asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6882

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6882nd meeting
Monday, 10 December 2012, 9.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. El Othmani/Mr. Bouchaara . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Morocco)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Aliyev
Mr. Li Baodong
Ms. Holguín Cuéllar
Mr. Araud
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Ohin
Mr. O’Brien
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
The Sahel: Towards a more comprehensive and coordinated approach
Letter dated 5 December 2012 from the Permanent Representative of Morocco
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2012/906)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-63637 (E)

*1263637*

S/PV.6882

Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.

The meeting was called to order at 9.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf.

The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
The Sahel: Towards a more comprehensive and
coordinated approach
Letter dated 5 December 2012 from the
Permanent Representative of Morocco to
the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2012/906)
The President (spoke in Arabic): Under rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Côte d’Ivoire and Chad to participate
in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Romano Prodi, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Sahel, and Mr. Antonio
Guterres, United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following to participate in this
meeting: His Excellency Mr. Téte António, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations;
Mr. David O’Sullivan, Chief Operating Officer of the
European External Action Service of the European
Union; Mrs. Saida Mendili, Director of Political
Affairs in the Arab Maghreb Union; Ms. Ritva
Reinedka, Director of the Human Development Group
in the Africa Region of the World Bank; Mr. Yousouf
Ouedraogo, Special Adviser to the President of the
African Development Bank; and Mr. Ufuk Gokcen,
Permanent Observer of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation to the United Nations.
I wish to welcome the Secretary-General, Ministers
and other high-level representatives participating in
today’s meeting. Their presence is an affirmation of the
importance of the subject matter to be addressed.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/906, which contains a letter dated
5 December 2012 from the Permanent Representative
of Morocco to the United Nations, addressed to the

2

“The Security Council reiterates its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security under the Charter of the United
Nations and recalls that cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations, consistent with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
is an important pillar of collective security.
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong
commitment to the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
political independence and unity of countries in the
Sahel region.
“The Security Council expresses its concern
about the underlying problems in the Sahel region
and remains engaged in addressing the complex
security and political challenges in this region
that are interrelated with humanitarian and
developmental issues as well as adverse effects of
climate and ecological changes.
“The Security Council remains seriously
concerned over the insecurity and the significant
ongoing humanitarian crisis in the Sahel region,
which is further complicated by the presence of
armed groups, including separatist movements,
terrorist and criminal networks, and their increased
activities, as well as the continued proliferation of
weapons from within and outside the region that
threaten peace, security, and stability of States
in this region and in this regard stresses the
importance of the implementation of all relevant
Security Council resolutions including those with
regards to arms embargoes.
“The Security Council also reiterates its grave
concern about the consequences of instability in
the North of Mali on the Sahel region and beyond,
and stresses the need to respond swiftly to this
crisis through a comprehensive and strategic
approach in order to ensure the territorial integrity
of Mali and restore its stability and prevent further
destabilization of States of the Sahel.
“The Security Council expresses its grave
concern about the increasing entrenchment in the
Sahel of terrorist elements, including Al-Qaida in

12-63637

S/PV.6882

the Islamic Maghreb, affiliated groups and other
extremist groups, and its consequences for the
countries of the region and beyond.
“The Security Council continues to be
concerned about the serious threats posed by
transnational organized crime in the Sahel
region, and its increasing links, in some cases,
with terrorism. The Security Council strongly
condemns the abuses of human rights committed in
the region by terrorist and other extremist groups,
including violence against civilians, notably
women and children, extrajudicial and arbitrary
executions, hostage-taking, trafficking in persons
and recruitment of child soldiers.
“The Security Council reiterates its strongest
condemnation of the desecration, damage and
destruction of sites of holy, historic and cultural
significance, especially but not exclusively those
designated UNESCO World Heritage Sites,
including in the city of Timbuktu.
“The Security Council welcomes the initiatives
and measures taken by the States of the Sahel, West
Africa and the Maghreb, the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Arab Maghreb Union, the Community of SaheloSaharan States, international partners such as the
European Union and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and the United Nations to tackle
the complex multidimensional challenges facing
the Sahel region but stresses the importance of
strengthening transregional, interregional and
international cooperation on the basis of a common
and shared responsibility.
“The Security Council reaffirms, in this
regard, the urgent need for enhanced and inclusive
cooperation and coordination between States of the
Sahel and the Maghreb, and among each other, in
collaboration with relevant United Nations entities,
regional and international partners, in order to
combat AQIM activities and to prevent further
progress of AQIM elements and affiliated groups
in the Sahel and Maghreb regions and beyond, as
well as to tackle the proliferation of all arms and
transnational organized crime, including illicit
activities such as drug trafficking.
“The Security Council recognizes the work
done and efforts made by the relevant United
Nations bodies, entities, relevant subsidiary bodies,

12-63637

and other international, regional and subregional
organizations aimed at enhancing capacity-building
of States of the Sahel and urges them to step up
their efforts to provide, upon request, assistance for
these countries in order to contribute to security
and arms control and tackle transnational organized
criminal activities and terrorism.
“The Security Council reiterates the need for
an enhanced, comprehensive and more regional
approach to the provision of humanitarian assistance
to the food-insecure, conflict-affected and
displaced populations in accordance with applicable
international Law and the guiding principles of
humanitarian assistance, and emphasizes the
necessity to turn attention to the chronic structural
nature of food insecurity and the nutrition crisis
in the Sahel region, address the underlying causes
of chronic repetitive humanitarian emergencies as
well as strengthen regional mechanisms for early
warning and disaster risk reduction.
“The Security Council commends efforts
made by the Regional Humanitarian Coordinator
for the Sahel, the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and other agencies to
provide assistance and draw attention to the scale
of the problems in the Sahel as well as the support
provided by countries in the region and beyond.
“The Security Council recognizes that the
strengthening of State institutions, economic and
social development, respect for human rights and
the rule of law are necessary to ensure long-term
security, development and stability in the Sahel
region.
“The Security Council also recognizes
the importance of a comprehensive approach
encompassing
security,
development
and
humanitarian issues to address the immediate and
long-term needs of the Sahel region.
“The Security Council welcomes the initiative
of the Secretary-General to hold a High-level
Meeting on the Sahel, on 26 September 2012, in the
margins of the sixty-seventh session of the General
Assembly of the United Nations.
“The Security Council also welcomes the
holding of the Rome Meeting of 7 December 2012 by
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Sahel, which identified concrete and coordinated

3

S/PV.6882

actions to advance the resolution of the multiple
crises in the Sahel region.
“The Council encourages the Special Envoy
to pursue his efforts in order to coordinate the
bilateral, interregional and international response
and support for the Sahel region and to engage
constructively with other representatives from
regional and subregional organizations, bilateral
partners and countries of the region and in this
regard stresses the importance of a coherent,
comprehensive and coordinated approach by all
United Nations entities involved in the Sahel region
and their cooperation with one another with a view
to maximizing synergies.
“The Security Council reiterates, in this regard,
its call to the Secretary-General and his Special
Envoy to finalize as soon as possible the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel region
encompassing governance, security, humanitarian,
human rights and developmental issues as requested
by Security Council resolution 2056 (2012).”
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2012/26.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: I thank Mr. El Othmani
for organizing this important open debate on the
situation in the Sahel. Last week (see S/PV.6879), the
Council heard the presentation of my report on Mali
(S/2012/894) pursuant to resolution 2071 (2012). I know
that Council members are currently considering a draft
resolution regarding Mali. But as acute as the problems
there are, we cannot lose sight of the context of which
Mali is but a part, namely, a sustained, systemic crisis
across the entire Sahel region. What happens in Mali
can affect the entire region. Likewise, we cannot expect
to address effectively the issues in Mali, unless we
confront the challenges affecting the broader region.

affected by food insecurity. Over one million children
under the age of five are at risk of acute malnutrition.
The Governments and people of the Sahel region need
our full support.
The United Nations has mobilized over $1 billion to
support the countries of the region in responding to the
immediate needs of affected populations. The recent
rainfall promises a better harvest this season, which
should help ease food insecurity. However, much more
needs to be done.
We must strengthen resilience across the region. We
know that building resilient societies and institutions
yields big returns. It increases the impact and costeffectiveness of humanitarian and development
assistance. Doing it right will require coordinating
United Nations system-wide efforts and linking the
existing national initiatives to region-wide approaches.
Resolution 2056 (2012) recognized the need for an
integrated strategy addressing all dimensions of the
crisis. We presented a framework during a high-level
meeting in September. I also appointed Mr. Romano
Prodi as my Special Envoy for the Sahel, who will
report to the Council more in detail. He is focusing on
four key issues: security, governance, humanitarian
requirements and development.
Let me point to just one area in the field of
development that could make a difference. Earlier
this year, I launched our Sustainable Energy for All
initiative. With the right investments and support, the
Sahel is ideally situated to be a global showcase for
solar energy. Mr. Prodi is here to provide an update on
our overall efforts and his thoughts on the way forward.
For my part, I call on the members of the Council
and the wider international community to continue to
support our efforts to support the strategy. We simply
must not relent until peace and stability have been
restored to the region.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.

I am grateful to the Moroccan presidency for
providing us the opportunity to discuss the bigger
picture. The warning lights for the Sahel region
continue to flash. Political turmoil, terrorist activity,
drug trafficking and arms smuggling are spilling over
borders and threatening peace and security.

Mr. Prodi: I am truly grateful for the opportunity
to take the floor before the Security Council as Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel.

Extreme climatic conditions and fragile economies
only add to that toxic brew of vulnerability. This year
alone, an estimated 18.7 million people have been

As the Secretary-General just said, the Sahel
region is facing a complex and mulifaceted crisis. It is
a crisis that may spread if not tackled in time. When

4

I now give the floor to Mr. Prodi.

12-63637

S/PV.6882

I was asked by the Secretary-General to assume the
responsibility of being his Special Envoy for the Sahel,
I was both honoured and frightened: honoured by the
trust, and frightened by the challenge.
This is a challenge that we can win only if we are
united, working for the same purpose. Our purpose
is to organize a worldwide platform aimed at putting
in action an efficient network of humanitarian aid
and a common strategy for the development of the
Sahel. However, nothing can be done in that respect
without restoring the unity of Mali in a peaceful Sahel,
immediately starting a process that will allow for
transparent and free democratic elections as soon as
possible. It is clear to every one of us that in order to
achieve that difficult but indispensable goal, we need
different ideas but common action against any form of
terrorism or illegal behaviour.
After two months of my mandate, I see that there
is now a common will to achieve those goals and
that all of us share the belief in the need to avoid the
spread of terrorism, now probably the most dangerous
prospect facing the world community. This unity is not
a common situation. We have to exploit it.
We are here in order to translate this common shared
view into common action. This is possible because
we can count on the strong cooperation of all within
the United Nations, all the members of the Security
Council, the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States, the European Union and all the
main actors of world politics.
The mandate established by the Secretary-General
was very clear when he summed up to me the scope
of my mission, which was to coordinate the efforts
of the many who already work very well along four
lines, which are complex and different but closely
interconnected: peace and security, political stability,
humanitarian aid, and long-term development. He
asked me to prepare an integrated strategy whereby
the international community could work effectively
together in helping the countries of the Sahel achieve
those goals.
It must be clear that this integrated strategy cannot
be an occasion to only write an elegant paper. It is a set of
actions tailored to face dynamically evolving problems
and aimed at bringing urgent relief in humanitarian
tragedies, generating new trust among the people of the
Sahel and attracting international attention with a view
to raising financial and political support.

12-63637

Key to the strategy is close cooperation among all
those who are facing the Sahel challenge, wherever
they come from. This is why, in the first weeks of my
mandate, I had extensive meetings with the leaders
of the countries and the African institutions most
involved in this process, in Bamako, Addis Ababa,
Cairo, Algeria and Morocco, and then in the European
Union, the United States, France, the United Kingdom,
Germany and Italy. Then I called for a meeting in Rome
at the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations — which is so kindly and effectively hosting
and supporting our activities — with all the mediators,
special envoys and senior United Nations officials
working on the Sahel. The purpose was to share our
views on the evolving situation in the Sahel and to
deepen the means by which the special envoys and
mediators could best coordinate their work. The result
has been extremely positive, and both coordination and
integration are perceived not as an option but as a must.
After the Rome meeting, I feel that we are truly a
large, strong international cooperation team. Next week
I will travel to the region for the third time since my
appointment. Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Djinnit and I will travel together to meet key
actors to discuss security, political, humanitarian and
development issues facing the Governments of the
region.
Clearly, our interlocutors cannot be only politicians.
We have before us the whole of society, and we shall
therefore open a dialogue with all its components:
intellectuals, religious people, women, businessmen,
representatives of tribes. We must listen and talk
to all of them. The challenges faced by the Sahelian
communities include environmental degradation, youth
unemployment, water management, weak institutions,
human trafficking, organized crime and terrorism.
Those are just some of the immediate issues we must
address.
To be operational and effective in those fields,
substantial resources are needed. That is another
difficult challenge, but I have been struck by the
voluntary offer of quite a few countries to move forward
quickly in order to meet the needs stemming from the
Sahel emergencies. There are never enough resources
in this field, and I am now trying to bring on board the
highest number of countries, international institutions
and private donors possible. It was widely accepted that
the first and most important focus would be the people

5

S/PV.6882

in need, particularly those affected by the crisis and in
dire need of assistance.
A meeting of all countries and institutions available
to support an urgent humanitarian aid action will be
organized very soon, following the Rome meeting, in
order to mobilize extraordinary support for responding
to the crisis. A multi-donor trust fund specific to the
Sahel is also, in my opinion, an urgent necessity.
Concerning long-term development, I intend to rely
heavily on people who have invested a considerable
amount of time and brainpower studying the region and
the challenges faced by its people. To that end, we have
received generous offers from the best specialists in the
world, from Brussels to Washington, including from
the top American, European and Chinese universities
and research institutions. We will do our best to take
advantage of their offers of support. We must not
reinvent what has already been studied and analysed. Of
course, all such efforts would also involve Governments,
civil societies, regional partners, non-governmental
organizations and financial institutions. Long-term
peace can be sustained only through development.
I intend to exert all possible efforts to mobilize
what is needed. I envisage resource mobilization to
take place in two phases. In the immediate and short
term, resources would be required to strengthen the
ongoing efforts and current mechanisms to alleviate
the immediate sufferings of the people. The second
phase would involve resources required to bring about
some fundamental and structural improvements in
the region to drive it towards long-term recovery and
development. I will count on grants, loans, direct
investments from multilateral institutions — the World
Bank, the African Development Bank and so on — and
national funds from the Gulf to China. In both phases, I
will rely heavily on the support of the Security Council
and the international community as a whole.
The resources we mobilize will never eliminate
the need for good governance. We must therefore also
place the onus on the shoulders of the Governments of
the region and help them to take these matters in their
own hands. For that reason, the African Union Special
Envoy for the Sahel and Mali, President Pierre Buyoya,
and I plan to hold in the near future a meeting of all
Sahelian countries in order to talk with them about
what they need from a strategy on the Sahel. All of that
can be implemented only if, in the future, there is a
common view among Malian leaders.

6

We have to make every effort to identify and support
one, and only one, decision-making centre inside Mali.
That is a vital point, even if it is not easy to achieve.
Strong leadership is needed in order to negotiate with
the north. We need strong leadership in Mali.
As a second step, we must help the opening
of a political dialogue with acceptable — I repeat,
acceptable — interlocutors in the north. For that
purpose, we must act as important and indispensable
facilitators, leaving to the Malians full responsibility
for the process. Dealing with the entire Sahel, we
shall also facilitate cooperation between Mali and its
neighbouring countries.
It is of course our duty to work to put an end to any
act of violence. As can easily be understood, the whole
long-term Sahel agenda can be implemented only if
we achieve the two main goals of the agenda: political
union and the democratic evolution of the country.
Regarding military action, we must prepare it
with the necessary instruments and speed; otherwise
we are not credible even in our efforts to achieve
peace. But we must make every effort to reach our
goals — unity, democracy, humanitarian assistance
and development — through peaceful means and
negotiation. An extended military action always brings
as consequences not only a humanitarian tragedy but
enormous financial costs and an extended period of
economic crisis. As far as timing is concerned, I have
simply taken note from all the experts I have met
that many months are needed to gather the strength
requested for a credible full-range action.
As for elections, they must take place as soon as
possible, and we should start the necessary technical
preparation for them immediately. My point, drawn
from my many previous experiences, particularly within
the European Union, is that we must prepare them well,
guarantee a free and transparent campaign and simply
avoid having an election in a divided country being
interpreted as sealing the division. In any event, if we
want to reach the goal of a united and peaceful country,
we have to understand that the tensions between south
and north are not a problem of today but are decades
old.
A platform of decentralization is therefore
needed — a platform that, while preserving the unity
of Mali, would make possible a credible change in
the relations between north and south. How much
decentralization is needed will be decided by the direct

12-63637

S/PV.6882

Malian negotiators. I would emphasize that only the
strong engagement of the international community can
guarantee a positive outcome of that effort.
The situation in Mali presents a challenge that can
potentially affect the entire region. Our efforts must
ensure that what has happened in Mali does not spread
to the entire Sahel. Accordingly, I would like to echo
the views of the Secretary-General that any military
effort in Mali must be undertaken after careful analysis
and thorough preparation and that those efforts should
be part of an agreed political process that tackles the
roots of the conflict.
While the road ahead looks full of major challenges,
I remain optimistic that, with the right tools and
support in resources and organization, those challenges
can soon be overcome. A failure should carry dramatic
consequences not just for the region but for the world
at large. The people of the Sahel have many hopes and
aspirations. I firmly believe that we must help them to
realize those hopes and aspirations, for their sake and
for the sake of their future generations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Prodi
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Guterres.
Mr. Guterres (spoke in French): First of all, I would
like to express my thanks for this opportunity to speak
before the Council. Only four days ago, we saw the
entry into force of the first binding legal framework on
the rights of internally displaced persons — the African
Union Convention for the Protection and Assistance of
Internally Displaced Persons in Africa, known as the
Kampala Convention. A number of countries in the
Sahel region, including recently Mali, have ratified this
milestone African treaty.
(spoke in English)
That means tangible progress on the legal level for
millions of uprooted people across Africa. The harsh
everyday conditions facing most internally displaced
persons on the continent today highlight the urgent
need to transform those positive legal developments
into reality on the ground. The Mali displacement
crisis, which has significant consequences for the wider
Sahel region, is a case in point.
Nearly 350,000 people have been forced from their
homes since the beginning of 2012, many of them
seeking protection in neighbouring countries. In a

12-63637

region where drought and prolonged food insecurity
had already caused one acute humanitarian crisis, that
massive displacement has now created another acute
emergency. Almost 200,000 people are internally
displaced, the majority of them living with host
families or in spontaneous settlements. In the north,
both the displaced and the communities sheltering them
lack food. In the absence of State authorities to provide
essential social services, they struggle to meet their
most basic needs.
Insecurity continues to hamper access by
humanitarian
agencies,
creating
calamitous
consequences for populations already drained by
months of hardship. Protection concerns are growing in
the face of widespread reports of serious human rights
violations, from sexual violence and child recruitment
to the stoning and mutilation of criminal suspects.
With the individual verification and so-called level 2
registration exercises soon to be completed, the number
of Malian refugees in neighbouring countries is now
estimated at more than 140,000.
But, as the Secretary-General has observed, we
cannot view the Malian crisis in isolation. It is essential
to take into account the context of the region — the
Sahel — which is facing enormous challenges that
range from food insecurity to institutional fragility in
some cases, and from widespread poverty to security
threats in others. It is the Sahel in its entirety, not only
Mali, that needs the attention and the support of the
international community.
The countries of the Sahel are among the main
victims of the accelerating effects of climate change.
While drought and desertification are not new in the
Sahel, their increased frequency and intensity are.
That situation will likely worsen in the future as a
potential source of conflict over scarce resources
and a new driver of forced displacement. In that
context, the international community, especially the
countries that contribute more to global warming and
its consequences, has a clear moral obligation to help
communities build resilience.
Resilience is key not only to better preventing and
mitigating the impact of natural disasters, but also
for adapting to the slow onset of desertification and
other processes that are destroying an environment
capable of sustaining human life. The countries of the
region — Algeria, Burkina Faso, Guinea, Mauritania,
the Niger and Togo — are to be commended for their

7

S/PV.6882

generosity and the unwavering commitment they have
shown to the principles of refugee protection. All of
them have kept their borders open throughout the crisis,
despite the enormous pressure that has put on their own
often vulnerable communities and scarce resources.
The refugee-hosting States need and deserve much
stronger international solidarity to help them manage
the additional strain created by the refugee influx. The
challenges facing UNHCR and its partners in assisting
displaced Malians in the neighbouring counties are also
significant. Most of the refugees are hosted in remote,
arid areas. It often takes several days of driving on very
poor roads to provide them with food, water and medical
supplies. In addition to access problems, insecurity,
including a high risk of kidnapping, also hinders the aid
effort in several locations, forcing humanitarian actors
to move with armed escorts, with all the problems that
entails. With refugee sites located close to the border,
refugees are potentially exposed to forced recruitment
and other spillover effects of the conflict.
Assisting a largely nomadic refugee population
poses another set of unusual, complex challenges that
require humanitarian actors to adapt their strategies for
response in innovative ways that are better targeted to
the specific character of those communities.
The humanitarian challenges I have mentioned
are compounded by a number of complex, interlinked
factors that make northern Mali, in the very fragile
context of the wider Sahel zone, one of the potentially
most explosive corners of the world today. As has
been mentioned, an area bigger than the entire Iberian
peninsula, from which I come, is now without the
presence of any State authority and is controlled by
armed extremist groups. The region’s remoteness,
poverty and vast, sparsely populated territories have
made it an ideal operating theatre for actors engaged
in highly lucrative organized crime, including drug
and arms trafficking, people smuggling and activities
linked to terrorism. That entails security risks at the
national and subregional levels and beyond, potentially
impacting all of West Africa, the southern rim of the
Mediterranean and, ultimately, Europe.
To be sustainable, a future political framework
must include, but also go beyond, the signing of
agreements with those elements of the insurgency that
are ready for dialogue. It must create the conditions for
all communities, regardless of their ethnic and social
composition and stratification — the Songhai, the

8

Tuareg, the Arab-speakers, the Fulani, the Peul and
others – to fully participate in a reformed Malian State
and in the socioeconomic development of the region.
In that regard, the ongoing mediation efforts need
full support. A lasting political solution can be reached
only with the full engagement of all countries in the
region and with a deepened and enlarged consensus at
national, regional and global levels. There are many
steps required that only the Malians themselves can
take. But for their efforts to succeed, the international
community will have to be fully engaged in an effective
future development strategy that is fair, equitable and
fully inclusive.
Poverty and underdevelopment, exacerbated by
desertification and the effects of climate change, are
being exploited by ideologies that are based either
on ethnicity or on religious extremism. As a result,
everyone stands to lose. That problem is exacerbated
in Mali today, but we cannot forget its regional
implications. If no comprehensive solution is found,
the current situation risks triggering something much
broader – a series of interlinked crises from Libya to
Nigeria and from the Atlantic Ocean to the Gulf of
Aden, thereby threatening the security and the stability
of several countries. The humanitarian consequences
of such a scenario would be unpredictable. I trust the
Security Council to do everything possible to prevent
that from happening.
We find ourselves today at a critical juncture for
the stability of the Sahel region as a whole. I would
therefore like to end by highlighting three key points
related to the activity of my Office. I hope that the
international community will take them into account
going forward.
First, Member States must give full consideration
to the humanitarian dimension of the crisis as they
consider the appropriate international response.
Assisting the displaced and other affected populations
is already highly challenging in the current situation.
We should not forget that, in any military intervention,
even when successful, tens of thousands more people
are likely to become displaced in the beginning, both
inside the country and across borders.
Secondly, I urge all actors in the conflict, including
a potential international force, to protect humanitarian
space and ensure that agencies have unhindered access
to affected populations. In that context, the autonomy
of humanitarian space, with a clear separation between

12-63637

S/PV.6882

the civilian and military spheres of any international
presence, is of fundamental importance. Thirdly,
planning for the political transition and post-conflict
recovery must carefully take into account those who
have been forced to flee. For example, the electoral
process must foresee such issues as voter registration
of displaced populations, many of whom have lost their
identity documents.
Similarly, future recovery and resilience strategies
will be incomplete if they fail to include the dynamics of
displacement. The potential for the safe and sustainable
return of those who have fled is one key concern to be
firmly anchored in any road map for the future of the
region. Adequate support to countries hosting refugees
is another, including, for example, the rehabilitation
of refugee-impacted areas once displaced persons are
able to return home. I am confident that my old friend
Romano Prodi’s efforts to bring about an integrated
United Nations strategy for the Sahel region will result
in a successful framework to enhance that support.
Once again, I appeal to the international community
to show to all countries of the Sahel the same solidarity
they have extended to so many Malian refugees while
totally disregarding the impact on their own economies
and societies. I again thank the Council for this
opportunity to brief it today.
The President (spoke in
Mr. Guterres for his statement.

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to the representative of Côte
d’Ivoire.
Mr. Koffi Diby (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
am very pleased and honoured to address this gathering
on behalf of His Excellency Mr. Alassane Ouattara,
current Chairman of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), who sends his fraternal
greetings. In my capacity as current Chairman of
the ECOWAS Council of Ministers, I express our
sincere congratulations to you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for December, and thank you for taking the initiative
of convening this important meeting on the situation in
the Sahel, which demands a rapid response in the areas
of peace and security, humanitarian assistance, human
rights and development.
Today’s meeting follows up on the high-level
meeting on the Sahel held in New York on 26 September
at the initiative of the Secretary-General, which

12-63637

enabled broad consensus on the part of the international
community on two points: first, the urgent need to
support a United Nations integrated regional strategy
for the Sahel on the issues of governance, security,
humanitarian action, human rights and sustainable
development, in accordance with resolution 2056
(2012); and, secondly, the urgent need for international
intervention in Mali in the framework of our collective
security.
With regard to the United Nations integrated
regional strategy for the Sahel that the whole world
expects to see in the next few weeks, it is important
to note that particular emphasis should be placed
on strengthening intraregional, interregional and
international cooperation and coordination with a
view to better addressing, together, the complex,
multidimensional and transnational problems the Sahel
region is facing. Those problems are the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons; trafficking in arms,
drugs and other banned goods; trafficking in persons,
hostage-taking and the recruitment of child soldiers;
the forced displacement of populations, whether
because of changes in grazing areas or armed conflict
and natural disasters that create refugees and internally
displaced persons; the impoverishment of populations
due to extreme weather conditions; violation of human
rights and desecration of sacred places, including some
recognized by UNESCO as World Heritage sites; and,
to top it all, the presence of ever more rapidly growing,
highly dangerous terrorist groups with large quantities
of sophisticated weapons from the arsenals of the
former Libyan regime.
In the face of all those threats, it is important that
the integrated strategy be developed as soon as possible,
endorsed by all and implemented — not only for the
benefit of the people of the Sahel countries, of course,
but also for the welfare of African peoples in general and
people around the world who suffer in various ways as
a consequence of those evils. In that regard, I welcome
the appointment of the Secretary-General’s Special
Envoy for the Sahel, former Prime Minister Romano
Prodi. He has already set to work, paying a preliminary
visit to many heads of State in the Sahel region and
holding a meeting in Rome on 7 December to identify
the essential concrete and coordinated actions needed
to resolve the crisis in the region.
Regarding the multidimensional crisis in Mali,
which represents a synthesis and culmination of the
threats and ills afflicting the Sahel — a region that,

9

S/PV.6882

it should be stressed, includes several ECOWAS
countries — I would like to reiterate here and now the
urgency and diligence with which the Security Council
should be authorizing the deployment of an African-led
international support mission to Mali and the necessary
logistical and financial support for it. I wish to recall that
the request to deploy an international support mission
such as the Council is currently considering was made
by the entire African continent, speaking in one voice,
including the Government of Mali, ECOWAS, which I
represent, and the African Union.
Northern Mali is gradually being transformed into
a sanctuary for terrorist groups engaged, with total
impunity, in the worst possible abuses and massive
violations of human rights. That terrorist presence
threatens every State in West Africa and the Sahel,
but also those of the Maghreb and beyond. We are
talking about a real danger to international peace and
security, which therefore demands a comprehensive and
determined response on the part of the international
community. That is why we believe that the deployment
of an international support mission is so vital to help
restore the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Mali
and to end the terrorist presence in our lands. For that
to happen, it is essential that the Security Council adopt
a resolution authorizing the deployment of a support
mission in the next few days. We must act urgently and
now, because any further delay in its adoption is likely
to strengthen the terrorists’ position, and the price of
their removal will be even higher for us all.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the Kingdom of
Morocco.
I would first like to thank the delegation of the
friendly State of India for its distinguished leadership
of the Council in November.
Today the Council is seized with the question
of the situation in the Sahel, in the light of the many
major and long-term security, humanitarian, food and
environmental challenges facing the region.
I would also like to take this the opportunity to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his personal
participation in this meeting. We are also pleased to
have with us today Mr. Romano Prodi, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Sahel, whose mission,
under resolution 2056 (2012), is to prepare and develop
an integrated United Nations strategy for the Sahel, in

10

order to increase synergies and coordination among the
various United Nations entities working on the Sahel.
We hope the strategy will be submitted to the Council
early next year.
The Sahel region is negatively affected by a
number of factors. Besides dealing with such problems
as desertification, poverty, malnutrition and famine, in
the last few years the Sahel has become a safe haven
for terrorist groups, ideologically and methodologically
affiliated with the international Al-Qaida network, as
well as separatist groups and traffickers in drugs and
human beings that are a threat to international and
regional security.
We should recall that concrete and specific
indications of the existence of challenges that should
be overcome began to emerge a few years ago, although
the international community did not address those
threats and their root causes or take or accelerate the
measures that might have helped to block or limit the
proliferation of such illicit activities. It was therefore
quite normal that Morocco, as an old African State
focused on the security and stability of Africa, would
place that serious question at the heart of its concerns
during its presidency. The Council should focus on this
question given its historic relations with the region.
We feel the threats being faced by the Arab Maghreb
Union, to which we belong.
Terrorists, separatists and criminals have
committed acts of violence on over two-thirds of the
national territory of Mali. That constitutes a threat
to the security and stability not only of Mali but also
throughout the region. That dangerous precedent on
our continent is a call to the international community,
which is represented by the Council, to act swiftly to
support Mali by assisting it in responding firmly and
effectively to the situation. Any delay in the resolution
of that grave crisis will only strengthen the stranglehold
and control of terrorist and criminal networks on the
region, which grow in strength daily, transforming
the area into a base for and source of terrorism. We
believe that it is vital to give priority to supporting
Mali on various fronts — political, economic, security
and humanitarian — so that the country can restore
its territorial integrity and deal with all of the entities
threatening its stability.
We would like to commend the efforts undertaken
by the Economic Community of West African States to
resolve the crisis. It is our ardent hope that the Council

12-63637

S/PV.6882

will be able, as soon as possible, to respond positively to
the requests made in unison by the African continent to
assist Mali in fighting these threats. The international
community should strengthen its support to States in
the region to help them build their national capacities,
establish effective security institutions and fortify their
borders. It is vital to emphasize efforts undertaken in
these areas by relevant United Nations entities.
With regard to coordination, a number of
praiseworthy initiatives have been undertaken at the
national, bilateral, subregional and regional levels, with
a view to providing solutions to the challenges facing
the Sahel, and this was already achieved before the
Malian crisis. Unfortunately, those initiatives have not
yet enabled us to deal with the problems in an integrated,
comprehensive and coordinated manner. The time has
therefore come to overcome those obstacles and to
institute inter-regional cooperation and coordination
between the States of the Sahel and the Maghreb for the
stability of this strategic area of Africa.
The various organizations brought together here
today provide an appropriate platform to lay the
groundwork for the sort of interregional cooperation
that would be effective in the Sahel. Such cooperation
is needed to organize humanitarian assistance in a
comprehensive manner and to focus on the regional
dimension. In this context, we welcome the tremendous
work carried out by various actors, in particular the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the International Committee of
the Red Cross, in addition to the various specialized
humanitarian agencies on the ground. We hope that
they will achieve concrete results for the Sahel and deal
with the problems in a manner based on sustainable
development, which, in turn, requires cooperation with
the international community, including the World Bank,
the African Development Bank, whose representatives
are present today, and the Islamic Development Bank.
The mutli-dimensional and interconnected crises
in the Sahel must be addressed through a holistic and
integrated approach that takes into consideration, in a
coordinated and synchronized way, all of the political,
economic and social threats facing the region. These
crises require the urgent implementation of measures
because time is on the side of terrorists and criminal
groups.
The Kingdom of Morocco participated in the Rome
meeting, which allowed us to identify ways to achieve a
12-63637

comprehensive and coordinated approach for the Sahel,
including the State of Mali, and would like to reaffirm
its commitment to supporting the outcome of that
meeting. We are committed to the security and stability
of the Sahel, which draws its legitimacy and relevance
from a commitment deeply rooted in our history and
geographical location.
We reiterate our full readiness to support all
sub-regional, regional and international efforts aimed
at stabilizing the Sahel and West Africa in general.
Our great hope is that the presidential statement just
adopted (S/PRST/2012/26) and the ideas presented
during this meeting will help us develop an integrated
United Nations strategy for the Sahel so as to bring
security, stability and development to the peoples and
States of the region.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
Ms. Holguín Cuéllar (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I wish to thank you, Sir, for
having convened this debate, which is both timely and
extremely relevant at a moment when the United Nations
is working to develop the integrated regional strategy
for the Sahel and considering options to address the
crisis in Mali.
I thank the Secretary-General, Special Envoy
Romano Prodi and High Commissioner for Refugees
António Guterres for their comprehensive and
informative briefings, which highlight the diversity and
complexity of the problems affecting a region that is
crucial for international peace and security.
The Sahel region is suffering the consequences
of persistent structural problems, which have been
aggravated since just over a year ago by deteriorating
security conditions, social and political instability, a
severe drought, and growing illicit arms trafficking,
the exacerbation of various forms of transnational
organized crime, and terrorism. All of this has resulted
in a humanitarian and food crisis, and a growing
number of human rights violations.
The dimensions of the crisis in the Sahel region
call for an approach that gives due consideration to
the particular conditions of each State and allows
for actions to be taken that focus on the region as a
whole. To that end, our work should be based on two
fundamental pillars. The first is the recognition of
national ownership in the search for solutions to the

11

S/PV.6882

various problems facing the Sahel. The second is close
and coordinated work with regional and subregional
organizations.
Colombia deems it essential that national authorities
agree and define clear and specific strategies that
respond to the needs and aspirations of the people, that
enjoy the necessary support from various sectors of
society, and that seek structural long-term solutions.
We attach special importance to the contribution of
regional and subregional organizations in addressing
situations that threaten international peace and security.
Such organizations have tools to build consensus and
define strategies, as well as access to the interested
parties and knowledge of the specific conditions of the
situation on the ground, which makes them important
partners for success in achieving the United Nations
goals in the Sahel.
United Nations activities must address immediate
needs, in particular with regard to humanitarian needs.
We are concerned about food insecurity, the large
number of internally displaced people and refugees,
and the poor provision of basic services, such as health
and sanitation.
On security matters, coordinated action that takes
into account the size and permeability of the borders
of the States of the region is important. Transnational
criminal groups and terrorist organizations take
advantage of border control challenges in order to act
with relative ease. It is necessary to comprehensively
address those challenges to regional security and to
make progress in the discussion and agreement of
mechanisms among the affected countries in order to
facilitate the exchange of information and experiences,
the establishment of common legal frameworks that
respond to the specificities of the region, cooperation
on legal matters and the strengthening of border control.
Furthermore, Colombia believes that the activities of
the United Nations and the international community in
the region should seek to build and strengthen national
capacities and institutions by adopting a general
and long-term approach that takes all aspects of the
problems affecting the Sahel into account.
Mali is perhaps the country in which the
manifestations of the deteriorating situation of the
region have most dramatically converged. Social and
political instability; threats to its security, unity and
territorial integrity; a serious humanitarian situation;
environmental degradation; the destruction of its

12

cultural heritage, and ongoing economic fragility
are just some of the challenges that the country has
simultaneously faced over the past year. The crisis has
led to the mobilization of the countries of the region,
which, as members of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) and the African
Union, have called on the transitional authorities of
Mali and undertaken a series of actions that have forged
consensus within the international community.
With the adoption of resolutions 2056 (2012) and
2071 (2012), the Security Council responded to this call
and unanimously expressed its willingness to support
regional efforts. The urgency of the situation requires us
to advance further along this path. Colombia supports
the plan agreed upon by ECOWAS and supported by
the African Union to achiev a two-track solution that
favours a negotiated political solution for the restoration
of constitutional order and for the advancement of the
transition, and that, at the same time, seeks a solution
to the threat posed by armed groups in the north of the
country.
In that regard, we commend the work of the President
of Burkina Faso in his capacity as ECOWAS mediator
and by the core countries, which have made significant
progress in establishing a platform for dialogue. As was
shown at the high-level meeing on the Sahel region,
convened by the Secretary-General in September, in
general terms the international community recognizes
the need for the United Nations to support this twotrack solution.
Furthermore, Colombia believes that the recurring
call made by the authorities of Mali, ECOWAS and the
African Union for the Security Council to authorize the
deployment of the African-led international support
mission for Mali must be considered in a timely
manner. While questions remain regarding the concept
of operations and there are misgivings regarding the
possible humanitarian and human rights consequences
arising from the deployment of the mission, we believe
that they can be overcome. We must act with a sense
of urgency, resolve the pending questions and act to
ensure that the leaders of the country and the region
have effective mechanisms and resources to resolve the
crisis in Mali and mitigate its impact on the Sahel.
With my presence at this debate, Colombia reaffirms
its concern over the various forms of terrorism linked
to illicit trafficking. The Sahel region has also been
affected by this situation, and we therefore support the

12-63637

S/PV.6882

international efforts aimed at tackling this phenomenon,
which is continually on the rise. Colombia supports
the regional efforts to develop a coherent, concerted
and timely strategy that contributes to peace and
international security.
Mr. Ohin (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to convey my warm congratulations to the
Kingdom of Morocco on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month and for taking the
initiative to organize this important meeting on the
Sahel. I would also like to thank the Special Envoy for
the Sahel and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees for their clear briefings.
The objective of this meeting, which is to explore
ways of moving towards a more comprehensive and
coordinated approach on the question of the Sahel,
is very opportune, given the timing and context. The
international community is today mobilized in various
ways to find the most appropriate solutions to the many
ills attacking the region. We are pleased to note that
this debate is in accordance with the debate held by
the Council on 21 February, during Togo’s presidency,
on the theme of the impact of transnational organized
crime on peace, security and stability in West Africa
and the Sahel region (see S/PV.6717).
Ten years ago, the countries and the peoples of
the Sahel were perceived throughout the international
community as being resolutely committed to stability,
democracy and development. The progress achieved
in those areas was favourable to its emergence from
crisis, political reforms and economic growth policies
to deal with the challenges resulting not only from
historic, sociological and cultural hurdles, but also and
above all from the austerity of nature itself. However,
as a consequence of the burden and nature of those
challenges, neither could the structural problems be
resolved in such a short period of time, nor was the
resilience of the people strong enough to effectively
address the recurring shocks of food crises due in
particular to drought.
In such conditions, it is not surprising that the region
has become a breeding ground for many scourges,
whose adverse effects could not be anticipated due to
lack of wherewithal and resources. This state of affairs
has jeopardized the progress made and destabilized
the States involved and their structures. These
scourges are transnational organized crime, including
drug trafficking and weapons trafficking; religious

12-63637

extremism; terrorism and drought. The convergence of
these factors explains the multidimensional nature of
the political, economic, security, humanitarian, human
rights crisis in the Sahel, and justifies the international
community’s mobilization, not only by reason of the
tragedy emerging on all of the aforementioned levels,
but also given the central geographical position that
the Sahel occupies with respect to other regions, and
especially given the impact of the crises on neighbouring
regions.
In that respect, Togo welcomes the work undertaken
by the Secretary-General to give the region an
integrated strategic plan, whose principal objectives
are to optimize United Nations action for the full
resolution of the many challenges facing the region.
Togo appreciates in particular the integrated approach
adopted by our common Organization in the context of
this strategy, which takes into account the complexity
of the factors in play and the interwoven challenges
to be taken up in the areas of security, socioeconomic
development, governance, human rights and the
humanitarian situation.
For our part, we are pleased to note that the
strategies developed by the Economic Community of
West African States and the West African Economic
and Monetary Union include vital components that
will be taken into consideration in the United Nations
strategy for the Sahel. Togo hopes that the strategy
will be adopted very swiftly. At the same time, the
strategy will have the merit of taking the transregional
dimension into account.
We also welcome the existence of the European
Union Strategy for Security and Development in
the Sahel, which stresses the fact that security and
development are inextricably linked in Sahel and require
close regional cooperation to allow for the growth of
economies and poverty reduction. On that specific
point, we would like to underscore two fundamental
considerations.
First, we must not lose sight of the impact of the
situation in the Sahel on the regions of West, Central
and East Africa and the Mahgreb with regard to the
food crisis and insecurity. The definition of priorities
and approaches to solutions and their modalities for
implementation must take into consideration the
repercussions on the other regions. Those repercussions
must be assessed in advance and must also be

13

S/PV.6882

considered as the programmes drawn up for the Sahel
are implemented.

the deployment of the international support mission for
Mali.

Secondly, we would like to recall that there can
be neither development nor good governance without
stability and security. As a result, we must at no time
lose sight of that consideration. On the contrary, it must
help to identify and deal with the underlying causes of
the problem.

With regard to the Sahel as a whole, Togo is, for
its part, committed to making its contribution as a
neighbouring State of certain Sahel countries for the
success of various initiatives, in particular by providing
grain through the World Food Programme. As a country
with access to the Atlantic, it already performs that
function for the landlocked States within subregional
bodies, such as the Economic Community of West
African States and the West African Economic and
Monetary Union.

Anyone talking about the Sahel today is clearly
focusing on what is unfortunately happening in Mali,
while bearing in mind the significant threats to peace
and security in the north of that country and the
humanitarian tragedy there, with thousands of refugees
in neighbouring countries. We need to reconcile
the urgent settlement of the Malian crisis, with its
multidimensional aspects, with a comprehensive
approach that takes into account the entire Sahel region,
which must definitely be seen as part of a long-term
effort.
In that connection, we would like to reiterate
Togo’s serious concern about the situation in northern
Mali and to call on the entire international community
to consider implementing the universal principle of
helping vulnerable populations. We make that appeal
because there is certainly a conflict situation in northern
Mali that is putting the people, in particular women and
children, at the mercy of the abuses of extremist and
terrorist groups, which are skilled in contemporary
practices and prevent humanitarian access, thus sealing
the tragic fate of thousands facing an acute food crisis.
The situation of those people calls to us to assume
our responsibility to protect, since they are undeniably
deprived of the necessary minimum to live in dignity.
The duty to protect that we therefore need to highlight
is justified by the fact that the minimum requirement
for human security and the protection of people and
property are necessarily closely tied to the existence of
a secure State with stable institutions.
In adopting resolution 2071 (2012), the Security
Council took a decisive step and clearly indicated its
readiness to uphold human rights and democracy over
darkness, religious extremism and terrorism, and to
favour dialogue over force. However, the armed groups
in northern Mali have clearly chosen another path,
namely, to disregard human dignity. It is therefore
imperative that the Council decide to restore hope to
Malians, in particular those living in the north of the
country, by adopting a new resolution that authorizes

14

Beyond general mobilization, the problems of the
Sahel require particular attention. A mechanism that
brings together all the relevant actors under United
Nations coordination must be put in place. Togo
welcomes the new appointment by the SecretaryGeneral of his Special Envoy for the Sahel and calls
on him to work together with the other special envoys
in the region, including the African Union High
Representative for Mali, in order to seek solutions to
the many problems facing the Sahel region.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General, Special
Envoy Prodi and the other speakers for their briefings.
We last gathered on the margins of the General
Assembly general debate to spur international action
on the deteriorating situation in the Sahel. Today,
the international community and the people of the
Sahel continue to face a complex set of interrelated
challenges that threaten the security of the region and
beyond. Serious tensions persist within and between
the countries of the region. Violent extremism is
flourishing. Terrorist and criminal organizations exploit
safe havens to plan and carry out attacks and to traffic
weapons and other illicit materials. The humanitarian
situation remains dire, as millions suffer from violence
and a lack of food.
Those problems are linked and require a
comprehensive solution with contributions from a range
of partners. The United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel and the actions of Special Envoy Prodi
are critical to mobilizing deeper cooperation among
international actors, including the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, to achieve our
common goal of a more democratic, stable, secure and
economically developing Sahel region.

12-63637

S/PV.6882

While the acute crises in Mali, which we have
been addressing in separate meetings, are perhaps the
most conspicuous problems that we face in the Sahel,
as the Secretary-General notes in his recent report (see
S/2012/894), they must be understood in the broader
context of a deeply strained region. Although Mali’s
current predicament arises largely from specific internal
factors, the country’s challenges are reinforced and
exacerbated by a range of transnational dynamics, such
as region-wide afflictions, adverse ecological changes,
underdevelopment, disaffected local populations and
organized criminal networks.

urgent attention. However, international assistance that
builds long-term resilience ultimately saves more lives
and reduces the likelihood of repeated humanitarian
crises. So as we work to alleviate suffering now, we
must enable communities to mitigate and recover
from shocks and reduce food insecurity. The United
States has committed more than $445 million in 2012
to humanitarian assistance for drought-affected and
conflict-displaced communities in the Sahel. We intend
these resources to alleviate the dire situation at hand,
to reduce chronic vulnerability and, ultimately, to
promote more inclusive growth.

Given Mali’s delicate situation, we must be
careful to address the crises in Mali without further
destabilizing the entire region. More than 210,000
Malian refugees have fled to neighbouring countries
and are living among communities already stressed
by drought. Any military intervention in Mali must
therefore be designed to minimize the operation’s
humanitarian and human rights impact. That is best
achieved through humanitarian participation in the
military planning process. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation in his most recent report on
Mali that United Nations human rights observers be
mandated to ensure that any intervention adheres to
international and human rights law.

The multifaceted and overlapping challenges of the
Sahel mean that we face a long road ahead that must
include stemming the terrorist threat, fighting organized
crime, controlling the proliferation of weapons,
promoting reconciliation and mediation within and
between countries, and responding to humanitarian
needs — all while strengthening community resilience.
This is a complex but essential agenda that demands
deeper cooperation on the part of all of us on each of
these challenges to lay the foundation for long-term
solutions to the multidimensional issues that pose a
serious threat to the peace and stability of the region.

The rise in violent extremism and organized crime
across the region has aggravated the situation in Mali.
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, the Movement for
Unity and Jihad in West Africa and other terrorist
groups have launched attacks and kidnappings from
northern Mali into neighbouring countries. Terrorists
and criminals are extending their reach. That threat
demands better coordination of existing efforts across
the Sahel to combat transnational crime and the
proliferation of terror networks. We can only tackle
those threats effectively if, as many speakers have said,
we work together.
The United States has expanded its counterterrorism partnerships in the region to help countries
tackle the growing threats to their own security. The
Global Counter-Terrorism Forum, for example, is
working on good practices for preventing and denying
the benefits of kidnapping for ransom to terrorists.
We are also working to shut down safe havens, cut off
financing, and counter extremist ideology.
Considering the humanitarian situation across
the Sahel, there are immediate needs that demand our

12-63637

We urge continued progress towards developing a
comprehensive strategy for the Sahel that focuses the
international community and coordinates its action
to bring, peace, political stability and sustainable
development to the people of that region.
Mr. O’Brien (United Kingdom): I am grateful to
you, Sir, for convening this timely and important debate,
and to the Secretary-General; the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Sahel, Prime Minister Prodi;
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Mr. Guterres; and to Minister for Foreign Affairs Diby
for their briefings. I am very pleased to follow United
States Permanent Representative Rice, and I look
forward to hearing more from our colleagues from the
region, including the African Union, the Community
of Sahel-Saharan States, and the Maghreb Arab Union.
The United Kingdom approaches the problems
of the region with respect, with care and with a clear
sense of purpose. My Prime Minister, David Cameron,
has asked me, as his Special Envoy for the Sahel, to
convey his personal commitment to working with our
partners here at the United Nations and in the region in
order to tackle the challenges ahead. We recognize the
responsibility that all United Nations Member States

15

S/PV.6882

share to help the people of the Sahel, working in full
partnership with those countries most affected, for
instability in the Sahel threatens not only the security
and livelihoods of people in the region, but also those
of its neighbours and beyond. Events in Mali have made
that only too clear.
What are the challenges that we face? First,
fragility exists across much of the Sahel, where, for a
variety of historical reasons, States are weak, borders
are long and porous, and Governments are challenged
by the need to serve diverse and growing populations
over vast distances and with few resources. Despite
remarkable achievements over the past 50 years, many
States of the region remain fragily.
Second are poverty and vulnerability. The Sahel
is one of the most devastatingly poor parts of the
world, with people surviving on the smallest possible
incomes. These many millions of people are blighted
by the lack of economic opportunity and unfair market
access, and they are on the front line of the world’s
natural challenges, especially that of malnutrition.
Food insecurity, compounded by political uncertainty,
has led to hundreds of thousands of displaced persons
and refugees this year alone, as was just so graphically
illustrated by High Commissioner Guterres, who rightly
urged us to give humanitarian action equal strategic
emphasis, along with the political and anti-violence
strategies.
Finally, there is insecurity, and the use and wider
threat of terror, violence and crime imported from
outside the Sahel. Extremism imposed in the name of
religion in the north of Mali is entirely contrary to the
long traditions of tolerance, diversity and respect that
characterize Islam in West and North-West Africa. The
criminality that accompanies it is also an aberration
imported from outside, however much it may subvert
and poison local populations.
For the sake of the people of the Sahel and the wider
international community, we must get to the heart of
these problems, and quickly, by addressing poverty,
building resilience — as the Secretary-General himself
so strongly stressed earlier today, citing his Sustainable
Energy for All initiative as a solar exemplar in that part
of the world — promoting political dialogue, renewing
engagement with all acceptable interlocutors, including
civil society organizations, and combating the scourge
of terrorism and crime. Working in concert with the

16

region, we must all share the responsibility of being the
builders of stability, opportunity and decent lives.
How can we achieve this? We must show resolve
against those — extremists, criminals, terrorists,
kidnappers, destroyers of heritage, and human rights
violators — who wish to exploit poverty and instability
for their own ends. Nowhere is action more urgently
needed than in the north of Mali. I welcome the work
of Economic Community of West African States,
the African Union and the United Nations to offer a
political process to those in the north who want to work
for a stronger, more just and united Mali, and to prepare
the option of military action against those who seek to
rule by hatred and terror. We must apply equal effort to
both those initiatives.
But in focusing on the urgent needs of Mali, we
must not lose sight of the needs of the wider region,
where many of the same drivers of conflict are present.
While others work to advance stability in Mali, we
look to Prime Minister Prodi, as Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Sahel, to lead this critical
work in the wider region. The United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel must address the problems of
fragility, poverty and insecurity comprehensively and
with urgency. Only with such leadership will we be able
to build stability and prosperity for all in the Sahel.
Since February this year, the United Kingdom has
committed over $90 million in humanitarian assistance
to respond to the current crisis, which will reach at
least 1.6 million people in need. But we know that such
assistance can provide only short-term relief. Together,
we must help the region to build resilience to the shocks
of scarcity, climate change, population growth and
food insecurity, and lay the foundations for long-term
development. The United Nations integrated strategy
must the show the way, and I welcome Prime Minister
Prodi’s insistence that this be action-oriented, not just
fine words.
To ensure the sustainability of that development,
we must work with our partners in the region to build
institutions of good governance and stability. In that
way, we can, together, fight terrorism and organized
crime and build a better future for the people of the
region. The United Kingdom believes that there is an
urgent need for action to build stability and resilience
and fight the scourge of terrorism and organized crime.
We look forward to a strengthened, comprehensive and
coordinated approach, and we back the United Nations,

12-63637

S/PV.6882

through Special Envoy Prodi, working with regional
partners to achieve this.
We have a common analysis and we have a common
political will. We are all already united, so now is the
time to grasp the opportunity that unity gives us and to
deliver our vision.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): Let me commence by
expressing our gratitude to the Moroccan presidency of
the Security Council for having convened this important
meeting to discuss the threats to international peace
and security posed by the multifaceted and interlinked
challenges that the countries of the Sahel region are
facing. I would also like to thank Secretary-General
Mr. Ban Ki-Moon, Special Envoy Mr. Romano Prodi,
and the High Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Antonio
Guterres, for their informative briefings. I also thank
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Côte D’Ivoire Mr. Charles
Koffi Diby for his insightful intervention on behalf of
Economic Community of West African States. The
high level of representation at today’s meeting attests to
the unwavering commitment of the United Nations, the
regional and subregional organizations and the States
concerned to finding durable solutions to the problems
in the Sahel region.
For years, the Sahel region has been plagued
by complex political, security, socioeconomic and
humanitarian challenges. The recent wave of violence in
the region and its vicinity, accompanied by infiltration
by armed groups, terrorists and criminal networks into
the region, an influx of weaponry and an upsurge in
radical separatist activities, have further undermined
the security and stability of the Sahel States and have
exacerbated the trials of the already harsh lives of
their peoples. In addressing the situation in the region,
the international community must remain strongly
committed to respecting the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, unity and political independence of the
countries of the Sahel.
The crisis in Mali, including its negative
implications for the region and beyond, is a matter of
grave concern. We concur with the Secretary-General
that Mali’s complex crisis requires a multifaceted and
integrated response, in which the political, security,
humanitarian and human rights dimensions are well
coordinated and mutually reinforcing. Azerbaijan
supports the ongoing national, subregional, regional and
international efforts to promote national reconciliation
and fully restore the constitutional order in Mali. At

12-63637

the same time, the situation in the north of Mali calls
for urgent action and measures, including in particular
those under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations, to restore the territorial integrity, sovereignty
and unity of the country and to dismantle the terrorist
and criminal networks there.
The persistent situation of insecurity and
underdevelopment in the Sahel naturally has an
aggravating impact on the humanitarian situation. It is
obvious that there is a need for a swift, comprehensive and
consistent international approach in tackling massive
displacement, health, food insecurity and malnutrition
problems. A prompt response and continued assistance
to the affected countries are required to address the
most pressing needs of the population and to prevent a
large-scale crisis in the region. In the broader context,
it is crucial to effectively link humanitarian and
development initiatives to ensure sustainable solutions.
Support for national Governments in the region is
required, with a view to enabling them to design and
implement resilience-based approaches to sustainable
development.
I commend the joint high-level partnership mission
of the United Nations Office of the Coordinator for
Humanitarian Affairs and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation to the Sahel region that took place from
14 to 21 October. The mission primarily focused on
gathering information on the impact of the humanitarian
crises in some countries and exploring ways to respond
collaboratively. Azerbaijan participated in that joint
partnership mission and will continue contributing
to national, regional and international humanitarian
efforts and development assistance programmes in the
Sahel.
One meeting will not suffice to fully reflect on
and search for solutions to all problems faced by the
Sahel countries. Those problems are perennial, chronic
and deeply rooted. A comprehensive, integrated
and radical response and consistent engagement
from regional and international actors are critical.
Resolution 2056 (2012) authorized the development and
implementation of a United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel region. The expedient finalization of the
strategy will imminently pave the way for a structural,
coordinated and efficient international approach to
tackle security, governance, humanitarian, human
rights and development issues in the Sahel. The efforts
of Mr. Prodi, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Sahel, are instrumental, indeed indispensable,

17

S/PV.6882

in achieving the earliest realization of the strategy
and coordinating responses at all levels to the regional
problems.
In conclusion, we reiterate our support of and
welcome the presidential statement made earlier today
(S/PRST/2012/26), which once again demonstrated the
Security Council’s strong determination to advance
peace, security, stability and development in the Sahel
region.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): The French
delegation aligns itself with the statement that will be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
I would like to thank all today’s speakers for
their statements. I thank Morocco for its initiative in
convening today’s meeting about a region that has
had the attention of the Security Council for almost
a year. What is happening in the Sahel represents a
challenge to international peace and security. The
international community has finally begun to take
stock of the challenge, as was reflected by the presence
of many Heads of State and Government at the highlevel meeting on the Sahel convened by the SecretaryGeneral on 26 September in New York.
Now that the Security Council is seeking solutions
to the crisis in Mali and ways to support African
regional organizations, we must not lose sight of the
rest of the region, where there are ongoing problems
of humanitarian, security, development and human
rights scope that call for lasting solutions and increased
coordinated responses. I would like to make three
points.
The first is a simple statement. The situation in the
Sahel is one of stark contrasts. While it seemed that
in 2012 the humanitarian situation improved, despite
the new problem of 400,000 refugees displaced by the
Malian crisis, the outlook is more worrying on the
security front as well as in development and wealth
distribution, which is more or less uneven country by
country. The region is also plagued by the well-known
common scourges of food crises, underdevelopment,
illiteracy, a lack of security, illicit trafficking and
political instability. Every year 250,000 children die
from malnutrition, but the Sahel has also become a
haven for international terrorists, as well an active area
for extremist movements that seek to impose their laws
on societies from the north of Nigeria to the outskirts
of Dakar.

18

The crisis in Libya made for large movements of
populations, returns to countries of origin, and a wide
dispersal of weapons that have benefited armed and
terrorist groups. Still, those armed groups, funded
by illicit trade or hostage-taking, were flourishing
well before the Libyan crisis, flouting Governments
of the Sahel too depleted to combat threats beyond
their immediate borders. Let us not forget that in West
Africa the cocaine trade for the European market has
quadrupled in recent years, generating $300 million
annually and reaching a new height of 2.5 million
African users.
My second observation is that solutions to the
challenges faced by the Sahel cannot be imposed from
outside. They must derive from local and regional
sources. It is their responsibility, and their initiatives are
already bearing fruit. In the humanitarian realm many
countries of the Sahel were able to respond promptly
to the food and nutrition crisis at the end of 2011, by
taking preventive measures that averted catastrophe.
Projected harvests for next year are encouraging.
Our role, through the United Nations and bilaterally,
is to continue to support such efforts and to help those
States to break the wretched and ever shorter cycles
of food crises and to finally succeed in bringing down
malnutrition statistics, which are unacceptably high.
In 2012, France donated €30 million for relief of the
most affected populations in the Sahel. We also support
the Alliance Globale pour l’Initiative Résilience au
Sahel et en Afrique de l’ouest, which was developed by
the European Commission, the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) and the countries
of the Sahel to respond to humanitarian crises in the
Sahel, with the goal of putting together an ongoing
response mechanism for that recurring crisis.
Only integrated action that also addresses
the security of the Sahel countries will create an
environment conducive to sustainable economic growth
that will benefit the entire population. Therefore, the
proposed military operation to liberate northern Mali
must include medium- and long-term measures aimed
at helping those States secure their borders and combat
transnational organized crime.
In that context, on 12 July the European Union
launched the EUCAP Sahel mission, aimed at
strengthening the national security forces of the
Niger, as well as regional cooperation. That is why
France has contributed more than €10 million a year

12-63637

S/PV.6882

to programmes for justice and governance cooperation
with Sahel countries through our bilateral file on
special priority funds. Ultimately, as the Sahel occupies
a transition area between West Africa and North Africa,
no initiative in the region makes any sense unless the
Maghreb countries are involved as full participants.
Thirdly, in that context France welcomes the
appointment of Mr. Romano Prodi as Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Sahel. Given its universal
nature, the United Nations is the sole entity able to bring
all the States of the region together without exception,
and through them the many regional structures. We
believe that Mr. Prodi’s first priority should be to
finalize and implement the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel region that the Council has been
awaiting for more than a year.
While that work is complex, the strategy has been
too long in the drafting. It is now time for action. We
believe that the Special Envoy’s mission represents a
unique opportunity to pursue internal efforts to organize
the work of the agencies, funds and programmes with
presences in the Sahel region so that they can all finally
work to a common end. The United Nations strategy
must seek to achieve the same regional objectives, while
taking into account the specificities and approaches
adopted by each country in the context of the strategy
for the Sahel that was adopted by the European Union.
A further significant undertaking of the Special
Envoy is to ensure regular coordination between the
United Nations system and the other protagonists
involved in the Sahel region, starting with the African
Union, the core countries, the Maghreb countries, the
Economic Community of West African States, the
European Union and the major bilateral donors. In
particular, we call for the closest cooperation between
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General and the
African Union High Representative for Mali and the
Sahel, President Buyoya, whose appointment bears
testimony to the efforts of the African Union to bring
its full weight to bear in seeking a solution to the crisis
in the region. We welcome those efforts.
We thank Mr. Prodi for his initiative to convene the
meeting of 7 December in Rome, which will make it
possible to develop a clearer and more efficient division
of labour among the various international stakeholders
that are involved in the Sahel region. Mr. Prodi can
count on France’s support in fulfilling his mission.

12-63637

Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Morocco for the initiative of holding today’s
ministerial meeting to discuss the situation in the
Sahel region. I am pleased to see you, Sir, presiding
over today’s meeting. I thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon; Mr. Romano Prodi, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Sahel; and Mr. António
Guterres, United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, for their respective briefings, and Mr. Charles
Koffi Diby for his statement. I welcome the presence
of high-ranking representatives of regional and
subregional organizations.
The Sahel region holds an important strategic
position. It runs across the African continent from the
Atlantic Ocean in the west to the Horn of Africa in
the east. Peace, stability and development in the Sahel
region have a direct bearing on the long-term peace and
stability of the African continent. At present, the Sahel
is facing a severe food crisis, and conflict in Libya
and Mali have further exacerbated the humanitarian
situation and added to the already heavy economic and
social burdens of the countries of the region. Arms
trafficking, transnational organized crime, and terrorist
and extremist activities represent severe challenges to
regional stability.
With a view to addressing the various challenges
facing the region, I would like to make the following
four points. First, an integrated strategy is important
for dealing with the current situation. The various
problems of the Sahel region are interlinked and
mutually reinforcing, and therefore require an
integrated approach. We hope that, as urged by the
Security Council, the Secretary-General will broadly
seek the views of the countries of the region and regional
and subregional organizations in order to develop an
integrated United Nations strategy as soon as possible,
with clearly defined objectives and practical measures.
Secondly, the key to long-term peace and stability
in the Sahel lies in resolving the fundamental problems
underpinning the current situation, which arose in
response to a complex series of factors, including
lack of development and poverty. The international
community, especially the donors and the international
financial institutions, should enhance their funding
and technical assistance to the countries of the region,
addressing economic and social development as a
priority. The priority for the time being is to tackle
the current food crisis in the Sahel and to resolve the

19

S/PV.6882

funding gap in the humanitarian assistance, to be
provided by the United Nations.
Thirdly, any effort to resolve the crisis in the Sahel
must be based on full respect for the ownership of the
countries and organizations of the region. The countries
of the region, the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States ave been working
actively to address the various economic, security and
humanitarian crises in the region. The international
community, in its efforts to assist in the process, should
fully respect the sovereignty and independence of the
countries of the region in order to fully include the
initiatives and plans development by regional countries
and regional organizations.
Fourthly, given the complex and diverse nature of
the challenges facing the Sahel region, it is important
that the international community adopt a coordinated
approach. The primary focus for the Council should
be on threats to peace and stability in the Sahel. In
addition, various United Nations agencies should work
together in responding to the current crisis, based on a
clear division of labour. China hopes to see synergies
generated between the good offices of the United
Nations and countries and organizations of the region,
and supports the work of Special Envoy Prodi to that
end.
At present, a solution to the Mali question brooks
no delay. The international community must take swift
and effective action to assist Mali, in full respect for its
sovereignty, in dealing with the separatist, terroristic
and extremist threats. We support the efforts of the
Malian transitional authorities to promote a political
process and to quickly and fully restore constitutional
order and maintain national unity and territorial
integrity.
China has actively supported the initiatives of
African countries and regional organizations to
strengthen cooperation and maintaining peace and
stability on the continent. The Council should pay close
attention to the call and proposal of Mali, the African
Union and the Economic Community of West African
States concerning the deployment of an international
force to Mali.
The Chinese Government attaches great
importance to the situation in the Sahel and has been
working actively and through various means to support
the efforts of countries of the region to achieve stability
and development. China has consistently provided

20

assistance, within its capacities, to the countries of the
region. In the past year, China has provided emergency
food assistance to many countries of the region and
strengthened cooperation efforts with the African
Union and countries of the region in the fight against
terrorism.
China is ready to continue to play its role in order to
find an early and comprehensive solution to the current
crisis in the Sahel.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): For the past 18 months, we have followed
developments in the Sahel with alarm and concern. We
see there an increasingly clear manifestation of a whole
host of destabilizing factors — arms flows, terrorist
and drug threats, separatist tendencies, severe internal
conflicts and a grave humanitarian and socioeconomic
situation — and they are continuing to get worse. We
are especially concerned by the crisis in Mali, which
has become a serious challenge for neighbouring
States. It has created a credible threat to the stability
and security of the entire region and far beyond. We,
like other international partners, are especially alarmed
by the fact that, in northern Mali, the lead role is now
being played by blatantly extremist forces who are not
hiding their ties to terrorist organizations, including
Al-Qaida. Terrorism has become a significant factor
affecting general security.
Any sustainable solution to the problem in northern
Mali will be political in nature. We are encouraged
by emerging signs of the start of negotiation contacts
between the representatives of the transitional
authorities and some groups. At the same time, an
essential condition for talks must be the severing of all
ties with terrorist organizations and the recognition of
the territorial integrity of the country. It is our view
that any military operation in the north must be seen as
a last resort.
Unfortunately, in the Malian capital there are still
clashes among the political forces. The basis for a
settlement of the internal crisis lies in the launching of
a broad national dialogue aimed at the restoration of the
constitutional order. A key role belongs to the Malians
themselves. It is therefore our view that the general
situation in the region today is such that it is essential
to step up efforts to deal with other conflicts as well.
The people of the Sahel continue to feel the
consequences of the Libyan crisis, which to a large
extent served as a catalyst for the current developments

12-63637

S/PV.6882

in Mali. The exodus of the Touareg into the Sahel and
the leakage of a huge amount of weapons has become a
critical factor in the destabilization of the situation in
general, and has led to the unraveling of the situation in
Mali in particular. This urgent problem must continue
to be the focus of our attention. To try to close our
eyes to it, justifying it with the infamous political
correctness, would only exacerbate the situation; we
would be giving up on the search for solutions.
An absolute imperative is strict compliance with
the arms embargo regime against Libya introduced
by resolution 1970 (2011), which remains essential,
and measures to prevent weapons flows from Libya,
including man-portable air defence systems, under
resolution 2017 (2011). The fact that there are supplies
of chemical weapons in the country gives further
urgency to these problems.
We are convinced that a vital role in dealing with
these problems in the Sahel must be played by the
countries themselves. At the same time, it is necessary
to coordinate the efforts of regional and subregional
organizations with the appropriate support from the
international community. An important role in that
context must be played by the United Nations. It is
obvious that its experience and expertise on this issue
will be required on a broad range of issues, from
countering terrorism to implementing socioeconomic
programmes.
In that regard, we welcome the appointment of such
an eminent political figure as Romano Prod as Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel.
The Russian Federation and the countries of the
Sahel are united by close traditional ties of mutually
advantageous bilateral and multilateral cooperation. We
are prepared to continue to give our regional partners
effective multifaceted assistance in areas in which they
show an interest.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I thank the
Kingdom of Morocco for taking the initiative to
organize this important debate at a time when the
Sahel is facing such formidable challenges, and I thank
Minister El Othmani for presiding over it. I also thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Romano Prodi, Mr. António
Guterres and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Côte
d’Ivoire for their statements. The presence here today of
representatives from several organizations involved in
the region further underlines the relevance of the topic

12-63637

for the maintenance of international peace and security
in the Sahel and beyond.
Recent events in Mali have underlined the need for
the international community to pay greater attention
and give new priority to dealing with long-standing
fragilities in the Sahel and with their consequences. We
hope that the Council can soon adopt a resolution that
will specifically address the situation in that country in
line with what has been requested by the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS).
The current crisis in the Sahel is historically deeprooted, has complex and multifaceted causes, be they
economic, social, political or ethnic, and therefore
requires a comprehensive strategy that addresses
the transnational nature of the challenges at hand,
including, naturally, those of organized crime and
terrorism, which also represent today a serious threat
to neighbouring regions.
Indeed, we should also be aware of the fact that
security issues are not restricted to the Sahel. In fact,
instability in West African coastal countries might
significantly contribute to the mounting insecurity in
the Sahel. The increase in activities of drug traffickers
and organized crime networks on the coast and their
illicit financial resources do in fact fuel criminal
activities and terrorism in the whole region. The effect
from the neighbouring regions of the Maghreb and
Europe are also evident.
Portugal has for a long time defended the regional
approach to the Sahel, not just because we find the
same fragilities in most countries in the region but
because the challenges faced by those countries are
of a transnational nature. Efforts made by individual
countries are important and can be more effective if
their emphasis is placed on the development of regional
capacities. There are already regional action plans
approved by regional organizations such as ECOWAS
that should be put into practice to deal with the problems
affecting the Sahel. We should also encourage viable
multilateral ad hoc arrangements within Sahel countries
themselves for pooling resources for border control and
in combating terrorism and organized crime.
Support from outside the region is also a reality.
I would mention, among others, the European Union,
which is already implementing its own strategy for the
Sahel.

21

S/PV.6882

Therefore, we believe that the United Nations
regional offices — the United Nations Office to the
African Union and the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa — and the relevant United Nations
missions in the region can have a key role to play in
bringing together all the relevant actors and promoting
concrete initiatives. Much is already under way, but it is
important that those different initiatives be framed by
a coherent strategy.
In that respect, we welcome the appointment of
Mr. Romano Prodi as Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Sahel and look forward to the
finalization of an integrated strategy for the region.
We hope that Mr. Prodi will develop a strong working
relationship with ECOWAS and with the African Union
High Representative for Mali and the Sahel, and we
reiterate our full support to his endeavours.
As a coordinator of international efforts, the United
Nations should take into account the perspective and
potential contribution of the wider region, including
that of North African countries, and thus overcome the
difficulty posed by the fact that the countries affected
do not belong to one single regional organization.
Some of those problems faced by Sahel countries
require quick responses, as they may potentially
expand beyond the region or aggravate an already
very serious humanitarian and security situation, but
others require long-term strategies and instruments.
We think, therefore, that the United Nations strategy
should clearly identify which measures may have
an immediate effect — for instance on humanitarian
assistance, arms proliferation, criminal networks or
border control — and which ones work essentially in the
long run, especially those aimed at economic recovery,
youth employment, climate change and capacitybuilding. That will help us in understanding how the
different types of measures can best be employed and
combined to promote sustainable development and
security in the region.
Looking at long-term measures, we believe that
particular attention should be given to the issue of
institution-building. As the example of Mali clearly
shows, it is obvious that, without strong institutions,
countries will remain vulnerable to both internal and
external threats. We therefore expect the United Nations
integrated strategy to provide concrete indications on
how to address the issue of institution-building and what
kind of measures may improve countries’ resilience.

22

I conclude by stressing again that the international
involvement in the Sahel requires coherence and
complementarity of the various efforts. A coordinated
and integrated approach is therefore of the essence, while
building on experience, solutions and lessons learned
in similar situations in other regions of the world. Such
an approach will help prevent any duplication of efforts
and ensure that international responses effectively
address the multiple dimensions of a complex situation
such as that of the Sahel.
For our part, Portugal will continue to contribute
to the collective effort to find new and bold responses
to a situation that extends beyond the Sahel region and
affects us all.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We join others
in commending Morocco for convening today’s
ministerial meeting dedicated to the Sahel region.
It is a timely initiative and will help maintain the
international community’s focus on the challenges that
the region is confronting. We thank Mr. Saad-Eddine El
Othmani, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
of Morocco, for presiding over this meeting. Pakistan
enjoys close relations with all countries of the Sahel,
and therefore has an abiding interest in their continued
well-being.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General and
his Special Envoy, Mr. Romano Prodi, as well as the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Mr. António Guterres, for their very useful briefings.
We also welcome the participation of the high-level
representatives of the various regional organizations
and United Nations entities at today’s meeting.
Despite the progress made by countries in the Sahel,
they continue to face serious security, humanitarian,
and socioeconomic challenges. If those challenges are
not addressed quickly and effectively, the gains made
so far could be reversed, and there would be negative
repercussions for the region’s long-term stability. The
region faces chronic problems of food insecurity,
underdevelopment and climate change. The recent rise
in organized crime has aggravated the situation.
The conflict in Libya has also added to the
region’s difficulties. Consequences of that conflict
are still unfolding, with Mali being its first victim.
Refugees from Mali have placed an additional burden
on neighbouring countries that were already reeling
from the impact of the prevailing drought. Terrorists
and criminals who have filled the security vacuum in

12-63637

S/PV.6882

northern Mali, pose a serious risk to the security of the
entire region.
We have previously expressed grave concern in
the Council over the rise of organized crime, including
drug and weapons trafficking, and terrorism in West
Africa and the Sahel. Drug trafficking in particular is
a serious threat to the countries of the region because
of its nexus with terrorism and its potential to fuel
corruption and undermine governance. Tackling
those threats demands greater regional cooperation in
border management as well as in the justice and law
enforcement sectors. Countries of the Sahel are all
developing countries that face lack of capacity and
resources. Therefore, the international community
must, in the short run, provide effective assistance to
the relevant countries and regional organizations. The
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime should also
play a role in providing assistance to those countries.
Evidently, to address the challenges the region
is facing, there is a need for an integrated strategy
that has the support of the international community.
Pakistan has supported the elaboration of a United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel region in
resolution 2056 (2012). We welcome the appointment of
Mr. Prodi as the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for
the Sahel and support his efforts for the development
of the strategy, as well as for mobilizing resources for
the region. We hope that with his support the United
Nations integrated strategy will soon be finalized.
The United Nations strategy should be based on
the principle of national ownership and drafted in close
consultation with concerned countries. Its aims and
objectives should be realistic and prioritized in order
to keep a balance between immediate and long-term
needs. It must focus on effective coordination among the
various United Nations presences in the region, which
would be crucial for its success. The strategy must also
identify the resources required for its implementation.
Statements made by regional representatives at today’s
meeting contain some valuable suggestions, which
must be considered.
The situation in Mali poses a grave threat to regional
stability and deserves the urgent attention of the Council.
Pakistan supports efforts to restore the territorial
integrity of Mali, address the threat of terrorism and
respond to the humanitarian situation in the country
and the Sahel region through a comprehensive approach
that addresses both the political and security aspects of

12-63637

the crisis. The African Union joint strategic concept of
operations provides a very useful basis for addressing
the Malian crisis.
An integrated Sahel strategy will act as a ballast,
help stem a powerful tide of extremism and spur the
social and economic development of the region. The
United Nations can be complimented for looking at
the big picture and working on a holistic approach.
We must now inject a sense of urgency to achieve our
goals. In the coming days and weeks, Pakistan will
assist in the efforts to develop an effective response by
the Security Council to address the development and
security challenges in Mali and the wider Sahel region.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We thank the Moroccan
delegation for organizing and presiding over today’s
important debate on the situation in the Sahel region.
Mr. Othmani’s presence here today demonstrates the
seriousness that the Kingdom of Morocco attaches to
long-term peace and stability of that region. We would
also like to thank the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Sahel, Mr. Romano Prodi, and the High
Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. António Guterres, for
their briefings and welcome the Secretary-General for
his participation here today.
At the same time, South Africa commends ongoing
efforts by regional leaders in the Sahel, in particular the
African Union and its Special Envoy, President Buyoya,
and the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), aimed at addressing the situation in the
region.
The situation in the Sahel constitutes a serious
threat to security and stability on the African
continent, as well as to international peace and
security. That region has, over the last few months,
endured enormous and complex challenges, including
continued instability in some countries, increased
terrorist activities, transnational criminal activities,
a worsening humanitarian situation and a persistent
food crisis. In that context, my delegation recognizes
the interconnectedness of the challenges that the region
is facing; they are complex in nature. My delegation
continues to be concerned by the growing threat posed
by terrorist groups and criminal elements in the region,
as well as drugs, weapons and human trafficking,
which are providing the financial wherewithal for their
activities.
The African Union Peace and Security Council
noted that those challenges had been aggravated by

23

S/PV.6882

developments in the Maghreb region, especially the
crisis in Libya, the influx of internally displaced
persons and the increase in transnational organized
crimes and the proliferation of weapons. It is for that
reason that the international community should work
closely with the African Union, countries of the Sahel
region and ECOWAS in addressing the situation.
We are also concerned about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in the region. It is reported
that humanitarian agencies will require more than
$800 million to respond effectively to the food security
and nutrition crisis facing the region. The situation is
further exacerbated by the presence of terrorist groups
in northern Mali, which has prompted massive internal
displacement of the population and has created over
400,000 refugees. In March, during the Peace and
Security Council meeting held in Bamako, our Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Ms. Maite Nkoana-Mashabane,
committed South Africa to assisting the Governments
of the Niger, Mauritania, Mali and Chad to overcome
the current drought and food insecurity. So far, between
September and October, South Africa has delivered
more 100 tons of maize power boosts — nutrition for
children. South Africa’s shipments to Mali, a part of the
full humanitarian support package, will be taking place
within the next few weeks.
The challenges that the Sahel region is facing
require a holistic and comprehensive approach from all
of us. It is imperative that the international community,
in collaboration with regional organizations, in
particular the African Union and ECOWAS, as well
as countries of the region, should work together to
address the root causes of the challenges that the region
is facing. However, we must remain cognizant of the
reality that while the challenges the Sahel is facing
demand our urgent response, they also require a longterm sustainable involvement from all of us.
Therefore, our commitment must remain
unwavering. The appointment of Mr. Romano Prodi and
the African Union High Representative for Mali, former
President Buyoyo, provides a unique opportunity for the
international community to coordinate its efforts in a
manner that avoids duplication and promotes efficiency
by coordinating the collective response. The meeting
convened by Mr. Prodi in Rome on 7 December is
most important in that regard. In is important for the
Special Envoy to urgently finalize the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel, encompassing
development, humanitarian and security dimensions.

24

That will ensure that the United Nations is focusing on
the challenges facing the region.
Allow me to turn to the situation in Mali, which is the
most urgent matter requiring our immediate attention.
South Africa strongly believes that the challenges
facing Mali are related to the overall situation in the
Sahel region. We are particularly concerned about the
ongoing insecurity in the north of Mali and the threat
that the situation poses to the security of neighbouring
countries and beyond.
The situation in Mali requires an urgent response
from the international community and the Council. In
that regard, South Africa fully supports the request by
the African Union and ECOWAS for the deployment
of the African-led international support mission in
Mali to assist the Malian forces to regain control of
the north. The Security Council should authorize the
deployment of that mission under Chapter VII, as well
as provide a United Nations logistical support package.
That is urgent. The Council must be seen as united in
supporting Malian forces to recapture the north.
To conclude, South Africa wishes to reiterate that if
the situation is left unattended, it will lead to a further
deterioration of the humanitarian situation and further
human rights violations. If left unchecked, the situation
in the Sahel threatens to spread and affect other countries
in the region and beyond, as well as to undermine
international peace and security. Today’s discussion and
presidential statement (S/PRST/2012/26) are important
for highlighting those challenges. Our discussion
should be followed by concrete action. We welcome the
words of Mr. Prodi in that regard — including support
for regional initiatives such as speedily authorizing the
deployment of the African-led international support
mission.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me, at the outset, to thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this important meeting on the
situation in the region of the Sahel. I am grateful for
your personal presence in leading our discussion. I
would also like to apologize on behalf of our Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Harold Caballeros, who was
unfortunately unable to attend, as was his intention
and desire, due to scheduling conflicts. I would like in
particular to express our appreciation for the concept
paper that your delegation circulated (S/2012/906),
which contains important ideas for organizing today’s
debate. I also thank the Secretary-General, the Special

12-63637

S/PV.6882

Envoy for the Sahel and the High Commissioner for
Refugees for their briefings. I listened with interest
to the statements by the Minister from Côte d’Ivoire,
speaking on behalf of the Economic Community of
Western African States (ECOWAS).
The theme of today’s debate could not be more
relevant. In the Sahel region, a number of problems
converge, including recurrent droughts with their
resulting famines, intermittent plagues, extreme
poverty, migration, and the internal as well as the
trans-border displacement of persons. Those problems
are exacerbated by other phenomena that have recently
been explored in the Council in a variety of contexts
with universal implications. I refer, for example, to
the illegal activities associated with organized crime,
and also to the consolidation of havens for terrorist
organizations.
Moreover, events in the Sahel are not unrelated
to the Libyan crisis of 2011, as we learned earlier this
year from the report (see S/2012/42) by an assessment
mission of the Secretariat. Consequently, the thematic
reach of our debate covers a wide range of issues. I
would like to limit my remarks to six short points.
First, a few words about Mali, which is the focus
of the Council’s attention when we speak of the
region of the Sahel. This is where we come closest
to the threshold of a threat to international peace and
security. The disruption of constitutional order last
March led to predictable consequences. Longstanding
demands for greater autonomy by the Tuareg peoples
of the north grew more pronounced, and today no less
than the territorial integrity of Mali is at stake. In
the governance vacuum, extremist armed forces have
gained significant territory. In that manner, havens
have been created where terrorist groups and criminal
cartels are able to operate at will. A regime of grave
human rights violations against the population has
emerged, and religious and cultural monuments are
being attacked, which has led to a humanitarian crisis
of the first order.
All that is taking place in a broad geographical
area that is today a no-man’s land. In addition, given
the multiple links between the countries of the Sahel,
as well as of the Maghreb, the chaotic situation that
reigns in northern Mali is at great risk of spreading to
neighbouring countries. We therefore support a robust
reaction from the Council to address that situation along

12-63637

the general lines of the proposal that the SecretaryGeneral presented to us just a few days ago.
That leads to my second point, which is that, apart
from its specific characteristics, the Sahel region offers
a new opportunity to draw lessons from the diverse
modes of partnership between the United Nations and
African multilateral agencies, as countenanced by
Chapter VIII of the Charter. At least so far as Mali is
concerned, the earliest initiatives, as is well known,
originated in the Economic Community of West African
States, with the support of the African Union. As in so
many other cases — Darfur, Somalia, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo — partnerships were established
between the United Nations and regional or subregional
entities that offer important potential benefits based
on the comparative advantage of each party. However,
they also generate potential obstacles derived from
the eternal problem of who does what, how the chain
of command and control functions within a complex
peacekeeping operation and who picks up the tab. In
the case of Mali, we welcome that kind of partnership
in principle, but without compromising the functions
assigned to the Council in the Charter.
Thirdly, in the Sahel, especially northern Mali, the
international community as a whole, and the countries
of the region in particular, face new challenges from
extremist or armed groups that use violence against
innocent civilians to further their own destructive
agendas. Given the size of the territory in question,
there is also a threat that havens will emerge there for
groups such as Al-Qaida, the Mouvement pour l’unicité
et le jihad en Afrique de l’Ouest, Ansar Dine and Boko
Haram. Preventing the establishment of havens for such
groups is thus a priority, and will require the Malian
Government to regain full control over its territory. We
support the backing of the international community for
this effort.
Fourthly, we are concerned about the reports of gross
violations of the human rights of the civilians living
in areas close to where extremist groups are operating.
Extrajudicial executions, amputations, beatings, rape,
kidnappings and the recruitment of child soldiers seem
to be the order of the day in communities previously
characterized by neighbourliness and tolerance. This
situation has also provoked a mass exodus that is
giving rise to a new humanitarian crisis just as the
previous crisis, attributable to climatic conditions,
was beginning to abate. In other words, humanitarian
assistance remains a priority in the Sahel, and we

25

S/PV.6882

commend the Regional Humanitarian Coordinator for
the Sahel, as well as the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, for their activities in that regard.
Fifthly, another rapidly growing sector in the Sahel
is that of local and transnational groups dedicated to
organized crime, including trafficking in illicit drugs,
arms, persons and contraband. This is a subject we
discussed in February, during Togo’s presidency of
the Council, under the rubric of peace consolidation in
West Africa (see S/PV.6723), which led to the adoption
of resolution 2039 (2012). We can certainly relate to
the need to combat this scourge, which requires solid
international cooperation, since the countries of Central
America in general, and Guatemala in particular, are
dealing with the same challenge.
Lastly, given the complex and multifaceted
characteristics of the situation in the Sahel, it is clear
that an integrated and coordinated approach is required
on the part of the entire United Nations system. We
therefore eagerly await the presentation as soon as
possible of the United Nations integrated strategy for
the Sahel that we requested in July, and concerning
which Mr. Romano Prodi has informed us. We trust
that this document, with its revisions, will provide a
road map for the strategy’s subsequent implementation.
For all these reasons, we also call on all international
stakeholders, regional and subregional organizations,
and development partners to redouble their efforts to
support and assist all the countries of the Sahel.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): Mr. President, I
am delighted to see you presiding here today.
The presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Morocco and of other dignitaries clearly underscores
the importance of the evolving situation in the Sahel
for peace and security in the region. At the outset, I
would like to thank the Moroccan delegation for having
arranged today’s meeting. I would also like to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, his Special Envoy,
Mr. Romano Prodi, and High Commissioner António
Guterres for their briefings. We hope that today’s
deliberations will help the United Nations to address
the multifaceted crisis in the Sahel in an integrated and
comprehensive manner, as is mentioned in the useful
concept note prepared by the Moroccan delegation
(S/2012/906, annex).
The Sahel region has long faced several challenges
in the political, economic and humanitarian spheres.

26

Many countries of the region are also dealing with
governance issues, due to the absence of adequate
institutional capacity. Over the past year, the situation
has worsened, due to the crises in the neighbourhood, as
has been most acutely demonstrated by the developments
in Mali. The proliferation of weapons, the activities of
rebel and terrorist groups, and transnational organized
crime, including illicit drug trafficking, have taken a
heavy toll on the region. Apart from the political and
security problems, the humanitarian situation in the
region has also been aggravated by extreme climatic
conditions and insufficient rainfall, which have had
a negative effect on harvests. More than 18 million
people in the region are suffering from severe food and
nutrition crises this year.
Extremist and terrorist groups have taken advantage
of the adverse political, security and humanitarian
situations to consolidate their positions, particularly
in northern Mali. Such groups have weakened State
institutions, committed serious human rights violations,
and damaged or destroyed many sites of cultural,
historic and religious significance. The activities of
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, Ansar Dine and
Boko Haram in northern Mali have turned the area into
a regional hub for terrorist groups. Several countries of
the region are seriously threatened by their activities.
More than 400,000 people have been displaced by the
fighting in northern Mali.
Clearly, the time has come for the international
community to seriously address the multiple crises in
the Sahel and to support the initiatives of regional and
subregional organizations. Given the complexity of the
challenges facing the region, the response requires a
holistic approach. The United Nations should play
the leading role in the process, and we appreciate the
Secretary-General’s initiatives, such as the high-level
meeting on the Sahel in September and the appointment
of the Special Envoy.
We look forward to the Secretary-General’s report
on an integrated strategy for the Sahel, as requested by
the Security Council. We think the strategy should be
developed with the full involvement of the countries of
the Sahel and regional and subregional organizations,
such as the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), the Community of
Sahelo-Saharan States and the Arab Maghreb Union.
In the immediate term, the priority should be
stabilizing the security situation. That requires dealing

12-63637

S/PV.6882

with the threats of secessionist, extremist and Al-Qaidalinked terrorist groups. Political dialogue should be
pursued with those willing to renounce terrorism
and lay down their arms. A secure environment will
also facilitate the implementation of programmes for
national reconciliation and the delivery of humanitarian
assistance.
We therefore support an expeditious response from
the Security Council to the request of ECOWAS and
the African Union for the deployment of an Africanled international support mission in Mali. The mission
should be deployed in parallel with the institution
of an inclusive political process, led by the Malian
authorities, to address the legitimate grievances of the
people of northern Mali. We also urge the international
community to redouble its efforts to meet the challenges
of food insecurity in northern Mali and provide
adequate resources to humanitarian agencies working
in the region.
Given the expanding activities of terrorist
networks and armed groups in the region, the United
Nations should also assist the affected countries in
strengthening the capacities of security agencies and
enhancing cooperation at the regional level, so as to
establish more effective border controls and combat
illicit trafficking in arms and drugs and organized
crime and terrorism.
The implementation of all strategies should give
primacy to national ownership and the capacitybuilding of national institutions and respect the
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of the countries concerned. Along with
the provision of resources, there should be better
integration and coordination among the United Nations
and other agencies on the ground to ensure the effective
implementation of the strategy.
In conclusion, the renewed attention to the Sahel on
the part of the international community is a welcome
development. We expect that attention to translate
into concrete action on the ground to address the
challenges. India, for its part, remains committed to
partnering with the countries in the region, the United
Nations, the African Union and other organizations in
the implementation of a United Nations-led integrated
strategy for the Sahel.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): At the outset, I wish to thank
the Moroccan presidency for having convened today’s
important meeting. Germany attaches great importance

12-63637

to the situation in the Sahel, and we therefore highly
appreciate your timely initiative, Sir, to debate the
current challenges facing the Sahel region.
Germany aligns itself with statement to be delivered
later on behalf of the European Union (EU).
Let me also thank the Secretary-General for his
remarks, as well as Mr. Prodi and Mr. Guterres for
their very helpful briefings. Furthermore, I would like
to welcome the representatives of the regional and
subregional organizations, as well as the representatives
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the World
Bank and the African Development Bank.
The situation in the Sahel was brought to the
attention of the Council only at the end of last year. Yet,
long-standing structural problems have been hampering
the development of the region for a long time. The
current crisis in Mali has highlighted the challenges and
threats to peace and security that the Sahel is facing.
Tackling those highly complex challenges includes
strengthening the fight against terrorism, transnational
organized crime and proliferation; providing an
immediate responses to the humanitarian crisis; as
well as promoting socioeconomic development, good
governance, democracy, the rule of law and respect
for human rights. From a long-term perspective, it also
includes finding responses to environmental challenges
caused by, among other things, climate change.
Allow me, Sir, to elaborate on some of those
challenges. The rise of terrorism and the establishment
of a safe haven and training ground for terrorists
in the region are matters of paramount concern and
require immediate attention and action. In that context,
Germany would like to reiterate its support for the listing
of the relevant terrorist groups and their affiliates under
the Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee regime.
The ongoing proliferation of arms in the region
is equally worrying. The international community
and established regional mechanisms should continue
to support national efforts in the region to combat
proliferation. Germany has been carrying out projects
on arms control, both bilaterally and within the
framework of the EU border management programme,
and has always advocated for a comprehensive approach
to combating the destabilizing accumulation of and
illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons. We
are currently funding various projects on stockpiles
management and security, as well as on demobilization
and integration in various African countries.

27

S/PV.6882

Climate change and its adverse effects represent
another serious challenge to stability and peace in the
Sahel region. So far, that aspect has been neglected and
needs, without any doubt, greater attention. Besides
security, development and environmental issues, the
humanitarian situation in the Sahel region remains
of great concern and calls for immediate action. The
international community needs to urgently step up its
assistance. Since the end of 2011, Germany has pledged
$80 million to date.
Let me also address some possible ways of tackling
the challenges in the Sahel. First, the importance of
capacity-building and institution-building cannot be
stressed enough. Those elements are key to enabling
functioning State institutions so as not only to
adequately address national challenges individually but
also to strengthen their cooperation with neighbours
effectively as part of joint strategies and programmes.
In that regard, we would also like to underline the
importance of support through subregional and
regional organizations and the United Nations. My
country remains active in supporting a number of
capacity-building projects, such as providing technical
assistance within the framework of the Customs Data
Project or in the context of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime Global Container Programme.
We would also like to recall, in that respect, the
establishment of the West African Science Service
Centre on Climate Change and Adapted Land Use
earlier this year, a novelty in the region. The Centre
is designed to respond to climate change and preserve
sustainable livelihoods in the region.
Secondly, I wish to underline the importance of
improving national, international and multinational
cooperation and coordination, including with the
European Union and its integrated Strategy for
Development and Security in the Sahel. The EU Sahel
Strategy has already been translated into concrete
action, and I would therefore strongly encourage close
coordination and collaboration between the United
Nations and the EU in order to create synergies during
the development of the United Nations Sahel strategy.
Finally, we all agree on the need for a comprehensive
overarching approach, which we hope to see in the
United Nations Sahel strategy. The high-level meeting
on the Sahel in September gave us a first glimpse
of the outline of the strategy, and we welcome the
meeting of the Special Envoys for the Sahel last week

28

in Rome under the guidance of Mr. Prodi as a further
step towards the resolution of the multiple crises in the
Sahel region.
At this point, I would like to thank the Mr. Prodi
for his efforts and assure him of my Government’s full
support to his endeavours.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the African Union.
Mr. António (spoke in French): At the outset, I
would like to thank the Council and you, Sir, for having
put the question of the Sahel on the agenda. I would like
to welcome the presence among us and the participation
of the persons who have spoken today. I would like to
thank in particular Mr. Romano Prodi, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Sahel, and Mr. António
Guterres, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees.
The present debate comes in the wake of the
discussions held by the Council some days ago on Mali,
as it is true that there can be no lasting solution to the
crisis in Mali without a comprehensive approach to the
multidimensional challenges facing the Sahel region.
The strategic concept for resolving the Malian crisis
includes a range of measures devoted to the situation
in the Sahel region. As we all know, the Sahel region
is facing a number of challenges linked to terrorism,
transnational organized crime, the illicit proliferation
of and trafficking in arms, latent armed conflicts,
environmental degradation, climate change, food
insecurity and a grave nutrition crisis. Those problems
have been exacerbated by the Libyan crisis, in particular
as a result of the influx of hundreds of thousands of
returnees and the flood of arms and munitions coming
from Libyan arsenals, which has provided a source
of weaponry for terrorist and criminal groups in the
region.
In that context, the African Union immediately
condemned the attacks that were perpetrated in
mid-January by armed rebels in the northern part of
Mali, as we were aware that those developments could
only worsen a security situation that was already
precarious, create a humanitarian crisis and destabilize
both Mali and the region. Our fears have proven to be
justified.
In the African Union, we became aware very early
on of the need to adopt a comprehensive approach that
would address all the matters at hand, in particular

12-63637

S/PV.6882

terrorism, armed rebellions, transnational organized
crime, the illicit proliferation of small arms and light
weapons and other weapons, food insecurity, poverty,
youth unemployment, environmental deterioration and
climate change, problems related to governance and
chronic underdevelopment. Therefore, in December
2011, the African Union Commission, together with
the United Nations, undertook a joint mission in the
countries of the Sahel in order to evaluate the impact of
the Libyan crisis. Subsequently, at the end of January
2012, the Commission convened consultations at the
ministerial level in Addis Ababa among the countries
of the region and other stakeholders in order to consider
the report and recommendations issued as a result of
the joint AU-United Nations mission (see S/2012/42).
In mid-March, the African Union Commission,
working closely with the United Nations, convened
a meeting of experts that brought together the
countries of the region, the various agencies of the
United Nations and international partners in order
to consider the situation in the Sahel region and to
develop recommendations on further actions. The
meeting adopted conclusions that addressed political,
security, humanitarian and development aspects. It also
proposed a follow-up mechanism. Those conclusions
were ratified by the ministerial meeting of the Peace
and Security Council that was held in Bamako on
20 March. The Peace and Security Council requested
the Commission, in cooperation with the United
Nations and the other stakeholders, including the
relevant regional economic communities, to take all the
necessary measures in order to ensure the follow-up
and the implementation of the conclusions reached in
the various areas of action that had been identified, that
is, the security and diplomatic aspects, humanitarian
aid, food security, the reintegration of migrant workers,
sustainable development and follow-up.
The Commission is endeavouring to implement
those conclusions. In that context, it has decided to
enhance its presence in the region by opening offices
in the countries where it has not been represented
and to strengthen the capacity of existing offices in
the region. Furthermore, the Chairman of the African
Union Commission has appointed a high representative
responsible not only for Mali, but for the Sahel region as
a whole, and that representative is the former President
of Burundi, Mr. Pierre Buyoya.
From a more programmatic perspective, the
Commission is engaged in developing a comprehensive

12-63637

African Union approach to support efforts made by
countries of the region. In that regard, we are seeking
to strengthen consistency between the activities
undertaken by the various African Union entities
involved in the activities and programmes operating
in the Sahel region. To that end, we plan to quickly
convene a meeting that brings together all the relevant
deparments of the Commission, as well as the regional
offices and the specialized agencies of the African
Union, in order to develop a joint plan of action for
peace, security and stability in the Sahel region.
When considering the situation in the Sahel region
and the action that needs to be taken, we must keep in
mind that in recent years the countries of the region
have made sustained efforts, both individually and
collectively, in order to tackle the challenges they
face. In that regard, the Council should commend
the core countries — Algeria, Mali, Mauritania and
the Niger — as well as other examples of bilateral
cooperation among those countries and the rest of
the region. In the same vein, we should note with
satisfaction the sustained efforts made by the Economic
Community of West African States in order to promote
peace, security, stability and development in the region
of West Africa.
Finally, I would like to welcome the organization
of a regional ministerial conference on border security,
under the aegis of the Libyan Government, held in
Tripoli in March. Ultimately, we must also acknowledge
the contribution that is being made as an intrinsic part of
the mandates of other relevant regional organizations,
namely, the Community of Sahelo-Saharan States and
the North Africa Regional Capability. International
actions should therefore focus on supporting efforts
made by countries of the region and make them more
effective. We in the African Union express the hope that
this meeting will help set a milestone in that regard.
I would like to use this opportunity to draw
attention to an issue of great concern both for the region
and for the African Union, namely, the issue of the
payment of ransoms for the release of hostages. This
has become a significant source of funding that enables
terrorist groups to gain the support of local populations,
acquire the necessary logistics and infrastructure
and recruit new elements, in addition to the resulting
criminalization of local economies. In that connection,
I wish to reiterate the urgent call of the African Union
to the Security Council to adopt a resolution prohibiting
the payment of ransoms to terrorist groups.

29

S/PV.6882

For our part, we shall spare no effort to contribute
towards a rapid resolution of the Malian crisis based
on the relevant decisions adopted by the Peace
and Security Council and shall work towards the
stabilization and development of the Sahel region, in
support of the efforts made by the countries concerned
and in close cooperation with the United Nations and
other international partners.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. O’Sullivan.
Mr. O’Sullivan (spoke in French): At the outset,
allow me to thank the Moroccan presidency of the
Security Council for organizing this important debate.
I would also like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
invited the European Union (EU) to participate today.
High Representative Catherine Ashton is currently
presiding over the meeting of the Foreign Affairs
Council. Unfortunately, therefore, she could not
participate in this meeting, but I am speaking on her
behalf. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his statement; his Special Envoy for the Sahel,
President Prodi, with whom I had the honour to work
very closely in other circumstances; and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. António
Guterres.
(spoke in English)
Today’s ministerial debate is a timely and a
necessary initiative. The European Union is extremely
concerned about the prevailing situation in the Sahel,
and in Mali in particular. That situation requires
urgent, coordinated and determined action by all those
concerned in Mali and in the region, with the support of
a united international community.
The Sahel is suffering not only a humanitarian
crisis, but also from the fallout from the conflict in the
north of Mali and the political crisis in the south. Time
is playing in favour of terrorist and criminal groups in
the north, who pose a threat to the entire region and
beyond. They are already perpetrating serious human
rights violations in Mali, for which they must be held
responsible.
The crises in Mali and the Sahel are interconnected.
Only a durable solution to the political and security
crisis in Mali will allow lasting peace and development
throughout the Sahel. However, lasting peace in Mali
will not be achieved if Sahel-wide issues are not
addressed.

30

We believe, like many members of the Council,
that a truly comprehensive approach is therefore
needed. We encourage the United Nations to finalize
and implement a United Nations integrated strategy
under the leadership of the Secretary-General’s Special
Envoy.
Since 2010, in close coordination with the
Governments of Mali, the Niger and Mauritania, the EU
has been shaping and then implementing its Strategy for
Security and Development in the Sahel. The objective
is to promote simultaneously security, good governance
and development at local, national and regional levels.
The role of all neighbouring countries, including States
of the Maghreb, is recognized in the EU Strategy.
In the current circumstances, the EU is committed
to making special efforts on the security front. The new
EU mission EUCAP Sahel was launched in July to train
the internal security forces of the Niger and to reinforce
regional coordination with Mali and Mauritania in order
to tackle criminal activities, including drug trafficking
and terrorism.
The EU is also committed to addressing the official
request of the Government of Mali to help modernize
and train the Malian defence forces, under legitimate
civilian control. That future EU training mission,
which should normally be approved at the meeting of
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs today, should also
address the need to help restore the chain of command
and generate a credible leverage on the use of force,
with due respect for international humanitarian law.
That EU engagement is part of the global support
for the restoration of State authority and for political
transition, reunification and stability in Mali.
To complement the Malian defence forces, an
African-led international support mission in Mali has
a significant role to play, not alone but rather within
and subject to a comprehensive political framework
and a coordinated approach by neighbouring countries.
We await the Security Council’s conclusions on the
African Union proposal. We will then assess what we
can provide to it.
We are conscious that the task facing Governments
in the Sahel region is enormous and that international
support is therefore essential. As in all other crisis
situations, it is equally critical that we, the international
community, all act in close coordination. The United
Nations, the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States all have crucial

12-63637

S/PV.6882

roles to play in achieving those goals. I would like to
emphasize that the EU will work closely with all of
them to that end.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chad.
Mr. Allam-mi (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to express to Minister El Othmani Chad’s warmest
congratulations on his great country’s assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council this month and
for having chosen for its agenda the important issue of
peace and security in Africa, particularly in the Sahel
region. That is the focus of international events, owing
to the crisis that has raged for a short while now in Mali.
Before continuing my statement of behalf of the
Chairman of the Community of Sahelo-Saharan States
(CEN-SAD), a post held by my country. I would like
to convey to you, Mr. President, and to all Council
members, the regrets of the Chadian Minister for
Foreign Affairs and African Integration for not being
here today. He would very much have liked to attend
this important meeting personally but had to remain in
the country for a high-level visit to N’Djamena by our
Libyan brothers and neighbours, with whom we jointly
secure and develop a large part of the Sahelo-Saharan
area. In other words, there is a link between our concern
today and that visit.
For approximately a decade, the Sahel has been
a transit area for all kinds of traffickers — in human
beings, drugs, cigarettes, arms and so on. The immense
size of the Sahel, the porous State borders and the
weakness of States in monitoring borders have allowed
all those traffickers to operate undisturbed, particularly
as they have managed to join forces with a part of the
local populations in that highly lucrative business. The
Libyan crisis, and the flight of hundreds of combatants
in the Libyan army who were originally from the area
and who brought with them weapons, equipment and
money, have spread the phenomenon and transformed
the Sahel into a vast safe haven, where certain groups
have even wanted to build an independent State.
Separated from Libya by a long desert and a
mountainous border, Chad has always guarded against
its territory being used as a transit area. On two
occasions, mafia and terrorist groups, including that
of the Algerian Abdul Kadir Al Para, known as the
One-Eyed Man, have been arrested. More recently, since
the Libyan crisis began, the Chadian Government has

12-63637

taken measures to secure its border, thereby stopping
any infiltration of troops or weapons.
This is the place to recall that there is no development
without security. That is true for the Sahel. The countries
of the region, supported by the international community,
must therefore seek and agree on better coordination of
their fight against terrorist and criminal armed groups
of all kinds rampant there. But eradicating insecurity
is not enough in itself to stabilize the Sahel without an
extensive development programme, since the Sahel is
prone to drought and desertification. Famine is also
endemic. Grazing land for flocks is becoming scarce
and agriculture lacks irrigation. Lands are lost every
year. Flocks are decimated, and those who raise them
are ruined and reduced to begging.
The international community must therefore
redouble its efforts to increase its development assistance
to the Sahel region by building infrastructure — a very
ambitious programme of roads, clinics, schools, tourist
sites and airports — so as to make the cities, wadis and
palm groves vibale. In short, axes of development that
can stabilize the population and improve their living
conditions must be established.
CEN-SAD was to play that role following its
establishment by the Sahelo-Sahara countries.
However, the Council will agree that that role has
been deflected. An extraordinary summit, planned for
January 2013 in N’Djamena, should review the charter
for CEN-SAD’s establishment to refocus its objectives
on the development and security of the Sahelo-Sahara
region. We welcome the involvement of Morocco in
that restructuring, which hosted the Executive Council
meeting and has proposed hosting another summit.
With regard to events in Mali, Chad believes that
the north of that brotherly country, just like the Sahel
region, is in the process of becoming a true and solid
rear base for terrorist and extremist operations of all
kinds. Meanwhile, the international community is
unable to speak in one voice and contents itself with
minimal compromises. Compromise is insufficient
to concretely, urgently and effectively deal with the
challenges weighing upon the subregion, the entire
African continent and beyond. The more time that
passes, the more that base will strengthen and the more
difficult it will be to take.
With regard to possible African or international
military intervention in northern Mali, Chad will, as its
position of principle, do its part when the time comes.

31

S/PV.6882

However, while reiterating its solidarity with the Malian
people, Chad will adopt a definitive position when the
United Nations speaks with one voice together with the
Malians, the Economic Community of West African
States and the African Union. Chad believes that it is
urgent to provide assistance to the Malian population,
which is subjected to the abuses of armed groups, and
to put an end to a situation that threatens international
peace and security.

of any developments in that region and the threat they
pose to security. That is confirmed by the transnational
and transcontinental challenges we face. It comes as no
surprise that armed violence has erupted at a sensitive
time when economic, environmental and food security
crises are rampant worldwide. Events have proven that
the armed groups and rebel movements involved are
multidimensional and pose a common threat to our
area.

Before I conclude, allow me to wonder if it is
appropriate to talk about a north-south opposition in
Mali. Besides the problems posed by a fringe of the
Tuareg minority, is there also a north-south issue in
Mali? In Mali — a country that was exemplary until
quite recently, where there was good governance and
no population seemed to be marginalized — is it right
to see the situation in terms of a conflict between north
and south?

The Al-Qaida network, which is rampant in those
States, recruits the youth of the Maghreb area into its
ranks, and it is clear that our collective responsibility
today lies in refuting the reference points and conceptual
framework of those groups by immunizing our youth
with a correct concept of our civilization, history and
religion, especially since the countries of the Arab
Maghreb and those of the Sahel and the Sahara have
for centuries been linked by a culture that has spread
the values of Islam and the principle of tolerance — a
foundation of our religion.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to Mrs. Mendili.
Mrs. Mendili (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at
the outset to express our deep appreciation for the
invitation to the secretariat of the Arab Maghreb Union
to participate in today’s Security Council meeting, held
under the presidency of Morocco, which is one of the
founding States of the Union. I take this opportunity to
note Morocco’s intensive efforts to maintain peace and
security in the world. I am honoured to express our deep
appreciation to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
ongoing efforts to lay firm foundations for security in
the Sahelo-Saharan region. I would also like to express
our good wishes to Mr. Romano Prodi, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Sahel. We wish him
every success in his efforts to promote security and
stability in the region.
This meeting is being held under exceptional
and sensitive circumstances, because the various
developments in the Sahel and the Sahara, which
constitute a security belt for the Maghreb and Africa
as a whole, are a great challenge. That is especially true
of the crisis in Mali and the deep repercussions thereof,
which are no longer limited to the West African States
but are spreading throughout Africa, in terms both of
security and stability and of development.
The strategic location of the Union States for Africa
and Europe, and their ties to the Sahel and the Sahara at
the geographic and cultural levels, make us well aware of
the historical importance and dangerous repercussions

32

The developments in our region and the
repercussions of certain events have made the area an
easy channel for drug and human trafficking. They have
also opened new networks and routes for smuggling
arms and other dangerous materials and made it easy to
cross international borders, which are difficult to fully
monitor. The best evidence of that is the huge quantity
of arms that have been smuggled from nearby areas, the
consequences of which could shake the very foundation
of all that has been achieved so far in establishing
democratic systems of governance. That calls for a
firm stance and systematic behaviour that is based on
our common interest in further coordination in order
to promote security, stability and development in our
societies.
We support and express our deep appreciation
for United Nations efforts to establish security and
stability in Mali through a political approach. However,
we believe that it might also be very useful to support
those efforts through campaigns to collect the weapons
that are so plentiful in the area, in cooperation with
relevant United Nations organizations.
There are strong and reciprocal ties among
armed groups, criminal groups, terrorist groups and
organized crime, including the trafficking of drugs,
arms and human beings, as well as illegal immigration
and money-laundering. All of those threaten the
security of the Maghreb area as well as its African and

12-63637

S/PV.6882

Mediterranean environment. That was the conclusion
reached by the Arab Maghreb Union’s foreign ministers
in a ministerial meeting that was organized to discuss
the security issue. The ministers stressed the need to
intensify efforts within the framework of common
responsibility at the bilateral, Maghreb, regional and
international levels in order to counter all threats and
dangers that could destabilize the Maghreb area. They
emphasized that this fight will be successful only
if it adopts a preventive, integrated and coordinated
approach that is part of a comprehensive strategy.
Given the magnitude of the threat and the pooling
of efforts among the various cells of Al-Qaida and other
criminal organizations, we have no choice but to bolster
security cooperation between the Arab Maghreb Union
and the Economic Community of West African States,
which would help to eliminate the causes of instability
and tension, with tremendous benefit to the Maghreb
and African States.
The international community must establish a new
reality based on common interests and an awareness
that our destiny is shared. It must be approached through
constructive cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and international organizations in support
of strategic policy- and decision-makers and in order
to enhance cooperation in border management and risk
analysis. We must also work on further coordination to
oppose and cut off the sources for terrorism funding
by focusing on human security and enhancing aid to
promote sustainable development.
Enhancing regional cooperation and coordination
in order to arrive at effective mechanisms and find a
common position would help us to confront the root
causes of the problems we are facing now. Our sole
purpose must be to create peace, development and
security.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to Ms. Reinikka.
Ms. Reinikka: The President of the World Bank,
Mr. Jim Yong Kim, is unable to be here today, but he
has asked me to convey his greetings and thanks to the
Council for organizing this event and for inviting the
World Bank. We are committed to a strong partnership
with the United Nations on the Sahel, and Mr. Kim was
particularly pleased to participate in the special event
on the Sahel organized on the margins of the General
Assembly in September.

12-63637

I wish to assure the Council of our continuing
commitment to working collaboratively to address
the great needs of the Sahel, where 19 million people
were affected by reduced access to food following the
2011 drought. Good rains in the current agricultural
season have reduced the acute need and benefited the
harvest in many locations, but rains have also brought
flooding that has affected 3.2 million people in West
Africa and displaced 1.7 million people, mostly in
Nigeria. Those challenges come on top of other chronic
threats including desert locusts, rapid population
growth, pre-existing high levels of child malnutrition,
well over 400,000 migrants returning from Libya, and
conflict. Conflict and lack of security have particularly
affected the delivery of humanitarian and development
assistance in northern Mali.
Being part of the Sahel, Mali is affected by climate
volatility and rainfall variability in a very deep-seated
way. Even in years when there is record agricultural
production, many people are vulnerable to shocks
because of chronic food insecurity, persistently high
malnutrition, and loss of livelihood owing to a lack
of economic alternatives. These shocks deeply affect
human development, with shortfalls in nutrition and
stimulation among the young children of today having
a tragic long-term impact on their future lives and
productivity as the adults of tomorrow.
The institutional and security crisis arising from the
military coup in March has made an already difficult
situation much worse in Mali. It has severely hampered
the response to Mali’s drought of 2011. Today, some
4.6 million people, of whom over 1.6 million live within
the conflict-affected northern regions, are at risk of
food insecurity in Mali. More than 450,000 people have
fled their homes since fighting erupted, and the number
of internally displaced people in Mali is estimated to
be 119,000. The national gross domestic product is
expected to contract by 3.1 per cent in 2012.
The World Bank is providing practical support
to help vulnerable groups cope with effects of this
compounded crisis. In July, we resumed existing
operations in Mali in the social sectors and agriculture
to help people access basic services. We are also
preparing new basic education and safety nets
programmes. We are working with partners to create
synergies and minimize fragmentation. For example,
for the Mali Safety Nets Project, we are working very
closely with UNICEF and the World Food Programme

33

S/PV.6882

to address the needs of specific groups, including
internally displaced people.
Across the Sahel more broadly, our three-phased
response — an approach we also adopted in the Horn of
Africa — has ranged from providing immediate relief
to planning for and investing in long-term resilience.
In the past few months, we have responded quickly
through accelerated disbursements amounting to
$64 million from existing World Bank operations across
the Niger, Mali, Chad, Burkina Faso, and Mauritania.
This has helped to support vulnerable households
through cash for work, recapitalizing livestock,
rehabilitating small-scale irrigation, and improving
access to food and health services. As a second part
to our response, we have helped people to replace lost
assets and to recover their livelihoods. Drawing on
lessons from the Horn of Africa, we are also helping
to plan for social safety nets that can be rapidly scaled
up to channel additional resources in times of need.
From experience in Ethiopia and other countries, we
know that robust social protection systems can make
a major difference, preventing shocks from escalating
into crises.
We are also helping to build resilient livelihoods in
the long-term. Investments in transformative multi-use
water infrastructure, such as the Kandadji program
in the Niger, will help people to sustain agricultural
production and remain resilient to crisis in future.
These large-scale investments need to be accompanied
by scaled-up, climate-smart agricultural practices.
They are also complemented by our ongoing support
for health and nutrition, as well as for education and
skills to help diversify livelihoods.
The Bank’s engagement in the Sahel and the Horn
of Africa also provides a springboard for addressing the
broader drylands agenda, which requires the integration
of resilience as a key theme of development.
Food security in the Sahel can also be significantly
improved by measures to free up food trade, including
improving the efficiency of border crossings or even
eliminating them, reducing non-tariff barriers to
food trade, reinforcing supply chains, strengthening
risk markets, such as offering farmers crop insurance
through weather-indexed instruments, and avoiding
export bans.
Strengthening regional bodies, such as the
Permanent Interstate Committee for Drought Control

34

in the Sahel, is a key element of preparedness going
forward. This will help to further develop early warning
systems, including using new but simple technologies
such as mobile phones, and consolidate useful flows of
information in anticipation of crisis.
The Bank works closely with partners, in particular
the regional organizations the Economic Community of
West African States, the West African Economic and
Monetary Union and the African Union-New Partnership
for Africa’s Development, as well as multilateral and
bilateral agencies, including in particular the European
Union, the African Development Bank and the Agence
Française de Développement. Working through such
partnerships, the World Bank is bringing knowledge and
financing to the table, relying on existing instruments
and reallocation of funds for rapid action, as well as
investing in medium-term recovery and long-term
resilience.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to Mr. Ouédraogo.
Mr. Ouédraogo (spoke in French): It is my honour
to speak on behalf of the President of the African
Development Bank, Mr. Donald Kaberuka. Allow me
to thank you, Mr. President, for your kind invitation
to the African Development Bank to participate in
this ministerial debate on the Sahel region. We take
that invitation as an expression of the devotion of your
country, the Kingdom of Morocco, to peace, security
and development throughout the African continent. We
commend and thank you.
Allow me also to welcome the endeavours of the
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon to resolve issues of
peace, security and stability throughout the world,
and particularly in Africa. In that context, we note our
support for the appointment of Mr. Romano Prodi as
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel.
We wish above all to assure Mr. Prodi that the African
Development Bank will stand by him as he carries out
his mission.
In participating here today, the African Development
Bank offers its support for the countries of the Sahel
region, most of which are founding members of the
Bank. However, we also express our support and
availability for joint efforts to resolve the prevailing
situation in the Sahel region. For all too long, that vast
territory, stretching from Cape Verde to the Horn of
Africa, has been beset by recurrent conflicts of variable
natures and intensity. Too often, those tensions have

12-63637

S/PV.6882

generated religious fundamentalism, rampant banditry,
trafficking of all sorts, especially in drugs, as well as
the taking of hostages.
Other consequences include the weakening of
States and vast population displacements towards
neighbouring States or territories, as we are presently
seeing in Mali. It is therefore extremely urgent to
act — and to act together — in order to mitigate the
situation, which risks becoming a dangerous spiral
capable of irreparably weakening the entire region and
neighbouring areas and leading to an unacceptable
debacle. That is why the Bank welcomes this
ministerial debate and supports the vision of deploying
a comprehensive integrated strategy for the Sahel.
For over a year now, we have undertaken efforts,
in the framework of our mandate, with the Global
Agriculture and Food Security Program on a series
of programmes involving several countries, including
Senegal, the Gambia and the Niger, at a total cost of
$115 million. Those programmes have allowed us to
mobilize larger sums than the Bank could raise alone
in order to achieve the anticipated results, which are
significant. Other projects are planned for Mali,
Guinea-Bissau, Benin and Côte d’Ivoire.
We also hope to ensure that the Sahel becomes an
area for development, because if development efforts
do not receive support, the region will be exposed to
certain threats with which we are familiar, including
the recurrent droughts that are becoming increasingly
frequent as a result of climate change.
Some of the Bank’s efforts have been undertaken
under the auspices of the Permanent Inter-State
Committee on Drought Control in the Sahel (CILSS)
with a view to boosting the overall resilience of all the
economies of the Sahel. We are implementing a major
$500-million programme together in order to promote
such resilience. Consultations are under way with the
States members of the CILSS and their partners involved
in agriculture, social protection and humanitarian aid.
When I speak of partners, I am referring in particular
to the European Union, the Islamic Development Bank,
the World Bank and the United Nations.
The main pillars of our initiative are promoting
production, processing and marketing infrastructure;
enhancing capacity-building to enable interventions
by public, private and community institutions in the
agricultural sector; improving production and the
productivity of the agriculture, livestock, forestry

12-63637

and fishing sectors; and promoting regional trade and
integration. This initiative will extend over a period of
10 years, and we hope that its initial phase will start in
2014.
Other efforts have been undertaken pursuant to
our vision for general resilience in the Sahel, together
with the Lake Chad Basin Commission, the Niger Basin
Authority and the Mano River Union. To that end, we
are focusing our efforts on strengthening agricultural
and regional infrastructure to allow us to open up the
region.
Two weeks ago, we welcomed Mr. Gressly, United
Nations Regional Humanitarian Coordinator for the
Sahel. We discussed enhancing the complementarities
between the activities of the African Development Bank
and the United Nations system, and we found that there
are areas where we can enhance such complementarities.
The Bank’s work is focused on medium- and long-term
development and on creating conditions to entrench
and intensify development. The United Nations has a
mandate geared more towards providing emergency
aid, in particular humanitarian assistance.
In the context of our agricultural infrastructure
policy, we have launched programmes to improve
water management. Twenty projects are currently
being implemented, at a cost of more than $500 million.
They include 13 projects that are dedicated specifically
to managing water for agriculture and livestock
breeding, covering over 30,000 hectares at a cost of
$225 million. In order to address the critical drought
situation that has recently affected Chad, Senegal, the
Gambia, Mauritania and Mali, the Bank has mobilized
emergency aid of over $4.7 million.
The Bank believes that the idea of agricultural
infrastructure can also be applied to efforts to open
up the region and to support governance and regional
integration. Our activities seek to ensure that the
overall resilience of the Sahel economies enables them
to tackle any situation, thereby buttessing them and
preventing them from becoming even more vulnerable.
Regional expansion is a good example of this.
The efforts undertaken in recent years have
demonstrated that regional and national markets have
become more fluid. Agricultural surplus can be sold to
other regions because of this expansion, but we realize
that the existing network is not enough. We noted with
regret that, in 2011, it was cheaper for Senegal to import
onions from the Netherlands than from the Niger, next

35

S/PV.6882

door, which had a surplus that it was not able to sell.
So the Bank decided to continue to fund the road
transportation sector, with a particular emphasis on
inter-State corridors. In 2013, we will be undertaking
a substantive project on the missing links in two
corridors, N’Djamena/Niamey and the trans-Saharan
route between Lagos and Algiers.
Regarding the burning issue of Mali, which is of
great concern to us, we recall that less than a year ago
that country was seen as an example to be followed
in every way. Following the sudden deterioration of
affairs, the Bank would like to place on the record
its full willingness to join the transitional national
authorities, the Economic Community of West African
States, the African Union and the United Nations in
seeking ways and means to achieve a final resolution
to the multidimensional crisis there, which has lasted
for too long. In September, we cancelled the measures
to suspend our operations that were put in place in
March. For that reason, some projects have already
been resumed.
We are wrapping up our discussions with the
transitional Government on implementing other
programmes as soon as conditions allow, which we
hope will be very soon. I am thinking in particular
here of budgetary support and the case of a programme
supported by the International Monetary Fund that
would enhance public services. I would also mention
projects that have a direct impact on populations, such
as the provision of drinking water to Bamako, which
is in an advanced stage, and other largely agricultural
projects, which will contribute to the resilience of the
country.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Gokcen.
Mr. Gokcen: First of all, I would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate the Kingdom of Morocco
for assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I also wish to convey the gratitude of
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) Secretary
General İhsanoğlu for the initiative of Saad-Eddine El
Othmani to organize this important meeting and for
inviting the OIC. The Secretary General apologizes for
not being able to attend personally. However, I have the
honour to read out his statement:
“We are deeply concerned at the prevailing
situation in the Sahel region, particularly in Mali,
and seek to resolve the crisis through negotiation
and discussion. From the very beginning, the OIC

36

made repeated calls to the different parties involved
in the crisis in Mali to shun the path of violence
and settle their differences through dialogue and
negotiations. Furthermore, the OIC also supported
the initiative of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the African Union
and other regional and international organizations
aimed at finding a peaceful solution to the crisis in
Mali and the Sahel region.
“The fourth Extraordinary Islamic Summit,
held in Mecca Al-Mukarramah on 14 and
15 August 2012, discussed the situation in Mali
and the Sahel and expressed its deep concern over
the developments in that region. The leaders of the
member States were concerned with the resurgence
of terrorist acts fuelled by organized transnational
crime, notably arms and drug trafficking, which
threatens the peace, stability and socioeconomic
development of the Sahel countries, particularly
Mali.
“The OIC summit reiterated its support for the
maintenance of the territorial integrity, national
unity and sovereignty of the Republic of Mali. In
that context, it firmly condemned the attempts by
armed terrorist groups, which violate the territorial
integrity of that country. The summit also reiterated
its full solidarity with the transitional National
Unity Government and urged all member States to
provide the needed support and assistance to help it
achieve its objectives.
“The Conference also expressed deep concern
over the humanitarian tragedy in Mali and the
Sahel region and mandated the Secretary General
of the OIC to take necessary measures to mobilize
the resources needed to overcome the difficulties
confronting the hundreds of thousands of refugees
and displaced people in Mali and its neighbouring
countries. It strongly condemned the atrocities
perpetrated by terrorist groups against unarmed
civilians and the destruction of sites classified by
UNESCO as world cultural heritage, especially
in Timbuktu. It applauded and encouraged the
ECOWAS mediation and supported the current
efforts of the field countries — Algeria, Mali,
Mauritania and the Niger — the African Union, the
United Nations and Morocco to help Mali restore
its territorial integrity and stability.

12-63637

S/PV.6882

“More recently, the thirty-ninth session of the
Council of Foreign Ministers, held in Djibouti from
15 to 17 November 2012, also discussed the situation
in Mali and the Sahel and reaffirmed its principled
position of safeguarding the unity of the Republic
of Mali as well as its sovereignty and territorial
integrity. The Council strongly condemned the
armed groups’ actions threatening the safety of the
country, renewed its total solidarity with the Sahel
countries in combating all forms of insecurity and
destabilization, and supported the peace initiative
sponsored by ECOWAS and the African Union.
“We appreciate the important role being played
by His Excellency Mr. Blaise Compaoré, President
of Burkina Faso, in his capacity as the ECOWAS
mediator on the crisis in Mali and reiterate our
continued support for his mediation efforts to find
a peaceful solution to the conflict in that country
within the framework of preserving its national
unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity. We also
support the efforts of His Excellency Mr. Romano
Prodi, Special Envoy of the United Nations
Secretary-General for the Sahel.
“In order to support all those efforts in a
coordinated manner, the OIC intends to appoint a
special envoy for Mali and the Sahel. The overall
mandate of the OIC special envoy for Mali and the
Sahel would be to contribute to the ongoing efforts
of regional and international organizations to find a
peaceful solution in Mali and the region as a whole.
“Terrorism and organized crime should be
forcefully rejected, particularly when attempts are
made to link those activities with Islam. All parties
to the conflict should seriously engage in the
ongoing Burkina Faso-led mediation efforts, which
seek to find a peaceful settlement. We believe
that a partnership among local and international
Governments, institutions and civil society will
provide an all-inclusive setting for peaceful
dialogue and negotiation. Creation of a broad-based
coalition of local forces against non-indigenous
Al-Qaida affiliates in the region is necessary.
“After the joint mission to Syria in March
2012, the humanitarian partnership mission to
Africa’s Sahel region was the second partnership

12-63637

this year between the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
and the Humanitarian Department of the OIC. OIC
and OCHA officials jointly led a high-level mission
to Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger from 15 to
21 October 2012. In an innovation, representatives
of Azerbaijan, Brunei Darussalam, Kuwait,
Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, the African
Union, ECOWAS, the Islamic Development Bank,
Direct Aid, the International Islamic Charitable
Organization and the Red Crescent agencies of
the United Arab Emirates, Qatar and Turkey
participated in the joint mission. The objective
was to raise awareness of the humanitarian crises
in the Sahel region and to highlight the role of the
multilateral humanitarian system in supporting the
national responses of the three countries visited.
In many cases, humanitarian efforts can no longer
stand alone if the progress in humanitarian field
is not sustained by stable development within
the region. In the Sahel, there is also a need for
a comprehensive and integrated approach to
addressing security, governance, development and
humanitarian needs.
“Finally, I wish to remind all members of the
larger international community that we all share
the responsibility of acting collectively in order to
help the population of Mali and the Sahel region
to live in peace, security, stability and sustained
development. I therefore call upon the international
community to work in a more active and
coordinated manner to put pressure on all parties
to end the crisis immediately and restore peace and
stability in Mali and the region. The OIC General
Secretariat, member States and OIC subsidiary and
specialized organs such as the Islamic Development
Bank, the Research Centre for Islamic History, Art
and Culture, the Islamic Education, Scientific and
Cultural Organization and International Islamic
Jurisprudence Academy stand ready to further
support the efforts of the international community.”
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

37
