S/PV.6847 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6847th meeting
Monday, 15 October 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rosenthal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Guatemala)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Sharifov
Mr. Zhu Yanwei
Mr. Alzate
Ms. Legendre
Mr. Eick
Mr. Kumar
Mr. Erroja
Mr. Masood Khan
Ms. Teixeira Coelho
Mr. Zhdanov
Mr. Laher
Mr. Akpoto Komlagan
Mr. Day
Mr. Cenzer

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-54813 (E)

*1254813*

S/PV.6847 (Resumption 1)

The meeting was resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President (spoke in Spanish): Under rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Australia, Bahrain and the Maldives
to participate in this meeting.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing this
morning.
Japan is deeply concerned about the serious and
worsening situation in Syria and profoundly deplores
the death of many thousands of people as a result of
the continued violence. Japan reiterates its call on all
parties in Syria to immediately halt the violence and
abuses of human rights, and condemns the Syrian
authorities for not keeping their own commitments and
responsibilities to protect their own citizens. The recent
deaths of Turkish civilians near the Syrian border are a
tragic incident that shows the increasing violence is not
only causing harm to Syrian people but also spilling
over into neighbouring countries. Japan welcomes
the press statement issued by the Security Council on
4 October (SC/10783) and condemns in the strongest
terms such acts of transboundary violence.
Japan once again urges the Syrian authorities to
cease violence immediately and to carry out concrete
measures for a Syrian-led political transition, including
in the framework of the Friends of Syria. The ad hoc
ministerial meeting on Syria held last month provided
an important occasion to strengthen coordination
among parties towards a peaceful transition in Syria.
Japan has not just implemented significant economic
sanctions, but we will also soon host the next meeting
of the working group on sanctions.
It is necessary for the international community to
step up the pressure in a unified manner. In that regard,
Japan deems it extremely regrettable that the Security
Council has thus far failed to unite and speak in one
voice, in line with such international efforts.
Japan welcomes and strongly supports the
diplomatic efforts by the Joint Special Representative
of the United Nations and the League of Arab States,
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi. The unconditional and swift

2

implementation of Mr. Annan’s six-point plan, together
with the transition plan set forth in the Action Group
communiqué (S/2012/523, annex), are essential in order
to bring about a democratic and pluralistic political
system.
Japan is gravely concerned about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation of the Syrian people. For
that reason, the Japanese Government has so far
provided emergency grant aid totalling $13 million,
and cooperated effectively with relevant international
agencies to improve the humanitarian situation of
Syria. Moreover, Japan commends the efforts by the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Ms. Valerie Amos, to coordinate humanitarian
assistance and bring the worsening humanitarian
situation in Syria to the attention of the international
community. As we enter into winter, we underline the
importance of allowing humanitarian personnel full
and unimpeded access to people in need of assistance.
The Middle East peace process represents a
linchpin to the peace and stability of the region. Japan
firmly supports a two-State solution, in which Israel
and a future independent Palestinian State would live
side by side in peace, security and mutual recognition.
We would also like to remind both sides that a two-State
solution can only be achieved through sincere direct
negotiations between the parties concerned. Japan
deplores Israel’s settlement activities and reiterates its
call upon Israel to fully freeze such activities, while we
also urge both sides to further their confidence-building
efforts.
Japan has been supporting the efforts of the
Palestinians towards establishing an independent State
and is committed to continue to provide assistance. We
strongly hope that the entire international community,
in particular donor countries, is united to assist the
Palestinians. Support to the fiscal stability of the
Palestinian Authority is a necessary task that Israel
should carry out. In that regard, Japan welcomes the
understanding between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority regarding the transfer of goods and related
tax procedures.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Abdou
Salam Diallo, Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.
Mr. Diallo (spoke in French): Allow me, at the
outset, on behalf of the Committee to thank you,

12-54813

S/PV.6847 (Resumption 1)

Mr. President, for this opportunity to address the
Council during this important debate. I wish the
Council the greatest success in its deliberations in the
month of October under your presidency, Sir.
The tragic events of recent days in and around
Gaza is a sobering reminder that resolution 1860
(2009) has yet to be fully implemented. The Committee
condemns all attacks against civilians, regardless of
their perpetrators. Indiscriminate rocket fire, targeted
assassinations and military strikes must cease, as
must provocations, threats and acts of incitement. The
policy of brinksmanship employed by the parties is
irresponsible and dangerous. Any major incident risks
unleashing a spiral of violence and provoking a deadly
conflict.
At its high-level meeting on 22 September 2011 on
the prevention of armed conflict (see S/PV.6621), the
Council resolved to strengthen efforts in this regard. It
is now high time for action. While we applaud Egypt’s
efforts to restore calm, the Council has the Charter
responsibility and the tools to act to stabilize the
situation, protect civilians, prevent the eruption of new
hostilities, and fully implement resolution 1860 (2009)
before it is too late.
Over the past few years, the Palestinian Authority
has built strong institutions, reformed its finances and
restored law and order. It is a major force of stability and
security in the area. However, those accomplishments
are starting to unravel owing to a financial crisis that is
triggering social unrest among the Palestinian people.
The donors’ meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance
to Palestinians did not result in significant new aid
inflows. Our Committee strongly urges donors to step
up efforts to provide the assistance so urgently needed,
without politicizing the issue.
The Committee is aware that donor-driven
development is unsustainable in the long run.
Palestinians need a healthy economy to underpin a
viable State. At its meeting in August, our Committee
heard a briefing by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the Norwegian Refugee Council on the devastating
humanitarian toll of Israeli restrictions and settler
violence on Palestinians in Area C, which is under full
Israeli control. Let me recall that Area C covers some
60 per cent of the West Bank.

12-54813

The Area is also strategic for a viable Palestinian
economy. Our Committee calls for a speedy transfer
of additional portions of the West Bank to Palestinian
control, a process that began under Oslo that was frozen
after 2000 and never restarted.
Our Committee is concerned by the assessment
contained in the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2012/701) that the two-State solution must
be urgently implemented to avoid the fait accompli
of a one-State reality. In that regard, our Committee
feels that an upgrade of the United Nations status of
Palestine can open up new opportunities to revitalize
the political process, rescuing the two-State solution,
before it is too late. At the same time, we reiterate our
principled position that settlements are illegal and an
obstacle to peace.
At its meeting on 8 October, our Committee heard a
briefing by members of the jury of the Russell Tribunal
on Palestine, a civil society initiative that just concluded
its fourth session in New York. We were struck by the
assessment of eminent jurists that the United Nations
failure to take action commensurate with the duration
and severity of Israeli violations testifies to a failure of
the international community. Our Committee takes its
responsibilities extremely seriously. We will continue
to promote accountability and will continue to make
a constructive contribution to our shared goal of two
States living in peace and security. We encourage the
Council to do the same.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to Mr. Thomas Mayer-Harting, Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The acceding
country Croatia and the candidate country Montenegro
align themselves with this statement.
The European Union stands by the Syrian people
in its courageous struggle for freedom, dignity and
democracy. The use of force by the Syrian regime against
civilians, including with heavy weapons and aerial
bombardments, has reached unprecedented levels and
can only exacerbate further the violence and endanger
the stability of the whole region. The European Union
recalls that the priorities should be to end oppression,
stop all violence, deliver humanitarian aid for all those
in need, prevent further regional instability and be
prepared for the post-conflict period. The European
Union underlines that those whose presence would

3

S/PV.6847 (Resumption 1)

undermine the political transition should be excluded
and that, in that regard, President Al-Assad has no
place in the future of Syria. The European Union
remains committed to the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Syria.
The European Union remains deeply concerned by
the spillover effects of the Syrian crisis in neighbouring
countries in terms of security and stability. The
European Union strongly condemns the shelling by
Syrian forces of Turkish territory, particularly on the
border town of Akçakale on 3 October. The European
Union calls on all to prevent escalation. The EU calls
again on the Syrian authorities to fully respect the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of all neighbouring
countries.
Recalling that the main responsibility for the
current crisis lies with the Syrian authorities, the
European Union warns against further militarization
and radicalization of the conflict and sectarian violence,
which can only bring further suffering to Syria and risks
having a tragic impact in the region. In that regard, the
European Union expresses concern about the protection
of civilians, in particular vulnerable groups and
religious communities. The intensification of violence
and the recent series of terrorist attacks demonstrate
the urgent need for a political transition that would
meet the democratic aspirations of the Syrian people
and bring stability in Syria.
The European Union reiterates its full support for
the endeavours of Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi as Joint Special
Representative of the United Nations and the League
of Arab States for Syria and stands ready to strengthen
its cooperation with him. The EU emphasizes the need
to focus international and regional efforts to solve the
Syrian crisis through a political solution and calls on
key actors in the region and all members of the Security
Council to uphold their responsibilities and support
Mr. Brahimi’s efforts.
In view of the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation and of the approaching winter, the European
Union recalls the moral imperative to step up assistance
to all affected populations throughout Syria and
neighbouring countries. The EU will continue to
provide assistance and calls on all donors to increase
their contributions to the latest United Nations appeals
for funding humanitarian assistance and refugee
assistance. All parties should allow full and safe access
for the delivery of humanitarian aid in all parts of the
country and respect international humanitarian law.
4

The European Union urges all parties to the conflict
to respect in full their legal and moral obligations to
protect civilians. Particularly alarmed by the dramatic
and growing difficulties in access in Syria to medical
services, the EU urges all parties to commit themselves
to respect in full the inviolability of all medical
facilities, medical personnel and vehicles in respect of
applicable international humanitarian law.
The EU is appalled by the deterioration of the
situation in Syria, in particular by the widespread and
systematic violations of human rights, international
humanitarian law and fundamental freedoms by the
Syrian authorities. The EU welcomes the extension of
the independent international commission of inquiry on
Syria and its strengthening through the nomination of
two new members. The EU reaffirms its support to the
commission’s investigations into alleged violations of
international human rights law with a view to holding
to account those responsible for such violations,
including for those that may amount to crimes against
humanity and war crimes according to the definition of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.
The EU underlines the importance of documenting
the widespread, systematic and gross human rights
violations and recalls that all those responsible must be
held accountable.
The EU recalls that an inclusive and coordinated
opposition is essential to starting a political transition.
The EU continues to urge all opposition groups, inside
and outside Syria, to put aside their differences and to
agree on a set of shared principles and start working
towards an inclusive, orderly and peaceful transition
in Syria .The European Union will continue to work
closely with the League of Arab States and facilitate
further dialogue initiatives to complement its efforts to
encourage the opposition to form an inclusive common
platform.
Today the European Union approved additional
restrictive measures against Syria. The European
Union stands ready to engage with those seriously
committed to a genuine democratic transition. The EU
will continue its policy of imposing additional measures
targeting the regime, not the civilian population, as
long as repression continues. It calls on all Syrians to
dissociate themselves from the repressive policy of the
regime in order to facilitate a political transition. The
EU commits to working closely and comprehensively
with international partners on planning to ensure that

12-54813

S/PV.6847 (Resumption 1)

the international community is ready to provide rapid
support to Syria once transition takes place.
On the Middle East peace process, political changes
across the region underline the urgent need for progress.
The European Union is convinced that heeding the
aspirations of the people in the region, including those
of Palestinians for statehood and those of Israelis for
security, is a crucial element for lasting peace, stability
and prosperity in the region as a whole.
It is in the fundamental interest of the European
Union, of the parties and of the wider region to
resolve the conflict, which can be achieved through a
comprehensive peace settlement based on the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles,
the road map, the agreements previously reached by
the parties and the Arab Peace Initiative. The European
Union stresses once again the central role of the Quartet
in this context.
The EU recognizes the additional challenges that
both parties currently face. The Palestinian Authority
continues to face severe financial difficulties, which
risk undermining everything that has been achieved to
date, including the State readiness of the Palestinian
Authority regarding its institutions in key sectors.
This has been acknowledged by the international
community, most recently at the meeting of the Ad
Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the
International Assistance to Palestinians, held here on
23 September. In this regard, the European Union calls
on international donors to increase their support to
the Palestinian Authority treasury, on the Palestinian
Authority to continue reforms and improve the business
environment, and on Israel to take further and broader
steps to enable Palestinian sustainable economic
development, including in Area C and the Gaza Strip.
The changes under way in the region continue
to present Israel with uncertainty, but also offer
opportunities in its relations with the Arab world.
At the same time, progress on the Middle East peace
process would contribute to regional stability and offer
new opportunities for the region as a whole.
The EU and its member States reaffirm their
fundamental commitment to the security of Israel,
including with regard to vital threats in the region, and
are committed to a just, lasting and comprehensive
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that would
guarantee security and prosperity for both Israel and a
future Palestinian State.

12-54813

The European Union is appalled by the recurring
rocket attacks from Gaza and condemns in the strongest
terms violence deliberately targeting civilians.
Our position as to how to achieve such a resolution
is clear. Direct negotiations between the parties in the
framework of a credible set of parameters, including
those established in the Quartet’s statement of
23 September 2011, remain the best way forward. The
European Union will continue to contribute, including
within the Quartet, to the work for that solution.
The European Union encourages others in the
region to facilitate a return to negotiations, and
calls on the parties themselves to demonstrate their
commitment to a peaceful solution by actions that
can create the environment of trust necessary to
ensure that meaningful negotiations can start without
delay. Now more than ever, bold decisions by both
parties are needed, and both parties must respect their
obligations under the road map. Settlement expansion,
which constitutes a violation of international law and
threatens to make a two-State solution impossible, must
cease immediately.
The EU reiterates its grave concerns about
these developments, including the acceleration of
settlement construction and the serious limitations
on the Palestinian Authority’s ability to promote the
economic development of Palestinian communities in
Area C. Continuing demolitions of Palestinian-owned
structures, displacement and plans of forced transfer, as
well as settler violence, also remain a serious concern.
The EU reiterates its call on Israel to work together with
the Palestinian Authority to allow more access to and
control of the Palestinian Authority over Area C. Social
and economic development in Area C is of critical
importance for the viability of a future Palestinian
State, as Area C is its main land reserve. A way must
also be found through negotiations to resolve the status
of Jerusalem as the future capital of two States.
The European Union continues to call for
intra-Palestinian reconciliation behind President
Abbas, in line with the principles set out in his speech
of 4 May 2011, as an important element for the unity of
a future Palestinian State and for reaching a two-State
solution. The situation in Gaza continues to be of great
concern. Fully recognizing Israel’s legitimate security
needs, the EU continues to call for the immediate,
sustained and unconditional opening of crossings for
the flow of humanitarian aid, commercial goods and

5

S/PV.6847 (Resumption 1)

persons to and from the Gaza Strip. The EU calls for
full respect for international humanitarian law.
High Representative Catherine Ashton will travel
to Lebanon, Jordan, the occupied Palestinian territory
and Israel later this month and more widely in the region
in November. The European Union also looks forward
to hosting the next meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee in Brussels in the spring of next year. At the
same time, our hope is to not then be simply reiterating
the statements we have made at that forum in recent
years while the parties themselves drift further apart.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of the United
Arab Emirates.
Mr. Al-Jarman (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I am pleased to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month. We thank the representative of Germany
for his stewardship in September. We would also like
to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his briefing.
The question of Palestine is one of the most
important challenges facing the Middle East. Recent
developments in the occupied Palestinian territory and
other Arab territories occupied since 1967 are evidence
of the gravity of the serious legal, humanitarian and
political violations committed by Israel, the occupying
Power, against the Palestinian people, including its
systematic, illegal, expansionist settlement activities
deep within the territory of the West Bank, East
Jerusalem and its surrounding neighbourhoods. Its
continued evictions of the Arab population from their
homes and confiscation of their land and property, both
public and private, undermine the foundations of the
Palestinian State and the Palestinian Authority.
The United Arab Emirates reiterates its
condemnation of all these serious Israeli practices,
which have stalemated the regional and international
efforts for the resumption of the peace negotiations and
led to increased tension and instability in the entire
region. We call upon the international community,
especially the Security Council, to fully fulfil its
obligations under the Charter to persuade Israel to
immediately cease its dangerous policies. This should
include rescinding its unilateral and illegal measures
taken in this regard and creating the appropriate
environment for the urgent resumption of peace
negotiations with a view to achieving a comprehensive,

6

just and lasting solution of the Palestinian question on
the basis of the two-State solution, as set forth in the
road map and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Here we reiterate our support for the establishment
of the State of Palestine and its admission to the
membership of the United Nations as soon as possible.
We express our grave concern regarding the difficult
humanitarian and economic situation of the Palestinian
people, especially in the Gaza Strip, as witnessed by
the most recent sustained military campaign against
the Gaza Strip, the blockade and the closing of crossing
points. As the Israeli occupation forces continue to
launch air strikes on civilian neighbourhoods in the
Gaza Strip, in serious breach of international law,
including the Geneva Conventions for the protection of
war victims, we call upon Israel to immediately stop
these attacks and put an end to its siege of the Gaza Strip,
in implementation of resolution 1860 (2009) and to
remove all of its military barricades in other Palestinian
cities and villages. We also demand the immediate and
unconditional release of Palestinians who are detained
and languishing in inhumane conditions in Israeli
prisons and detention centres.
The United Arab Emirates has been following with
grave concern the increasing violence and the killings
and displacement in Syria. From this rostrum, we call on
the international community to fulfil its humanitarian
and political obligations in order to put an end to the
horrendous atrocities being perpetrated against the
peaceful people of Syria. We are convinced that the
crisis can be resolved only through a methodical transfer
of power, and we support the efforts undertaken by the
Joint Special Representative, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, to
find a solution to the crisis through peaceful means, as
set out in the terms of reference of his mandate.
We reiterate our commitment to all requirements
related to nuclear non-proliferation and to efforts
to convene an international conference on the
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
Middle East, including the Arabian Gulf region, in
2012. We stress the need for all relevant parties to
participate in that conference. We also call on Israel
to accede to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons and to subject all its nuclear facilities
to the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
comprehensive safeguards system.
In that regard, we urge the Islamic Republic of
Iran to cooperate fully with the IAEA and to fulfil
its international obligations, thereby dispelling all
12-54813

S/PV.6847 (Resumption 1)

suspicions and fears regarding its nuclear programme.
We hope that a peaceful solution will be found to this
crisis that will ease tensions in our region by ensuring
the transparency of the Iranian nuclear programme and
demonstrating its peaceful nature.
In closing, we hope that the Security Council will
fulfil its obligations and take the actions necessary to
support prospects for renewing peace negotiations and
for achieving just, lasting and comprehensive peace and
security in the Middle East.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Khan (Indonesia): The delegation of Indonesia
is pleased to participate in this open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question. We are also grateful to the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for
his briefing.
Before I continue, the delegation of Indonesia
would like to associate itself with the statements that
will be delivered later by the Permanent Representative
of Kazakhstan, on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, and the Permanent Representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
Indonesia remains deeply committed to the
resolution of the situation in the Middle East, although,
regrettably, there has been next to no progress in the
peace process between Israel and Palestine. Despite that
fact, Indonesia remains fervently supportive of the twoState solution. We believe that the kernel of a permanent
solution lies in two States, Israel and Palestine, living
side by side in peace and security, on the basis of the
principle of land for peace and a just and comprehensive
regional peace consistent with the relevant Security
Council resolutions, the Quartet road map and the Arab
Peace Initiative. It is realistic and desirable that both
parties, encouraged by the international community,
make progress in that direction.
Israeli policy in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, especially its continued
illegal settlement activity, continues to prove a difficult
obstacle to that objective, in addition to being a grave
violation of international law. Settlements may be good
for the Israeli ego, but they indicate no commitment
to meeting the Palestinians in fair and realistic
negotiations. The continued construction of settlements
and their expansion simply compounds the problem of
12-54813

the fragmentation of the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, and complicates prospects for negotiations.
Similarly, Israel, ignoring and defying the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice, has further
continued its illegal construction of the separation wall
in the West Bank, including in and around occupied
East Jerusalem.
As we all know, Gaza remains pervaded by general
suffering following Israel’s menacing blockade there,
which hinders the movement of people and goods,
leading to increasingly greater unemployment and the
shrinking of private-sector businesses.
Indonesia fully supports Palestine’s application
for full membership in the United Nations, which was
submitted last year by President Mahmoud Abbas.
This year, in his speech to the General Assembly, the
President indicated that, for the same purpose, Palestine
had begun intensive consultations with the objective of
having the General Assembly adopt a resolution during
its sixty-seventh session by which it would consider the
State of Palestine to have non-member State observer
status in the United Nations. We are pleased to place our
support behind this effort and to invite other Member
States to support it as well.
The two-State solution is meaningful only if it is
comprehensive and embraces other relevant political
tracks such as the Israel-Syria and Israel-Lebanon
tracks. Thus Israel must withdraw completely from
the remaining occupied Lebanese land, as well as from
the occupied Syrian Golan, and comply fully with
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
Finally, with respect to the current situation in
Syria, I wish to highlight President Yudhoyono’s
address to the general debate, only a few weeks ago, in
which he stated:
“The world community is witnessing, with
great pain, the worsening violence and unfolding
humanitarian catastrophe on the ground; at the same
time, the United Nations is a state of in paralysis in
responding to the situation... Indonesia therefore
reiterates its call for the immediate cessation of
violence in Syria, which has taken a high toll in
innocent civilian lives. The Security Council must
now unite and act decisively, as mandated by the
United Nations Charter, to bring the situation under
control.”(A/67/PV.6, p.33)

7

S/PV.6847 (Resumption 1)

Therefore, Indonesia sincerely hopes that the
world, including the Council, will now unite to end the
violence in Syria.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jordan.
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan)
(spoke in Arabic): I should like at the outset to express
our satisfaction at seeing you, Mr. President, guide
the work of the Security Council this month. We are
confident that your well-known experience and wisdom
will ensure a successful outcome to the work of the
Council.
We have repeatedly cautioned against the
exploitation of international and regional concerns
with respect to the Arab Spring, the Iranian nuclear
programme, the American presidential elections and
other international and regional issues to impose new
Israeli faits accomplis on the Palestinian occupied
territories, which could undermine the establishment
of a Palestinian State. Therefore, His Majesty King
Abdullah II, in his statement before the General
Assembly on 25 September, emphasized the crux of the
matter, namely, the question of Palestine, as follows:
“As the Arab Spring demanded dignity for all, so
it demanded the end of exceptionalism. No single
issue causes greater anger than to tell an entire
people that when it comes to global justice they
do not count. The Arab Spring cannot bear its full
fruit until the Palestinian-Israeli conflict ends, and
ends with a just peace and a Palestinian State living
side by side with a secure Israel at peace with the
entire region.” (A/67/PV.7, p.20)
Our main priority has always been and will remain
the two-State solution, with Israel and Palestine living
side by side in peace and security and able to move
forwards on the basis of a fair and comprehensive
settlement. Earlier this year, we worked alongside the
two parties in Amman in an attempt to relaunch a
dialogue. Although that dialogue has ceased, we will not
lose hope and will continue to work for the resumption
of direct negotiations between the two parties.
In that regard, we have repeatedly demanded and
will continue to demand that Israel completely cease its
settlement activities and unilateral actions, since such
measures pose a direct threat to a peaceful settlement.
We therefore noted before the General Assembly that
what is needed now more than ever is for all countries to
use their collective influence, since neither the parties
8

to the conflict nor the world can endure the ongoing acts
of aggression and insecurity. We hope that, following
the United States election this year, there will be an
exceptional opportunity to achieve our common goal.
We reiterate our ongoing concern over Jerusalem
and its holy Islamic and Christian sites and subsequent
threats. We underscore the significance of the sacred
Al-Haram al-Sharif, which is the third holiest site for
Muslims, who consider Al-Haram al-Sharif as sacred
as the Kaaba itself. The international community
should therefore send a clear message that any attempt
to destroy the Arab, Islamic or Christian character of
Jerusalem is unacceptable.
Despite the urgent need to reach a lasting settlement
to the Palestinian issue, we should not ignore the plight
of our brothers in Syria. The bloodshed there, which we
strongly condemn, cannot be overlooked or condoned.
Members are all aware of Jordan’s huge burden as a
result of sheltering refugees, who flee daily for their
lives. That burden will be exacerbated with the onset
of winter, increasing their hardship and suffering.
Also, we cannot ignore the deliberate targeting of
our border troops as they strive to secure the entry of
refugees across our borders. That targeting must stop
immediately.
In that regard, we wish to underscore the fact
that Jordan will never hesitate and will continue to
provide assistance to our brothers in Syria despite the
dangerous and serious bloodshed. At the same time,
we will not allow any violation of our sovereignty
because of our humanitarian role. If our sovereignty is
breached, Jordan reserves the right to resort to all legal
international measures and mechanisms. As a member
of the United Nations and the League of Arab States
and a party to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, Jordan will not hesitate to use such
mechanisms.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Pedersen (Norway): We take the floor today
to draw attention to the grave consequences of Syria’s
tragic path to civil war and to stress that we must not
lose sight of the unresolved Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Both conflicts require a political solution.
The historical changes and popular uprisings
in the Arab world, in particular Tunisia, Egypt and
Libya, have removed lifelong dictators and replaced
them with representative Governments. Those changes
12-54813

S/PV.6847 (Resumption 1)

were driven by the people demanding greater political
freedom, which is their legitimate right. Governments
that draw their legitimacy from the consent of their
people, rather than from fear and repression, are best
suited to delivering justice and lasting order, stability
and peace. The international community must now
help to consolidate those developments by providing
political and economic support, while holding the new
Governments accountable.
Nineteen months ago, the conflict in Syria began
not as a sectarian civil war but as a call for dignity,
freedom and democratic change through the peaceful
protests of the Syrian people. It was a genuine call by
the Syrian people. It was not an external manipulation
or a pretext for foreign intervention, as the regime is
propagating. Tragically, the call for change was met by
brutal military force, not dialogue.
President Al-Assad and his regime decided to
turn the legitimate struggle of the Syrian people into
a sectarian war by redefining peaceful protests as
terrorism and foreign conspiracy. Every Government
has a responsibility to protect its people but Al-Assad
chose to turn the deadly State apparatus against the
Syrian population. The popular demands for meaningful
change have never been given serious consideration by
the Syrian regime.
Syria’s conflict has already spilled over into
neighbouring countries and is destabilizing the region,
as we have seen on the Syrian-Turkish border. We
condemn the shelling by the Syrian forces and the
continued violence in the strongest possible terms.
All violence and atrocities in Syria, including the
systematic use of sexual violence and torture against
children, men and women, must stop. Crimes of that
nature must never go unpunished. Even in times of war,
there are rules. All parties to the conflict are bound
by international humanitarian law. It is our duty to
end impunity for international crimes and to ensure
accountability for the crimes committed.
The Syrian Government bears the primary
responsibility for the conflict. One tragic result of
the conflict is the escalation of humanitarian needs
both inside Syria and beyond. We commend Syria’s
neighbours for their generosity in receiving Syrian
refugees and for their efforts to support them. Increased
humanitarian support and access are necessary and all
parties must protect the civilian population, ensure
unhindered humanitarian access and protect health
workers and medical facilities.
12-54813

As the level of violence intensifies, it is urgent to
move forward with a meaningful political transition
that meets the aspirations of the Syrian people and
brings stability. Such a plan has already been endorsed
by an overwhelming majority of the General Assembly.
A credible political transition must be inclusive and
peaceful and must preserve the unity of the State, while
protecting the rights of all constituencies in Syria. To
make progress towards transition, the violence must
end, Al-Assad’s regime must cede power and the
political opposition must unite around a road map for
peace and shared principles.
By staying engaged with all parties, the Joint
Special Representative of the United Nations and the
League of Arab States for Syria, Lakhdar Brahimi,
plays a key role in helping to find common ground in
order to move the political process forward. Norway
fully supports his efforts. However, it is unfortunate
that Mr. Brahimi’s tasks have been hampered by a
divided Security Council. It is indeed inexcusable
that the Security Council has failed to act on its clear
responsibilities and to use its collective weight to
impose serious consequences in the event of the Syrian
Government not ending the violence or complying with
its responsibilities.
The Israeli-Palestinian confl ict remains deadlocked,
with no political solution on the horizon. That deadlock
must be broken and the negotiations on a two-State
solution resumed.
On 23 September, Norway once again hosted a
meeting of the donor support group for the Palestinian
Authority, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee on Assistance
to the Palestinians, in New York. The meeting was
held against the backdrop of the serious fiscal crisis
facing the Palestinian Authority, which may be looking
at a financing gap of not less than $400 million at
the end of this year. The Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
was established in accordance with the Oslo Accords
to mobilize funding to promote the development of
a Palestinian institutional structure upon which an
independent and viable Palestinian State can be built.
That aim has been achieved. The assessment made
last year that the Palestinian Authority is ready for
statehood still stands.
However, the Authority should not be allowed to
become a perennial client of the international donor
community. The task of the donors will not be complete
until the Palestinian economy can prosper and fiscal
independence is assured. The reports to the Ad Hoc
9

S/PV.6847 (Resumption 1)

Liaison Committee meeting noted that the constraints
on the Palestinian economy are limiting its prospects
for reaching sustainability. While acknowledging
that Israel has taken steps to facilitate growth in the
Palestinian economy, the donors called on it to take
further steps to improve access in the West Bank and
Gaza, including in Area C and East Jerusalem. Further
realization of the potential of the Palestinian private
sector can be achieved by relaxing Israeli restrictions
on access to land, a range of raw materials and export
markets.
While welcoming the Palestinian Authority’s
efforts to strengthen its fiscal position, the donors
noted the importance of further mobilizing all available
Palestinian resources in order to overcome the current
crisis and continue to reform its institutions. The donors
reaffirmed their willingness to continue to support the
Authority, but only as part of an international effort to
promote the two-State solution.
The current political stalemate is, however,
untenable. The Israeli occupation, which severely
hampers Palestinian economic development, remains
the main obstacle to the realization of Palestinian
statehood. A self-sustaining Palestinian economy
cannot be achieved as long as the occupation remains
in place and illegal settlements continue to expand,
encircling East Jerusalem and undermining the very
concept of the two-State solution.
Norway, as Chair of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee,
urges donors to honour their outstanding commitments
and continue their assistance in helping to build a viable
Palestinian economy that can sustain the institutions
that are vital for statehood. If the present fiscal crisis in
the Palestinian territory is not resolved, there is a risk
of growing social and political unrest that could spiral
into chaos.
The continued impasse in the negotiations between
the parties threatens the common vision of the twoState solution and is an obstacle to a peaceful future for
the Palestinian and Israeli people. That is why Norway
calls on both parties to resume negotiations on the final
status issues. It is the only way to achieve a viable and
just solution.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): I have the honour
to address the Security Council on behalf of the

10

Organization of Islamic Cooperation group in New
York.
Our meeting today is taking place amid serious
concerns about this critical time and the intricate
situation in the Middle East. The intransigence of
Israel, the occupying Power, and its persistence in
its unilateral policies definitely undermine the twoState solution and increase regional instability. It has
therefore become imperative that the international
community play a constructive and effective role to
reverse this deteriorating situation. We must also
enhance opportunities for a just, comprehensive and
lasting settlement to the conflict, based on the relevant
United Nations resolutions.
The situation in the region has been exacerbated
and tensions increased due to the illegal policies
of Israel, the occupying Power, in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, such
as the expulsion of Palestinians, the expansion of
settlements and the construction of the apartheid wall.
That state of affairs is being further aggravated by the
detention of thousands of Palestinians and the illegal
blockade of the Gaza Strip. Israel’s practices thus not
only represent a flagrant violation of international law
and the Geneva Conventions, but also undermine the
stability, prosperity and security of the countries of the
region.
With the assistance of the international community,
the Palestinian Authority has achieved tangible success
in building the institutions of a potentially independent
Palestinian State. It has also developed a strategic plan
for achieving reform, economic development, social
justice, transparency, good governance and efficient
financial management. We acknowledge its remarkable
progress and considerable improvements in building
government institutions, as has been confirmed by
reports from the World Bank.
Nonetheless, the Israeli occupation remains the
main challenge to sustainable development, progress
and prosperity in Palestine. Israel’s full control of Area
C, which makes up 60 per cent of the West Bank, imposes
an enormous price on Palestine. Israel holds most of the
agricultural land, natural resources — including water
resources — and land reserves, thus damaging the
territorial integrity of, and restricting access to, Area
C, where the settlements are located. That consequently
stifles Palestinian economic development and limits
the Palestinians’ capacity to utilize much of their land
and most of their natural resources.
12-54813

S/PV.6847 (Resumption 1)

It is worth noting that the economic losses directly
attributable to the ongoing Israeli occupation are
estimated at $7 billion a year. That is a devastating
factor that not only jeopardizes the gains already
achieved, but also inflicts serious damage on the
Palestinian economy and curbs its growth.
Sustainable economic growth and institutionbuilding require further attention and support on the
part of the international community. The current fiscal
crisis could jeopardize the existence of the Palestinian
Authority’s institutions altogether. It is high time for the
international community to take urgent action to lift the
Israeli restrictions and help the Palestinians overcome
the challenges posed by Israeli occupation. This
should be done through parallel investment in both the
political and economic areas. We must therefore work
together to compel Israel to honour its responsibilities
under international law and to facilitate Palestinians’
unimpeded access to their lands and natural resources.
At the same time, the international community is invited
to unite in a sense of urgency to increase financial
and economic support to the Palestinian Authority.
It is also important that the international community
work to help free the Palestinian economy from Israeli
hegemony.
It is self-evident that the building of State
institutions in Palestine will definitely enhance
regional peace, security and stability. Hence, we
emphasize the need to continue international efforts
to end the Israeli occupation and support the national
aspirations of the Palestinian people. It is therefore the
duty of the entire international community to render
all forms of assistance to the Palestinian Authority,
including financial and economic support, so as to lay
the foundations of a modern, democratic and viable
State.
We should keep in mind that assistance is vitally
needed to help the Palestinian Authority address
the needs of its people and protect and maintain the
gains already achieved. We must commit ourselves to
enabling the Palestinian people to realize their right
to freedom, self-determination, independence and the
establishment of the sovereign State of Palestine, with
East Jerusalem as its capital.
In conclusion, with regard to the situation in Syria,
I would like to express our unequivocal support for
the efforts of the Joint Special Representative of the
United Nations and the League of Arab States for

12-54813

Syria, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, in achieving a peaceful
settlement and establishing peace and security in Syria.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I wish to extend my sincere
congratulations to you, Mr. President, and your country,
Guatemala, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. My delegation associates itself
with the statement to be delivered by the representative
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and
that just made by the representative of Kazakhstan on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
The situation in the Middle East, especially the
unresolved conflict on the question of Palestine,
continues to be the central issue in the maintenance of
international peace and security. The intransigence of
Israel on the question of Palestine, the Arab Spring, the
situation in Syria and Libya are issues that have drawn
our attention to the region. The Middle East continues
to witness incidents of violence and hostility.
It is without a doubt that the deadlock in the talks
on Palestine is diminishing the possibility of a return
to the negotiating table for a two-State solution. With
more Israeli settlements created, the probability of a
resumption of mediation is even more remote. But the
world cannot sit idle as the situation in the Gaza Strip
and the West Bank continues to deteriorate, with no
hope of recourse. We should collectively demand that
Israel lift the blockade on Gaza immediately.
Israel must cease all its illegal settlement activities.
Malaysia has been consistent in its view that the
continued occupation by Israel of Palestinian land and
territory is unlawful and against international law. On
the same token, Malaysia is also extremely concerned
with Israel’s intention to divide the Al-Aqsa Mosque,
which is also a holy site for Muslims and Christians.
Such acts would further undermine international law
and aggravate the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory.
Just a few weeks ago, world leaders gathered in New
York to participate in the High-level Meeting on the
Rule of Law at the National and International Levels.
Our leaders adopted what is considered to be a landmark
Declaration (resolution 67/1). The provisions contained
therein should be implemented. These include applying
the rule of law to all States equally and resolving
disputes by peaceful means, in conformity with the
principles of justice and international law. World
11

S/PV.6847 (Resumption 1)

leaders also committed themselves to upholding the
right to the self-determination of peoples who remain
under foreign occupation, and to ending impunity for
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law. Malaysia hopes that the Security Council
will uphold the agreement adopted in the outcome
document.
The plight of the people of Palestine cannot be
ignored by the international community. It is our moral
responsibility to uphold their aspirations to freedom
and liberty. Their ambitions for self-determination
are legitimate aspirations. With 133 Member States
recognizing Palestine as a State, it is an irony that we,
the people of the world, cannot make this aspiration a
reality. We must continue to uphold the principles for
the establishment of a Palestinian State under the twoState solution, based on the pre-1967 borders and with
East Jerusalem as its capital. Only then will Israel and
Palestinians live side by side in peace and security.
We are appalled by the death of thousands of
Syrian civilians and the thousands more who have
been displaced and have taken refuge in neighbouring
countries. The unabated violence and destruction of
property must end, the loss of lives must be stopped,
and due process of law must resume. We call upon all
parties in Syria to cease hostilities immediately and
abide by international law, including international
humanitarian and human rights laws. We believe that
a solution to the conflict in Syria must be a Syrian-led
process if it is to be sustainable in the long run.
Malaysia joins the international community in
urging restraint between Turkey and Syria with regard
to the recent shelling incidents along their common
borders. We believe that resorting to military action
would worsen the situation. Both nations should find
the courage to resolve their differences amicably,
without the need for any military action.
Malaysia strongly supports the restoration of
Syrian sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan. We
urge Israel to withdraw from the occupied Syrian Golan
to the line of 4 June 1967.
Malaysia also reiterates its support for Lebanon in
its efforts to complete the liberation of all its territories
and condemns the continued violations and aggression
launched by Israel. We urge Israel to fully implement
resolution 1701 (2006), which called for a permanent
ceasefire and for the complete withdrawal of Israeli

12

troops from Lebanon, with full respect for the Blue
Line.
The situation in the Middle East needs our collective
attention and a solution. Malaysia urges the main
players to show political leadership and impartiality
in order to improve the deteriorating situation in the
region. We also wish to remind the Council that failure
to enforce many of its resolutions on the question of
Palestine has in some ways encouraged the occupying
Power to continue defying world opinion. The time has
come for us to make some difficult decisions for the
good of the region and the world. It has been a year
since Palestine submitted an application to be a State
Member of the United Nations. How much longer
does the international community have to wait for
the Council to take a decision, when the majority has
agreed to admit the State of Palestine as a Member of
the United Nations?
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ecuador.
Ms. Lalama (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation wishes to express its viewpoints on the
situation in the Middle East and the question of
Palestine, all the more so at this important stage, which
the Security Council must address. I would like to begin
by thanking the President for convening this debate. My
country appreciates the detailed briefing of the UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, on the situation in the Middle East, including
the question of Palestine.
The Government of Ecuador expresses its concern
once again, pursuant to the standards and principles
of international law, over the Security Council’s
protracted handling of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
At this time of political and economic turmoil, it is
important to fight for an international system of justice.
In that context, the case of Palestine has awakened the
conscious of the international community about what
the United Nations should be. Member countries are
more interested than ever in complying with current
international legislation and resolutions, and call for an
end to Zionism in Palestine in all its forms.
Proof of that is the recognition of 133 States
Members of the Organization that support the request
of the President of the Palestinian Authority, on
23 September 2011, for Palestine to be considered a full
Member of the United Nations. However, due to the
anti-democratic right of veto enjoyed by the permanent

12-54813

S/PV.6847 (Resumption 1)

members of the Security Council, the rise in status of
Palestine in the United Nations has not taken place. It
is time to seek mechanisms to actively support progress
in the peace efforts and strengthen the capacity of the
Palestinian Authority so that it can meet the security
needs of its people.

with East Jerusalem as its capital. While the issue is
being studied, we call for the support of the General
Assembly to consider Palestine as an Observer State of
the Organization. Only in that manner will we achieve
peace and security in the Middle East, and thereby the
security of all States Members of the United Nations.

The Charter of the United Nations was created to
emphasize the rights of the people, not those of States.
The Security Council therefore has responsibility
for Israel’s violations of international law, which
have allowed it to operate in a state of immunity and
impunity. Israel has flouted resolution 242 (1967),
which rejects the acquisition of territory by war, while
its settlements on Palestinian territory are in full view
of the international community. Since 1992, it has built
a true wall of shame based on the pretext of security
concerns, althouth its purpose is actuallly to militarily
control the West Bank and impede the lives of the
Palestinians by controlling agriculture and 82 per cent
of the water. Many efforts and initiatives at the United
Nations, including creating new principles, have all
met with failure in the face of this conflict. But it is
important to emphasize that that also applies to the
Quartet grouping, which prepared a road map that has
had no effective results to date.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.

My country believes it is timely to implement the
Declaration of the High-level Meeting of the General
Assembly on the Rule of Law at the National and
International Levels (resolution 67/1), adopted at the
opening of the current session of the Assembly (see
A/67/PV.3), which states that,
“the rule of law applies to all States equally,
and to international organizations, including
the United Nations and its principal organs, and
that respect for and promotion of the rule of law
and justice should guide all of their activities”.
(resolution 67/1, para. 2)
In that context, my delegation calls for the Security
Council to drop its passive attitude when considering
Israeli abuses. It is not enough to denounce and
condemn Israel for its violations of international law,
since that path has not led to any positive results and, to
some degree, has resulted in complicity.
To conclude, Ecuador calls upon the international
community to support the request of Mr. Mahmoud
Abbas, President of the Palestinian Authority, to
accept Palestine as a State Member of the United
Nations with full rigths, within its 1967 borders and

12-54813

Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, allow me to extend my sincere
congratulations to you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I also thank you for convening this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East.
I also express my country’s endorsement of the
statements delivered, and to be delivered, on behalf of
the League of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and the Non-Aligned Movement.
Israel has continued both its occupation of
Palestinian and Arab territories and its aggression
against religious holy place in violation of international
law. In return, the United Nations has continued to
ignore what is right and kept silent on instances of
violent provocation, unjust aggression and illegal
acts committed by Israel against the Palestinian
people — the very same people who continue to hope
that the international community will grant them
justice by authorizing the establishment of their free
and independent State, within the 4 June 1967 borders,
with Jerusalem as its capital.
While we support the demands of the Palestinian
people, we also call for the complete withdrawal of the
Israeli occupation forces from all other occupied Arab
territories, including the Syrian Golan and the Shaba’a
farmlands and other occupied Lebanese territories.
Israel has never ceased its abhorrent actions,
including attacks against religious sites, forced
displacement and expulsion, arbitrary detention and
mistreatment of prisoners, building new settlements
and expanding existing ones, as well as extrajudicial
killings.
Furthermore, in the past month, Israel has stormed
the Al-Aqsa Mosque and attacked worshipers with
sound bombs. Prior to that, Israeli settlers and the
occupation forces launched more than 60 attacks on
holy sites in Jerusalem and other occupied Palestinian
territories.

13

S/PV.6847 (Resumption 1)

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, by virtue of its
responsibility for Islamic holy sites and its custodianship
of the two holy mosques in Mecca and Medina, is
deeply concerned about Israel’s continuous assault on
Jerusalem, in general, and on Al-Haram Al-Sharif in
particular, including its continuous attempts to burn
down or otherwise destroy Al-Haram Al-Sharif.
We draw attention to additional Israeli plans to
accelerate the demolition and displacement timetables
and to intensify settlement policies. The most accurate
description of the illegal settlement expansion carried
out by Israel is that it is a great danger that threatens
the two-State solution. The settlements clearly violate
international law and the Fourth Geneva Convention,
which prohibit occupation authorities from taking any
action that could lead to changing the demographic or
geographic character of occupied territory.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia considers resolving
the Palestinian issue a top priority, and reiterates its
full support for Palestine’s request for full membership
of the United Nations and its affiliated entities. As a
step towards that goal, we call upon all Member States
to support upgrading Palestine to non-member State
status, and urge them to support Palestinian endeavours
in that regard.
At the same time, we question the unfair practices
that put pressure on the Palestinians and threaten to cut
back assistance to them. Rather, the threats and pressure
should have been directed towards Israel, to compel
it to end the occupation, cease settlement activities
and seriously negotiate the process of establishing an
independent Palestinian State.
My country looks forward with great interest to the
conference on the Middle East aimed at establishing
a zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons
of mass destruction, to be held in Helsinki by the end
of the year. We call on the Finnish facilitator of the
conference, Mr. Jaako Laajava, and the States that
sponsored the initiative, to issue invitations to the
Conference without delay.
The tragic situation in sisterly Syria has reached
dangerous levels. The number of victims, refugees and
displaced persons has increased every day as a result of
the Syrian regime’s arrogant policies and practices. That
regime insists on considering its citizens as enemies
who deserve nothing but bullets, artillery shells and
bombardment by aircraft and helicopter. Moreover,
the regime’s aggression goes beyond its national

14

borders and threatens the security of the entire region
while depending on military and political backup and
cover from certain major Powers. The Syrian regime
continues to pursue a military solution, ignoring the
fact that fate will inevitably answer the people’s call
for freedom.
While we support the efforts of the Joint Special
Representative of the United Nations and the Legal of
Arab States, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, we believe that the
success of his mission requires a focus on achieving a
peaceful transition of power and the taking of concrete
steps towards building the future of new, modern and
civil Syrian State in which the entire Syrian people,
with its broad spectrum of religious, sectarian, ethnic
and regional affiliations, enjoy equal rights and
responsibilities. The Syrian regime must realize that
the time for its departure has arrived, as it cannot build
its rule on the bones of its people, nor can it quench its
thirst for power with the blood of innocent women and
children. The international community must shoulder
its responsibilities and intensify its support for the
Syrian people using every possible means to enable
them to defend themselves, heal their wounds and care
for their children and displaced refugees. Furthermore,
we demand that an investigation be conducted on the
Syrian regime’s crimes against humanity and that
all those involved in such heinous acts be brought to
justice.
My country is deeply concerned about the
continuation of the Islamic Republic of Iran’s nuclear
programme outside international control, a matter that is
seriously jeopardizing the security of the entire Arabian
Gulf region. While we reaffirm the right of Iran and all
countries in the region to acquire nuclear technology
for peaceful purposes, we uphold the principle that the
process should be under the full and comprehensive
supervision of the International Atomic Energy
Agency. We also support the efforts of the 5+1 group
with respect to negotiations with Iran aimed at reaching
a peaceful resolution to the issue. Consequently, we call
on Iran to negotiate seriously and in good faith in order
to achieve that goal. We further call on all parties to
refrain from threats and counterthreats.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I thank the delegation
of Guatemala for scheduling today’s very important
open debate on the situation in the Middle East. Allow

12-54813

S/PV.6847 (Resumption 1)

me to express our appreciation to the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman for his
comprehensive briefing this morning.
The delegation of Bangladesh aligns itself with the
statements made by the representatives of the Islamic
Republic of Iran and Kazakhstan, who spoke on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, respectively. In addition, I wish to
briefly make certain points that Bangladesh believes to
be of importance.
The people of Palestine are being denied their
fundamental rights to self-determination and to live
freely in their own land, while displaced Palestinians
have been denied their rights to return home and live
with dignity and in safety. Achieving a lasting solution
in the Middle East requires Israel’s complete and
unconditional withdrawal from the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem.
The occupying Power’s extensive destruction
of property, homes and economic institutions, its
construction of new walls, confiscation of land and
farms, its settlement activity and indiscriminate air
strikes and incursions in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including in and around East Jerusalem, are
all contrary to international law. They have seriously
hampered the already critical dire socioeconomic
situation faced by the Palestinian people. In that regard,
we support the invitation from the Palestinian Observer
Mission to the Security Council to visit the occupied
Palestinian territories.
The humanitarian situation in Gaza remains
an issue of concern. One could duly concur with
Palestinian resentment that the Paris Protocol has been
selectively implemented in favour of Israel insofar as
provisions that would allow the Palestinian Authority
to enter into free trade agreements with other States
or which mandated access to Israeli markets have not
come about. We urge Israel to lift its harsh restrictions
in order to ease the plight of civilians and bring an end
to the blockade of Gaza. Walls and blockades do not
work in the long run; indeed, even the Berlin Wall had
to come down.
The situation of Palestinian prisoners in Israeli
detention centres has deeply offended those who truly
believe in human rights and the fairness of justice.
Those detained must be charged and face trial with
judicial guarantees, or be released without delay. We
know that justice delayed is justice denied.

12-54813

During the recent general debate of the General
Assembly on 27 September 2012, Palestinian
President Mahmoud Abbas indicated that Palestine
intended to seek upgraded status at the United
Nations — from Permanent Observer to “non-member
observer State — through a draft resolution to be
submitted for adoption by the General Assembly
(A/67/PV.12). Since the Palestinian application to
become a State Member of the United Nations has
remained unresolved in the Security Council since
September 2011, we believe that Palestine’s current
demand warrants due consideration from the world
body.
However, we are saddened to see that there is very
little momentum this year for breaking the impasse. in
contrast to September 2011 when the Quartet issued a
new timeline for the Middle East peace process that
called for each side to submit a comprehensive proposal
on borders and security within three months, to be
followed by direct negotiations leading to a solution by
the end of 2012 (see SG/2178). Although the Palestinian
Authority submitted its proposals soon thereafter, the
Israeli Government did not meet the initial three-month
deadline, and no direct negotiations have taken place. I
would add that the European Union should now assume
greater responsibility because it has received this year’s
Nobel Peace Prize. Let it prove its worth by taking a
lead role in realizing peace and security in the Middle
East.
We believe that the best guides for achieving
a two-State solution are the relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions, namely,
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978), the
principle of land for peace, the Madrid Conference
terms of reference, the road map and the Arab Peace
Initiative.
The principled support of the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination from all corners of the
globe, both bilaterally and multilaterally, has been
an essential pillar of Palestinian resilience over the
decades. In that regard, let me reiterate Bangladesh’s
long-standing position that the continued illegal
occupation of Palestine over the past six decades is the
root cause of violence, unrest and destabilization in
the region. Let me also reiterate our full support for a
lasting peace for all inhabitants of the region — both
Arabs and Israelis — and our strong commitment to
the realization of an independent, sovereign and viable

15

S/PV.6847 (Resumption 1)

State of Palestine with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital,
living side by side and in peace with all its neighbours.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): My delegation thanks
you, Mr. President, for arranging today’s discussion on
this critical issue.
Sri Lanka also associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran, who spoke on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is undoubtedly at
the heart of the tensions in the Middle East and must
be resolved urgently in order to achieve a meaningful
peace, including in the wider region. Peace between
Israel and Palestine will be the answer to a long-standing
prayer of the international community. As things stand,
the conflict saps resources, makes life a continuing
and hopeless nightmare for many Palestinians, fuels
desperate responses, and keeps the world on nervous
toes. Unfortunately, the peace process, which was so
enthusiastically embraced, is at an impasse and tensions
continue to escalate.
It is an essential condition that all parties cease
tension-provoking activities. Israel’s continuing
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territories are a critical sticking point. The resumption
of talks has become tied to that issue. The Security
Council, the General Assembly, the Human Rights
Council, the Economic and Social Council and the
International Court of Justice have called for an end to
settlement activity and highlighted its illegality. Israel’s
practice of demolishing Palestinian homes is a matter
of concern and fuels resentment. The continuation of
that practice cannot contribute to confidence-building
or the peace process. It should be emphasized that
Israel must not undertake actions that are contrary to
the established truths of international law.
The humanitarian situation of the Palestinians in
the occupied Palestinian territory is of grave concern.
The large-scale detention and imprisonment of
Palestinian civilians, including children, often under
flimsy excuses, is disturbing. In the briefing this July,
in my capacity as Chairman of the United Nations
Special Committee on Israeli Practices in the Occupied
Territories, I detailed some of those unacceptable
practices. The detaining and mistreatment of children,

16

particularly in administrative detention, can only add
to the tensions. The frustration and resentment that this
generates detracts from the peace process.
The most pressing humanitarian situation is in
Gaza, where conditions are unsustainable. It remains
politically separated from the West Bank. We will
continue to encourage political rapprochement between
Gaza and the West Bank. In Gaza, the blockade, which
is now entering its sixth year, has created an aiddependent economy and thereby reinforces a sense of
helplessness and extremism. The principle result of
Israel’s blockade has been to make almost 80 per cent
of Palestinians in Gaza dependent on international
humanitarian aid. Despite some easing of restrictions,
businesses in Gaza have been particularly affected
by the blockade, with imports remaining at a low
level compared to the pre-blockade situation. Israel’s
restrictions on exports, with limited exceptions, has
stifled economic activity and made job opportunities
scarce. Between 30 per cent to 40 per cent of Gazans
remain unemployed. The United Nations is required
to keep most of the people in Gaza supplied with the
minimum necessities. Even a modest improvement of
the situation in Gaza would require the lifting of the
blockade and the full implementation of resolution
1860 (2009).
With a view to ultimately establishing an
independent Palestinian State, existing in peace side
by side with Israel, both parties must actively pursue
every possibility for peace, taking into consideration
the relevant Security Council resolutions, the road map,
the agreements previously reached by the parties, and
the Arab Peace Initiative. A climate conducive to peace
will be encouraged by ending the settlement activities,
releasing more Palestinian detainees, and strengthening
the Palestinian Government mechanisms. It is also
necessary for the Palestinians to contribute to the peace
process by ceasing attacks on Israel.
We welcome the progress made by the Palestinian
Authority in institution-building, despite the severe
political and economic constraints imposed. We also
hope that the Members of the United Nations will
continue to support the aspirations of the Palestinian
people to seek membership in this Organization. We
would also wish to underline our strong support for
the work for the United Nations agencies in occupied
Palestinian territory, including the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in

12-54813

S/PV.6847 (Resumption 1)

the Near East and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.

application for non-member State observer status
should the Palestinians decide to pursue that path.

Sri Lanka remains committed to the attainment
of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to
statehood and to a two-State solution.

It was a tragic loss of opportunity when the Security
Council decided not to accept the invitation to visit
Palestine to see for itself the situation on the ground
in order to put it in a better position to take informed
decisions on the matter. The Council is judged not only
by its actions, but also by its inaction, and we strongly
urge the members of the Council to reconsider their
decision.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iceland.
Ms. Gunnarsdóttir (Iceland): The continuing and
escalating bloodshed in Syria must be stopped. The
international community must unite to end the violence
and do whatever it can to foster a political and peaceful
solution for the sake of the Syrian people. We must
ensure that the regime, and anyone else responsible for
the horrible atrocities committed, will at the end of the
day face responsibility in an international court of law.
The conflict in Syria is already having serious
consequences on neighbouring countries, with the
flow of refugees straining their ability to cope, and the
artillery and mortar fire across borders. Additionally,
traditional transport routes are being disrupted, which
can have devastating economic consequences. The
truth of the matter is that if the Security Council cannot
agree on how to address the situation, then other forces
will determine the course of action. That does not
bode well for the Syrian people or regional stability. It
will do us well to recall that the Charter of the United
Nations confers the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security upon
the Security Council. The Council has to live up to that
responsibility.
In his speech during the general debate of the
General Assembly, my Foreign Minister said:
“The truth is that the Security Council has become
an obstacle to the international efforts to address
and solve situations such as that in Syria. We must
reform it so as to make it a tool, not a hindrance, for
progress in situations such as that in Syria this year,
or as we saw last year concerning the Palestinian
application.” (A/67/PV.18, p.4)
The Minister also left no doubt in his speech
during the general debate as to Iceland’s firm support
for the inalienable right of the Palestinian people to
self-determination. Accordingly, Iceland continues
to call upon the Security Council to vote in favour
of recommending that the General Assembly accept
Palestine’s application for United Nations membership.
In the meantime, Iceland will support Palestine’s

12-54813

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is at the core of
restoring durable peace and stability in the region.
The occupation leads to violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, where
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem and the wall,
continue to top the list. The international community
needs to continue to speak out against those violations
and to take action accordingly. One should, however,
never loose sight of the main issue, which is to end
the occupation altogether and to realize through
negotiations the two-State solution, where both States
can live in peace and security side by side. That is the
heart of the matter. This is a conflict about land, and
that is why continued settlement activities are such an
obstacle to peace. It is, however, important also to be
aware that the settlements and the wall are reversible,
like everything man-made.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Le Hoai Trung (Viet Nam): At the outset, I
would like to say that we are very pleased to see you, Sir,
assume your role as President of the Security Council.
On behalf of the Vietnamese delegation, I would like
to extend our thanks to you for having convened this
important debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine. I would like also
to express our appreciation to Mr. Jeffrey Feltman,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
informative briefing.
Viet Nam associates itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Islamic Republic Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
It is widely acknowledged that the Middle East
has faced growing and unprecedented complex
developments over the last couple of years. The
upheaval and transformations that have been taking

17

S/PV.6847 (Resumption 1)

place have seen all parties concerned, Governments as
well as people, find themselves in novel but challenging
situations. In the light of their wider ramifications, it
is in our common interest to promote dialogue and
cooperation to minimize the adverse effects and refrain
from the use or threat of use of violence and force.
Change, however, has yet to come to the question
of Palestine, which has always been at the core of the
situation in the Middle East. Years have passed since we
last saw substantive progress in the negotiations between
the two sides, or among associated parties. Millions of
Palestinians remain displaced from their homeland and
continue to suffer what the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
considers “the deadlocked political process and the
deteriorating socioeconomic situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory”. Israel, as the occupying Power,
persistently refuses to freeze settlement activities or to
adhere to the long-standing terms of reference for the
peace process. The lack of direct talks and negotiations
and, therefore the current impasse, have been coupled
with recent threats to exercise unilateralism with regard
to past agreements.
In that context, Viet Nam reiterates our principled
support for the courageous struggle and rights of the
Palestinian people over more than 60 years, in particular
the right to self-determination. We strongly urge an
immediate end to the current blockade of Palestinian
territory and for continued efforts to facilitate
negotiations among all the parties concerned, including
those by the Quartet, the League of Arab States, regional
and international partners and the United Nations, in
order to resume Israeli-Palestinian negotiations as
soon as possible. It is high time that the international
community, including the Security Council, intensify
efforts to address this crisis, for which a just, lasting
and comprehensive peaceful solution is long overdue.
That solution must take into account the legitimate
security concerns of the parties concerned, be based on
relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid terms
of reference, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map, of which the principle of land-for-peace and
the right of all States in the region to live in peace and
security are the critical element.
The solution to the pressing issues in the Middle
East also lies in greater efforts aimed at creating an
environment in the region of mutual trust, peace
and coexistence. An important step to that end is the
upcoming conference on the establishment of a Middle

18

East zone free of nuclear weapons and other types
of weapons of mass destruction. We are convinced,
however, that visible progress towards a lasting and just
solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict would also
be a strong reassurance to all Governments and peoples
about the genuine feasibility of peace and prosperity
for all in the region and, thus, peace for the world as a
whole.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month and to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman for his
briefing this morning.
The Council is one of the central pillars of
international peace and security. That is why its
credibility is of the utmost importance. Today we are
discussing two issues that have a major impact on
international peace and security. However, the Council
has fallen short of both the trust bestowed upon it by
the Member States and the aspirations of most peoples.
The Palestinian question is the central question for
Arabs and Muslims. It is the main political issue on the
international stage. However, there is a lack of political
will needed to push the peace process forward towards
a just and lasting solution.
Regardless of the various points of view on this
issue, the ball is indeed in the Israelis’ court. We do
not find those who believe that the Palestinian people
have not done enough reasonable. The Palestinian
people have been denied a great number of their rights,
but they nonetheless continue to call for peace and
negotiate on a tiny part of their historical land. They
are calling today for non-member State observer status
in the United Nations. We believe that their call should
be heeded, as it would contribute to a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution to the crisis.
The numerous Israeli policies — regarding Al-Quds
Al-Sharif, illegal settlements and the construction of
the illegal separation apartheid wall, among other
matters — all show a lack of good faith, irrespective of
the security justifications endlessly invoked by Israelis
to reject comprehensive peace based on international
law. We believe that, with its mosques and churches,
Jerusalem should remain Arab, Islamic and Christian.
There is no Palestinian State without Jerusalem, and no
Jerusalem without the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
12-54813

S/PV.6847 (Resumption 1)

We believe that pressure should not be put on the
Palestinians, who have already made great concessions,
but rather on the Israelis to reach a comprehensive
solution for the Palestinian question based on
previously agreed upon principles, including the twoState solution.
Israel should lift the embargo placed on Gaza and
put an end to the illegal Judaization of Jerusalem and
the attempts to obliterate its Islamic and Arab character.
In line with all the resolutions adopted by the
Council to stop the Judaization of Jerusalem, we reaffirm
our view that the solution to the crisis in the Middle
East hinges on Israeli withdrawal from all occupied
Palestinian territories, the occupied Syrian Golan and
the remaining occupied Lebanese territories, including
ending its violations of Lebanon’s sovereignty.
With regard to the Syrian issue, the Security
Council has been unable to bring an end to this
tragedy. The Syrian regime has drawn on weapons
from across the whole spectrum of its vast arsenals,
killing tens of thousands of people. It is appalling that
the Syrian regime is using cluster weapons, which are
internationally prohibited, against its own people. What
other kind of weapons could that regime use against
the citizens of Syria, their villages and cities? The
insistence by the Syrian regime to crush the revolt by
committing massacre and using force is in vain. It will
only enflame the sectarian war in Syria. That is what we
have been warning against since the very beginning of
the crisis. We have now started to see the impact of the
crisis on the security of the entire region.
As to the humanitarian situation, the number of
internally displaced persons and refugees has risen to
over 1 million. That has led to calls for the creation
of buffer zones and safe havens to protect Syrians, or
for Arab or international forces to intervene to restore
peace in Syria. We therefore call on the Security
Council to provide support to the Syrian people and
to use all possible means, including Chapter VII, to
protect the Syrian people. In that connection, we stress
the need to maintain Syria’s sovereignty, independence,
national unity and territorial integrity.
We have supported in good faith all diplomatic
efforts to achieve a comprehensive solution to the Syrian
question, in which the whole spectrum of the Syrian
people would participate. But at the same time, we call
for pressure to be brought to bear on the Syrian regime,
so as to translate its words into action. We therefore

12-54813

support the efforts of the Special Representative,
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kyrgyzstan.
Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important debate
at such a crucial time, when major political changes are
taking place in the Middle East.
We are living in a hightly interlinked world, where
events in one region, or even at the local level, might
have an influence on world processes. Last year we
watched with a sense of sincere empathy and solidarity
the events in the Middle East and North Africa. Today’s
situation in Syria is also a subject of great concern.
Attempts to solve the conflict and stabilize the situation
in that country have, unfortunately, been unsuccessful
so far. Thousands of innocent people have been killed
and the number of victims is growing day by day. The
Kyrgyz Republic calls for the immediate cessation of
violence in Syria. Unity on the part of the international
community is urgently needed to create the conditions
to start an inclusive national dialogue among the
various political forces and to pursue political, social
and economic reforms in the interest of all Syrians. In
that regard, we fully support the efforts of Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi, Joint Special Representative of the United
Nations and the League of Arab States, to explore a
peaceful, political solution to the conflict in Syria.
The situation in and around Syria should not detract
attention from the efforts to resume direct IsraeliPalestinian negotiations. We consider it important
to continue that process to find ways for a long-term
settlement of the situation and to reach a peace agreement
providing for the coexistence of two States in peace
and security in accordance with previously defined and
accepted parameters. We agree with Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, who stated in his address to the General
Assembly that, after decades of harsh occupation and
humiliating restrictions in almost every aspect of their
lives, the Palestinians must be able to realize their right
to a viable State of their own (see A/67/PV.6).
In recent months, we have been following with
great concern the aggravation of the economic,
financial and humanitarian situation in Palestine. In
that connection, we call for a lifting of the blockade
of the Gaza Strip and for the delivery of financial and
humanitarian assistance to create conditions favourable
for development for the Palestinian people.

19

S/PV.6847 (Resumption 1)

The Middle East Quartet has a strong mandate
because of the trust placed in it by the whole international
community. It should promptly put inplace all the
necessary conditions to enable the two States to find a
mutually acceptable resolution. Kyrgyzstan hopes that
the Quartet will play an active role in finding a solution
suitable to all parties concerned. We are in favour of
the settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict by
political and diplomatic means on the basis of relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Quartet’s road map.
It is time to decide on the issue of Palestine’s
accession as a Member of the United Nations or granting
it non-member State observer status. We have long
been waiting to welcome Palestine as a Member of the
United Nations. In that regard, Kyrgyzstan considers
it extremely important to achieve rapid progress in the
peace process and to overcome the current worrisome
impasse. We also urge the parties to demonstrate their
strong will and unwavering commitment to peace and
to eliminate all the obstacles impeding the resumption
of direct talks.
In conclusion, let me emphasize that the peoples
of the Middle East have been suffering from conflict
and confrontation for several decades. The time has
come to reach a final and comprehensive settlement
that would resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We
believe that maintaining the current situation is totally
unacceptable.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have the
honour to address the Security Council today on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement on the situation in the
Middle East, including the question of Palestine.
At the outset, I would like to express the Movement’s
appreciation to Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, for his briefing to the
Council today.
The Non-Aligned Movement remains firm in its
conviction of the urgent need for the international
community to act resolutely and collectively to fulfil its
longstanding commitment to, and responsibility for, the
realization of a just solution to the question of Palestine
in all its aspects, on the basis of international law and
the terms of reference of the peace process, including
the resolutions of the Council.
20

The Movement remains resolute to continue
assisting the Palestinian people in their legitimate quest
for dignity, justice and their inalienable right to selfdetermination in their independent State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. The issue is long
overdue and its continued postponement will only put
that goal further out of reach.
The Movement fully supports the application
submitted by Palestine, on 23 September 2011, for
membership in the United Nations and considers it to
be consistent with the right of the Palestinian people to
self-determination and independence.
The Movement regrets that all efforts exerted to
date by international and regional parties, including by
the Quartet, have been unable to achieve any progress,
owing to the deliberate obstruction by Israel, the
occupying Power, its refusal to respect the parameters
of the peace process and its insistence on continuing to
change the facts on the ground, in total contradiction
of the two-State solution, the Charter of the United
Nations and international law.
The Movement remains concerned about the
ongoing and intensifying acts of violence, terrorism
and racist hate crimes, the demolition of houses, the
revocation of residency, the attacks on towns and
villages across the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, the excavations under Al-Aqsa Mosque
and the storming of the Mosque compound, the firing
of stun grenades at Palestinian worshipers, the latest
instance of which took place on Friday, 5 October and
caused many injuries among Palestinian worshipers, as
well as the uprooting of olive and other trees by illegal
Israeli settlers.
The Movement expresses its grave concern over
continued illegal Israeli colonial settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territory, particularly in
and around East Jerusalem, and the construction of the
apartheid annexation wall in violation of international
law, relevant United Nations resolutions and the
International Court of Justice advisory opinion of 9 July
2004, and calls upon the international community,
including the Security Council, to compel Israel to
cease these illegal actions and measures.
The Non-Aligned Movement expresses grave
concern regarding the deteriorating situation and
deplorable conditions of the thousands of Palestinian
prisoners and detainees unlawfully held in Israeli jails
and detention centres, including at least 300 children as

12-54813

S/PV.6847 (Resumption 1)

well as women and elected officials, and calls for their
immediate release.
In the light of the very difficult conditions on the
ground, the Non-Aligned Movement calls once again
for specific measures to address in particular the grave
impact of Israel’s settlement policies on the Palestinian
people and their land, including the violent actions
by Israeli settlers against Palestinian property and
Palestinian civilians, including women and children, as
well as provocations, incitement, attacks against holy
sites in occupied East Jerusalem and the vandalizing of
mosques and churches.
Equally, the Movement remains concerned about
the new round of deadly violence, terror and ongoing
missile air strikes and artillery bombardment by Israel,
the occupying Power, against the Palestinian people in
the besieged Gaza Strip, including the deadly attacks
carried out on 7 October. The Movement strongly
condemns such attacks, which are a grave breach of
international law, including international humanitarian
law and the relevant provisions regarding the protection
of civilians in armed conflict and the prohibition of
reprisals and collective punishment against civilian
populations under occupation.
The intensification of Israel’s aggression against the
Gaza Strip threatens to further destabilize the situation
on the ground and to ignite yet another round of deadly
violence. The Movement also remains concerned about
the critical humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip.
We call once again for the full and immediate lifting of
the illegal Israeli blockade, which has now entered its
sixth year, in violation of resolution 1860 (2009), other
relevant United Nations resolutions and international
humanitarian law, which prohibits the collective
punishment of civilian populations under occupation.
Israel must promptly and unconditionally open all
its crossing points with Gaza and end its continued
obstruction of the freedom of movement of persons and
of the reconstruction efforts in the Gaza Strip.
The Movement stresses that those actions must
be ended, as they undermine the resumption of
credible negotiations and obstruct the achievement of
a just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. This demands the
attention of the international community, particularly
the Security Council, which is duty-bound to act to
maintain international peace and security and ensure
respect for international law.

12-54813

The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its call for
the Security Council to act and demands that Israel,
the occupying Power, immediately cease all such
violations of international law, including international
humanitarian and human rights law, and fully abide by
its legal obligations, including those under the Fourth
Geneva Convention. Israel’s blatant impunity and
disregard for the law cannot be tolerated.
The Movement also takes this opportunity to
express its support for Palestinian reconciliation
efforts, which continue to be sponsored by Egypt, and
hopes that Palestinian unity will soon be restored in
the interest of the legitimate national aspirations of the
Palestinian people.
Turning to Lebanon, the Movement condemns
Israel’s ongoing violations of Lebanon’s sovereignty
and calls on all parties concerned to fully implement
resolution 1701 (2006) in order to end the current
fragility of the situation and avoid the resurgence of
hostilities.
Concerning the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Movement reaffirms that all measures and actions
taken or to be taken by Israel, the occupying Power, to
alter the legal, physical or demographic status of the
occupied Syrian Golan, as well as Israeli measures to
impose its own jurisdiction and administration there,
are null, void and have no legal effect. The Non-Aligned
Movement demands that Israel abide by resolution 497
(1981) and withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian
Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967, in implementation
of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
I would like to take a few minutes to speak in my
national capacity.
I wish to refer to the current political and security
situation in the Middle East, which is becoming more
and more delicate and risky. There are now more threats
than ever in the region from terrorism, extremism, the
militarization of the region and the nuclear weapons
of the Zionist regime. Under such circumstances, any
militarization of the region, miscalculation or wrong
decision would only foment extremism, terrorism and
sectarian clashes.
This is particularly true with regard to the situation
in Syria. Iran believes that any foreign military
involvement in or against Syria would only exacerbate
the crisis and extend insecurity to other countries in
the region. The Islamic Republic of Iran is of the view

21

S/PV.6847 (Resumption 1)

that the way out of the present crisis in Syria lies in
strengthening a comprehensive, peaceful political
process under regional and international supervisory
arrangements aimed at establishing, first and foremost,
a cessation of hostilities and the holding of a national
dialogue between the opposition and the Syrian
Government for a peaceful political process and an
end to the violence as soon as possible. This view was
reiterated in the talks with Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, the
Joint Special Representative visiting Iran, in the course
of his meeting held yesterday with our high-ranking
officials. We assured him of our full support for his
initiatives.
We believe that the countries in the region should
cooperate with one another to make the restoration of
peace and national dialogue and reconciliation possible.
If we want to bring peace and stability back to
Syria and to the region, there is no alternative but to
work together. I am therefore not going to respond to
some allegations made here by some friendly countries
in the region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this debate and
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing this
morning.
Australia shares the world’s frustration at the
standstill in the Middle East peace process. We share
the frustration of the Palestinians and their strong and
legitimate desire to have their own State. We also share
Israel’s legitimate concerns to ensure its own security
and the security of its people. That security would, of
course, be best guaranteed through an effective and
genuine two-State solution. Those are the messages
we have consistently expressed to both Israeli and
Palestinian leaders, including over the past 12 months.
It has now been 19 years, as we know, since the
Oslo Accords, and a decade since the historic Arab
Peace Initiative, and yet a just and lasting solution still
evades us. In a period of tremendous change in the Arab
world, the status quo in the Middle East peace process
is simply untenable. The status quo cannot provide the
lasting peace and security which Palestinians, Israelis
and all the peoples of the region deserve.
The prospects for a negotiated peace based on a
two-State solution are disappearing, and this genuinely

22

concerns us. It is therefore now more important than
ever that negotiations between the parties resume as a
matter of urgency. While the parties themselves must
resolve through negotiations the final shape of an
agreement, for meaningful progress to be made and for
negotiations to be credible in order to start, they should
take place on the basis of the 1967 boundaries, with
agreed land swaps.
The continuing settlement activity in the West
Bank remains a fundamental concern. A Palestinian
State must not just be independent; it must be viable
and contiguous. Settlement activity, which is illegal
under international law, must cease. Australia remains
opposed to any steps towards legalizing outposts.
It is also imperative that all violence against
civilians, including rocket attacks on Israel from
Gaza, end immediately. All people in the region need
to be able to pursue their lives free from the threat of
violence.
At a time when negotiations have stalled, one
important cause for optimism has been the success
which President Abbas and Prime Minister Fayyad
have had in building the institutions for a Palestinian
State. However, that decisive achievement is coming
under threat, as we know, due to the serious financial
crisis facing the Palestinian Authority. As a significant
donor, we participated in the meeting of the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee for the Coordination of International
Assistance to Palestinians held in New York on
23 September, which was a very depressing meeting. It
is essential that the international community continue
to support the Authority, whose effective functioning is
a vital source of stability in the region. We call on all
donors to live up to their commitments in that respect.
Turning now to the appalling human tragedy which
is taking place in Syria, we remain deeply concerned,
as is everyone else, that the Council has been unable to
adopt a Chapter VII resolution to ensure there are real
consequences for President Al-Assad’s non-compliance
with Council resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012).
We support the efforts of the Joint Special
Representative of the United Nations and the League of
Arab States, Lakhdar Brahimi, to find a way through
the crisis. But it is well past the time for President
Al-Assad to reverse course and end the violence which
he has unleashed on his own people. President Al-Assad
has been given many opportunities by the international

12-54813

S/PV.6847 (Resumption 1)

community to take a different path, and he must do so
immediately.
The recent incidents across the Syrian-Turkish
border are of grave concern and underscore the serious
regional dimension to the Syrian crisis. We echo the
Council’s condemnation of the Syrian attack and call on
Syria to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of its neighbours. We also recognize the significant
burden being faced by Syria’s neighbours, including
Turkey, Iraq, Jordan and Lebanon.
While the outlook in Syria is very bleak, it is
equally important — indeed, imperative — for us to
still focus on our need to help alleviate the suffering of
the Syrian people. As the third-largest national donor,
my own country is and will remain committed to
providing humanitarian assistance. We are especially
concerned about the need to protect medical facilities
and personnel. All parties to the conflict must
respect and adhere to the principles of international
humanitarian law and ensure the safe and unhindered
access of humanitarian personnel. We have been very
actively talking with others over the past few weeks to
see if we can find new ways to protect hospitals and
health workers in Syria, and we will continue to do so.
But while we take humanitarian steps to help those
affected by the conflict, the international community
must also continue to pursue whatever steps we can
towards a political solution. The Council’s role in that
respect remains, obviously, essential.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Venezuela.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to congratulate
the fraternal country of Guatemala for its leadership
during its presidency of the Security Council.
We are here before the Council once again to
address the issue of the Middle East, including the
question of Palestine. We endorse the presidential
statement of the Security Council which you, Madam
President, promoted and which strongly condemned the
terrorist attacks in Aleppo, Syria, which took place on
3 October and led to dozens of deaths and injuries.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela associates
itself with the statement made by Ambassador
Mohammad Khazaee, Permanent Representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

12-54813

My country wishes to express its deep frustration
at the inaction of the Security Council when faced with
the expansionist policy of Israel, the occupying Power,
in the Palestinian territories. Such inaction is, as the
Council is aware, the result of the threat of veto by the
United States and its closest allies. Those Governments
are today promoting armed intervention in Syria; last
year, they spearheaded resolution 1973 (2011) on the
situation in Libya, which led to hundreds of civilian
deaths and to chaos and violence in North Africa. The
resulting collateral damage is euphemistically referred
to “necessary costs”. The absurd logic that they use
to “protect civilians” and “promote democracy”
encourages war and violence.
In the Middle East, there is an alarming increase
in volatility and violence, which without any doubt
threatens world peace. Regrettably, certain members
of this body tend to remain silent in the face of the
evident threat to international peace and security posed
by the Government of Israel. On the other hand, they
encourage conflicts that should be resolved solely
through mediation and dialogue; that is the case with
Syria.
That bellicose attitude threatens the institutionality
of the United Nations, the Charter of the United Nations
and international law. Military interventionism is the
method chosen by certain Powers in order to promote
their expansionist, colonialist ambitions.
In Syria, terrorist mercenaries are being financed
and armed with a view to overthrowing the Government
of that country. In that context, thousands of innocent
civilians have been killed, and the situation in the
Middle East has been further destabilized.
There is an attempt in the region to put in power
Governments that will yield to imperial Powers and
offer no resistance to the political and military elite of
Israel, the occupying Power. In that way, they seek to
strengthen that Power and to weaken the Palestinian
cause at the expense of greater uncertainty and
instability in the Middle East.
In short, those Powers disregard and violate the selfdetermination of peoples and the sovereignty of States.
The imperialists and their allies try to establish a kind
of beneficial terrorism and resort to it, including State
terrorism, when they wish to appropriate or control
territories and their natural resources or to overthrow
leaders of the people — whatever they wish.

23

S/PV.6847 (Resumption 1)

The Bolivarian Government of Hugo Chávez Frías
has warned against the serious consequences of arming
mercenary terrorist groups in order to overthrow the
Government of Syria. In that way, they seek to put
Israel in a stronger position in the negotiations with
Palestine, Lebanon and Syria.
As Noam Chomsky said, the great threat to the
region and to the world is Israel’s nuclear arsenal and
the power that that gives Israel to expel Palestinians
from its territories and to threaten the countries in the
region. The countries that arm and protect Israel speak
of peace, human rights and international humanitarian
law without any moral or political authority. Ironically,
those who today speak of peace are the ones that have
the greatest interest in the colonial expansionist war.
Let us recall that Israel, the occupying Power, has
refused to allow inspections of its nuclear installations
or to sign the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. That Power is the real threat to the region and
to the world.
The many detailed letters from the Permanent
Observer of Palestine to the United Nations,
Ambassador Riyad Mansour, addressed to the President
of the Security Council and of the General Assembly
pitifully describe the inhumane and illegal aggression
of the State of Israel against the Palestinian people.
International law, including international humanitarian
law, the provisions for the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and the prohibition of reprisals and the
collective punishment of civilians subject to occupation,
is being flagrantly violated.
Such crimes must be immediately investigated
and the perpetrators brought to justice. The attempt to
disguise one of the main causes of the conflict in the
Middle East, namely, the expansionist policy of Israel,
should be condemned.
The Bolivarian Government advocates peace and
the pursuit of balance in the Middle East. It supports
dialogue and mediation as the only way to achieve
peace and brotherhood among peoples.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Ben Sliman (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I
extend to you, Mr. President, my warm congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I commend you on guiding the
Council with wisdom and efficiency.

24

Today, we meet in an open debate on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question,
against the backdrop of a complete standstill, the lack
of any prospects for peace and the inability of the
Organization to uphold the noble purposes for which
it was established, in particular with regard to the
Palestinian issue.
At the outset, I would like to express our grave
concern about the deteriorating situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories and the increasing suffering of
the Palestinian people as a result of the scourge of the
occupation and deprivation and a suffocating economic
crisis, exacerbated by diminishing international
aid, despite the pledges of numerous countries and
international bodies and organizations.
The deadlocked political outlook of the Palestinian
issue has serious implications not only for the
Palestinian people but also throughout the Middle East,
a region that is in a critical position, thus putting it in
a state of constant turbulence and instability. Israel’s
non-compliance with its international obligations
and its ongoing flagrant violations of the fundmental
human rights of the Palestinians only exacerbate the
situation. The Palestinian people are therefore living
constantly under the aggression and violence not only
of the Israeli military machine but also of the extremist
settlers with the full complicity of the occupation army
and the Israeli Government, as well as international
betrayal. The Israeli Government has therefore come
to perceive that as condoning its ongoing serious
violations and policy of uprooting and ethnic cleansing.
Moreover, Israel has been rewarded and even shielded
from accountability with impunity.
The Palestinian people are living in a disastrous
situation with no decisive international position on
Israeli violations of international law and its provisions.
They can no longer tolerate neglect and indifference. I
must be clear that the lack of a credible solution would
ultimately lead to a new situation, inciting sentiments
that would be exploited by extremist elements
throughout the world. Unfortunately, here and there
we have started to hear calls for jihad to be adopted as
the key instrument to putting an end to the historical
injustice long endured by the Palestinian people.
I call on all delegations gathered here today in
the primary organ and forum entrusted with the
maintenance of international pace and security to
consider the value of our meetings. Regrettably, such

12-54813

S/PV.6847 (Resumption 1)

meetings have proved that they do not live up to the
responsibility required of the serious situation that
threatens the Palestinian people’s security and the
region’s stability. The region needs a climate of trust to
bring about peaceful exchanges among its peoples and
to establish institutions and structures that promote the
development of democratic societies.
Our meetings and the long-standing methods of the
United Nations in dealing with the Palestinian issue are
nothing other than steps towards conflict management.
They do not establish the dynamic to address the core
issues in order to resolve the conflict and enable the
Palestinian people to exercise their inalienable national
rights and to establish an independent State, within
the 1967 borders, with Holy Jerusalem as its capital.
While my country calls for increasing such debates
and maintaining their regularity, at the same time it
urges that ways be found to inspire hope among the
Palestinians and the entire international community
through respect for the moral and legal authority of the
relevant United Nations resolutions. That would be an
incentive to rapidly and seriously relaunch the peace
process on all tracks in order to achieve the two-State
solution in line with those resolutions.
The failure of the international community to
address the Palestinian question with the earnestness
and scrupulousness that the tragic situation of the
Palestinian people requires has led to the escalation
of acts of aggression committed by Israeli settlers
against Palestinian citizens and their property. Such
practices are a natural result of Israel’s continuing
lack of commitment to its international obligations, its
ongoing occupation and its alteration of the facts on
the ground, which has targeted the city of Jerusalem
and its surroundings in an effort to change its Arab and
Islamic identity and to annex vast tracts of Palestinian
land. The Israeli occupying forces also continue to seize
by force large areas of Palestinian territory — farms,
residential neighbourhoods and aquifers — under
various pretexts and designations. All these practices
are designed to make any future agreement based on
the two-State solution a virtually unattainable if not
completely impossible option.
We all recognize that a two-State solution is critical
to any meaningful peace process that can lead to the
restoration of the Palestinian people’s legitimate rights.
These are the core ingredients of a settlement of the
conflict that does not emanate from a vacuum but is
inherently anchored in international and regional

12-54813

instruments and United Nations resolutions. We must
reaffirm our resolve that they will be revived and
enforced, in the hope that the international community
will continue to have a chance to put an end to the
current impasse in the negotiations, salvage the peace
process and imbue it with a new dynamism.
In that context, we hope that the United Nations,
especially the Security Council and the General
Assembly, can comply with their historic obligations
at this critical juncture of the Palestinian question
by reaffirming its core principles, the framework
instruments and the terms of reference so as to pave
the way for a new path in the peace process, for which
a first landmark would be giving full support to the
ongoing efforts to help Palestine acquire non-member
State observer status in the General Assembly. We are
confident that Palestine’s acquisition of that status
would demonstrate to the whole world its readiness to
assume its role as a peace-loving State, fully committed
to United Nations resolutions and instruments, as well
as a critical factor in the maintenance of peace and
stability in the region and in the world as a whole.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I would like to start by
again congratulating Guatemala on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council. Under your able
leadership, Mr. President, I believe that the Council will
enjoy a productive, helpful and useful discussion of the
issues relating to international peace and stability.
On this occasion, I would like to speak very briefly
on the crisis in Syria and to express our appreciation
for the position that the Security Council took over the
shelling on 3 October of the Turkish town of Akçakale
by Syrian armed forces, which led to the loss of five
Turkish citizens. The statement underscored that this
incident highlighted the grave impact that the crisis in
Syria is having on the security of its neighbours and on
regional peace and stability, and demanded that such
violations of international law stop immediately and
not be repeated. While the number of Syrians seeking
shelter in Turkey has surpassed 100,000, the Turkish
Government continues to extend its helping hand to
those in need.
Since I was not able to address the Security Council
in September, I would also like to offer our sincere
condolences to our American colleagues here and the
American nation in general on the demise of Chris

25

S/PV.6847 (Resumption 1)

Stevens, the late Ambassador of the United States to
Libya. As a country that has lost many of its diplomats
to acts of terror, Turkey shares their grief and condemn
this terrorist attack in the strongest terms. Turkey has
consistently emphasized that terror has no religion
or nationality and is a crime against humanity. We
continue to believe that fighting terrorism effectively
demands the unity and solidarity of the international
community.
I would now like to express our views on the
latest developments relating to the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict. Unfortunately, nothing has changed in a
positive direction since the Council’s last open debate
on this issue (S/PV.6706). We have witnessed increasing
violence directed at Palestinians by settlers during the
olive harvest season; extremist attacks on Muslim and
Christian sacred sites have continued; and the church
of Saint George and the Al-Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem
have recently been targeted. We share the concerns
voiced on 6 October by the Secretary-General of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, when he warned
against escalation.
During the past three months, Israeli operations
again claimed Palestinian lives, and the suffering of
Palestinian prisoners under inhumane conditions in
Israeli prisons continued. We strongly condemn the
decision to issue tenders for the construction of 130
additional units in the settlements of Har Homa in East
Jerusalem, further increasing the settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territories. All settlement
activities in the occupied territories constitute a
violation of international law. The recent elevation
of Ariel College to university status has introduced
education elements into the illegal settlement activities.
Such policies undermine the possibility of revitalizing
the peace process and seriously endanger the vision of
a two-State solution. We denounce the wave of recent
attacks in the West Bank. A resort to violence in
response to existing disputes on the part of any party
cannot be tolerated.
The Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination
of International Assistance to Palestinians recently held
a meeting in New York prior to the high-level segment
of the sixty-seventh session of the General Assembly
to address the dire circumstances of the Palestinian
economy. In that context, the imaginary boundaries
imposed on Palestinian fishermen, the continuing
occupation of Palestinian lands, and the illegal blockade

26

around Gaza are the main determinants of the economic
situation in Palestine.
As a recent briefing of the Special Coordinator on
the Middle East highlighted, private-sector growth in
Palestine is affected by the obstacles posed to Palestinian
movement in the West Bank (see S/PV.6835). Area C
is essential to a viable Palestinian State. On that note,
I would like to call on the international community
to continue and even enhance its support for the
Palestinian people, especially for the efforts of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. In these circumstances, the
Israeli Government has declared early parliamentary
elections. The only expectation of the international
community for this process is peace.
We supported Palestine’s bid for membership of
the United Nations in 2011, and we will continue to
support any initiative within the General Assembly that
would elevate Palestine’s status in the Organization.
Let us be clear — the Palestinian application to the
United Nations is not a declaration of statehood. The
Palestinian leadership declared itself a State in 1988, and
a total of 133 Members under this roof have recognized
the State of Palestine since then. Palestine aims to
take its rightful seat among us. A united Palestinian
front will certainly draw even wider support from the
international community.
Allow me to conclude with remarks from the draft
report of the Russell Tribunal on Palestine, which
met in New York on 6 and 7 October. The Tribunal’s
draft report appeals to the international community
as a whole, but primarily calls on the United Nations
to implement its Charter, uphold its value system and
implement the rule of law in the case of Palestine,
and criticizes it for its unethical performance on that
matter. It argues that such performance is undermining
the credibility of the United Nations system as a whole
and the trust of the international community.
We will continue to support the efforts of the
United Nations to achieve a solution based on the
established parameters of Madrid, Oslo and the Arab
Peace Initiative. In our view, the United Nations has
yet to fulfil its promise made in General Assembly
resolution 181 (II) of 1947, which forsees the coming
into existence of independent Israeli and Arab States.
Now is the time for the United Nations to live up to its
decisions and take corrective action, despite a delay of
65 years. Turkey will continue to support the two-State

12-54813

S/PV.6847 (Resumption 1)

solution, based on the 1967 borders, whereby Israel and
Palestine shall live side by side in peace and tranquillity,
with East Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French):
Canada welcomes this opportunity to discuss the
situation in the Middle East, particularly given the
urgent need for the Security Council to take appropriate
action on Syria. The continuing violence, the worsening
humanitarian crisis and the growing threat to regional
stability clearly constitute a case in which the Council
must assume its basic responsibility to maintain
international peace and security. It is shameful that the
Security Council remains paralysed more than a year
and a half after the outbreak of the crisis.
Canada continues to call for a complete and
immediate ceasefire that will lead to a Syrian-led
political transition. Given the Al-Assad regime’s failure
to honour its commitments, we all need to be fully
cognizant of one indisputable fact — Al-Assad will not
voluntarily end the brutal campaign of slaughter that
he has launched against his own people. He has a clear
interest in desperately clinging to power. All countries
must bring pressure to bear on Syria for Al-Assad to go.
As long as the Security Council does not adopt
tough, binding measures, those who want to protect the
Al-Assad regime with Syrian blood will benefit from
the political and legal cover this impasse provides.
Canada repeats our call for the Security Council to
impose binding sanctions and an arms embargo in order
to increase pressure on the Al-Assad regime to end the
violence and recognize the legitimate democratic rights
of the Syrian people.
(spoke in English)
In particular, Canada has been actively urging
Syria’s neighbours to stop allowing arms and other
tools of war to reach Al-Assad in his bloody struggle
to cling to power. We commend Turkey on successfully
stopping one such shipment, as those efforts will help
to limit the Al-Assad regime’s ability to kill civilians
in Syria.
Canada continues to be profoundly concerned by
the threat that Iran poses to regional and global security.
Iran’s nuclear activities in defiance of Security Council
resolutions, State sponsorship of terrorism, appalling
human rights record and hegemonic interference

12-54813

throughout the Middle East all endanger an increasingly
fragile regional balance. It is Canada’s unambiguous
view that, beyond despotic regimes clinging to power at
the expense of their people, and beyond the carcinogenic
militancy of Al-Qaida and its affiliates throughout the
broader Middle East and North Africa, it is the Iranian
regime that poses the greatest threat to global peace
and security.
In addition, Canada is deeply concerned about the
regional implications of Iran’s persistent meddling in
Iraq, a country struggling to rebuild itself after years
under the brutal Saddam Hussein regime. We urge
Iraqi officials to continue to assert their hard-won
sovereignty, notably over their skies, and to resist
Iranian influence. At the same time, we call on the
Security Council to take action and put a stop, once and
for all, to Iranian support for Al-Assad.
With regard to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
Canada remains wholly supportive of United States and
Quartet efforts, and we welcome their ongoing attempts
to encourage the parties to resume successful and direct
peace negotiations without delay or preconditions, in
accordance with the Quartet’s statement of 23 September
2011. But let me be clear. Canada will oppose any
unilateral resolution in the General Assembly. In our
view, those measures will make a resumption of the
peace talks more difficult and raise expectations yet
not change the facts on the ground or improve lives,
leading to heightened frustrations and a review of our
relations with the Palestinian Authority.
Canada would welcome the establishment of a
Palestinian State as a result of negotiations with Israel.
However, in our judgment, any two-State solution
must be negotiated and mutually agreed upon by both
States. Pursuing a United Nations resolution is counterproductive to achieving that trust. We should instead all
be focused on encouraging the Palestinians to return to
peace talks immediately.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Maldives.
Mr. Sareer (Maldives): I wish to begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, and your country,
Guatemala, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. My delegation further thanks
the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for his comprehensive briefing on
the situation in the Middle East, including the question
of Palestine.

27

S/PV.6847 (Resumption 1)

In December 2010, the Middle East and North
Africa saw the onset of actions that would come to be
known as the Arab Spring. What began as a peaceful
movement has now become a display of overt violence
and bloodshed in Syria. The Maldives believes that this
issue is central to any discussion of the current political
situation in the Middle East.
Speaking at the open debate on this topic in July
(see S/PV.6816), the Maldives called for outright peace
in Syria. However, since then, with the increasing
hostility along the Turkish border, as well as daily
reports of increasing deaths in the area, it has become
clear that the Syrian issue threatens to engulf the
Middle East. The violence and unmitigated human
rights abuses prevailing in Syria today are a disgrace to
the community of nations. In a region plagued by one
crisis after another, we call for a renewed commitment
from all stakeholders to the development of peace and
stability.
Disarmament and the non-proliferation of weapons
in those areas affected by the Syrian conflict are an
important step forward in preserving peace in that
region. As a nation dedicated to non-aggression
and peaceful diplomacy, the Maldives wishes to see
international relations conducted in the same manner.
The Maldives applauds the recent presidential
elections in Egypt, and continues to support the
ongoing democratic developments in the region. As
a democratic Muslim nation with a wide political
spectrum, we understand the growing pains associated
with transitions in the Middle East and those relating
to the implementation of democratic norms. However,
we cannot relate to, nor can we condone, any political
transformation that is sought with violence.
Along with the conflict in Syria, the Middle East
is immersed in the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. The
Maldives remains stoutly determined that Palestine
must be recognized as a legitimate State. The Maldives
believes that a two-State solution, with Israel and
Palestine coexisting side by side in peace, is the only
way to bring about peace in the Middle East. The
Maldives does not believe that such recognition would
hinder peace talks, but rather foresees it strengthening
and solidifying a tangible solution.
My delegation therefore believes that the Security
Council has an obligation to push the resolution
forward, bringing the world closer to ending that
lengthy conflict. As an institution that guarantees

28

peace and stability, the United Nations has a duty to
ensure the success of a two-State solution.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to thank you, Sir, for convening this debate. I also
thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his briefing this morning.
The problem of the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question, remains a matter of great
importance to the Arab countries and to the international
community as a whole. At the same time, the issue has
seen no progress despite all the efforts undertaken on
all fronts and all levels. A comprehensive settlement of
the Middle East issue, and in particular the Palestinian
question, calls for concerted international efforts to
guarantee the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people and to ensure justice and right.
At the summit of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC), held in Mecca on 25 August, the
King of Bahrain reiterated the importance of the matter
and the fact that we need to work in earnest to bring
about a just, comprehensive and lasting solution to the
issue, resulting in an independent State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, based on the Arab
Peace Initiative, the decisions of the Quartet and United
Nations resolutions. Moreover, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs reiterated before the General Assembly (see
A/67/PV.14) the principled position of Bahrain that it
has put forward in all bodies and forums.
The Kingdom of Bahrain reiterates the need to
ensure the implementation of the resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly that call
for the lifting of the ongoing illegal blockade of Gaza.
We urge the international community to assume its
responsibilities and to work immediately to bring an
end to the blockade.
The Middle East question will be resolved only
if Israel withdraws from the Palestinian and Arab
territories that it has occupied since 1967, including
East Jerusalem and the Syrian Golan and all occupied
Lebanese territories, in accordance with relevant
Security Council resolutions.
An independent Palestinian State must be established
on the basis of the 4 June 1967 borders, with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as the capital. It is important to achieve a just
solution on the repatriation of Palestinian refugees,

12-54813

S/PV.6847 (Resumption 1)

based on General Assembly resolution 194 (III). In
addition, we call for reactivating the resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly that call
for an end to all Israeli violations and aggression. We
must also ensure compliance with the Fourth Geneva
Convention in the occupied territories.
Lastly, the two-State solution is the only possible
lasting option and the Arab Peace Initiative is a key
foundation of that option and solution.
I greatly fear that the current stalemate in the peace
process is due to Israeli policies, which have undermined
all Arab and international efforts to achieve peace. We
call upon the Security Council and other mechanisms,
such as the Quartet, to spare no effort in seeking an
end to the stalemate, for the benefit of the Israeli and
Palestinian peoples alike and in the service of regional
and international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of Israel has asked for the floor to make
a further statement. I would ask the representative of
Israel to be as brief as possible.
Mr. Nitzan (Israel): This monthly debate on the
Middle East is no stranger to falsehoods, distortions
and absurdities. I must say that the performance of

12-54813

the Lebanese representative this morning offered
us all another window into the theatre of the absurd.
While reciting every meeting on the Council’s calendar
this month, he conveniently forgot to mention the
consultations scheduled for 31 October on resolution
1559 (2004). That resolution calls for the disarmament
of the terrorist organization Hizbullah — the same
Hizbullah that has assembled more missiles than many
NATO members; that the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of resolution 1559 (2004)
describes as having “the capacities of a regular army”
(S/2012/244, para. 23); and that only last week sent an
Iranian military drone over Israel.
With Iranian funding, training and arms, Hizbullah
has hijacked the Lebanese State and turned it into an
Iranian outpost for terror. Hizbullah is an integral part
of the Government that the Lebanese representative
represents here. Perhaps that explains the Lebanese
decision to omit the consultations on resolution 1559
(2004) from the Council’s calendar.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded this stage of its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m.

29
