S/PV.7113

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7113th meeting

Wednesday, 19 February 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Linkevičius/Ms. Murmokaitė/Mr. Baublys . . . . . . . . . . 

(Lithuania)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Moreno Charme
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Sarki
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
The promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance of international
peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on measuring the effectiveness of the support
provided by the United Nations system for the promotion of the rule of law in
conflict and post-conflict situations (S/2013/341)
Letter dated 3 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Lithuania
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2014/75)

14-23890 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1423890*

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

Nations system for the promotion of the rule of law in
conflict and post-conflict situations.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The promotion and strengthening of the rule of law
in the maintenance of international peace
and security
Report of the Secretary-General on measuring
the effectiveness of the support provided by the
United Nations system for the promotion of
the rule of law in conflict and post-conflict
situations (S/2013/341)
Letter dated 3 February 2014 from the
Permanent Representative of Lithuania
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2014/75)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Botswana, Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cuba, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Ecuador, Estonia, Georgia, Germany, Guatemala,
Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Malaysia, Mexico,
Namibia, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Pakistan,
Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Qatar, the Republic of
Moldova, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Uruguay and
Zimbabwe to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedures, I invite His Excellency Thomas MayrHarting, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations, to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and previous
practice in this regard.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/2013/341, which contains
the report of the Secretary-General on measuring the
effectiveness of the support provided by the United

2/85

19/02/2014

I also wish to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to document S/2014/75, which contains
a letter dated 3 February 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Lithuania to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.
I wish warmly to welcome His Excellency
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, to whom I now give
the floor.
The Secretary-General: I thank the Government
of Lithuania for organizing this important debate.
The rule of law is at the heart of our work at the
United Nations. It is intrinsically linked to peace and
security. When public institutions fail to deliver justice
or to protect peoples’ rights, insecurity and conflict
prevail.
At the national level, reconciliation and enduring
peace require the strong rule of law through responsive
and inclusive institutions. People must be able to trust
that their institutions can resolve disputes promptly and
fairly, and provide equitable access to basic services,
including justice and security.
At the international level, adherence to the rule of
law is critical for conflict prevention and the peaceful
resolution of disputes. Mechanisms to combat impunity
and ensure accountability, including United Nationsassisted criminal tribunals, reinforce the primacy
of law. That is why strengthening the rule of law is
now an integral part of the mandates of peacekeeping
operations and special political missions. Today, 18
missions around the world currently mandate rule-oflaw support.
We are providing national authorities with
wide-ranging support, from constitution-making
to strengthening police, justice and corrections
institutions, and from anti-corruption efforts to those
ensuring justice and accountability for gender-based
crimes.
I have designated the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the United Nations Development
Programme — working with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
UN-Women and other partners — as the global focal

14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

point for police, justice and corrections. That new
global focal point arrangement has already assisted our
efforts from Mali to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to Haiti and beyond, strengthening our ability to
deliver as one effectively and coherently. I encourage
members of the Council and other Member States and
regional organizations to support the global focal point
and work with the United Nations to ensure the longterm development of national rule-of-law institutions.
The crafting of peacekeeping and peacebuilding
mandates provides a strategic opportunity to support
national priorities in this area. Along with police and
military elements, mandates for new missions should
include justice and corrections. That will help extend
State authority and lay the foundation for longer-term
institution-building. Those mandates should be guided
by several important points. Let me briefly highlight
four.
First, mandates should reflect the specific
challenges of a country and identify priority areas of
support. That will enhance the effectiveness and gender
responsiveness of our rule-of-law work. It also helps
guide programming and serves as a basis for dialogue
with national authorities.
Secondly, sequencing or establishing phases
for the implementation of the different components
of assistance is vital. Promptly addressing people’s
immediate security and protection needs is crucial to
laying the groundwork for the long-term success of
institutions and processes.
Thirdly, given limited human and financial
resources, a gradual or progressive implementation
strategy may be the most effective in transitioning from
peacekeeping to long-term development assistance.
That requires early collaboration between missions and
country teams.
Fourthly, assessing progress is essential to making
policy decisions supported by evidence and responsive
to particular needs. The Security Council has made
important inroads towards promoting monitoring and
evaluation of United Nations rule-of-law assistance.
Specific and sequenced mandates, which include datacollection and evaluation capacities, would further
support those efforts. As I noted in my report to the
Council of 11 June 2013 (S/2013/341), the Organization
must nurture and strengthen a culture of evaluation.
I am encouraged by the Council’s continued
commitment to ensuring that we make the most and

S/PV.7113

the best of rule-of-law assistance in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding missions. I greatly appreciate the
Council’s discussion today.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lithuania.
Let me start by thanking Secretary-General for his
report (S/2013/341) on measuring the effectiveness of
the United Nations rule-of-law activities and for his
insightful briefing today. We appreciate the SecretaryGeneral’s personal leadership and commitment to
mainstreaming the rule of law in United Nations
activities.
Dwight Eisenhower once said,
“The clearest way to show what the rule of law
means to us in everyday life is to recall what has
happened when there is no rule of law.”
The events in the Central African Republic and Syria
offer a shocking example of what happens when there
is no rule of law. In the Central African Republic, a
total collapse of law and order has led to unspeakable
atrocities and fears of ethnic cleansing and genocide. In
Syria, siege and starvation are being used as a weapon
of war. The civilian population is subjected to aerial
bombings, Scud missiles and mortar attacks. In gross
violation of international law, humanitarian access
continues to be denied, and humanitarian workers are
targeted. The savagery of Al-Shabaab in Somalia, the
barbaric brutality of radical extremists in the north of
Mali, the hundreds of thousands of displaced people
in South Sudan — those and other situations highlight
the critical importance of restoring the rule of law and
institution-building for protecting civilian populations
and tackling the root causes of conflicts.
At present, nearly 20 United Nations missions have
a rule-of-law mandate. As technical as those mandates
may be, the rule of law is a lot more than the mere
sum of specific activities carried out by peacekeepers
and special political missions on the ground. It is the
underlying framework of rules and rights that make
safe, secure and fair societies possible. It informs
good governance, ensures accountaility and enables
the discharge of justice for all without discrimination.
In countries emerging out of conflict, the rule of
law provides a framework to address the legitimate
grievances and concerns of affected populations and

14-238903/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

allows the taking of action against perpetrators in a
peaceful manner.
The Council’s focus on holistic rule-of-law
assistance in conflict-affected countries is therefore
critical to conflict prevention as well as to breaking
the cycle of relapse into violence. Rule-of-law
activities as mandated by the Council range from
constitution-making, ensuring inclusive political
processes and building police, corrections and lawenforcement services, to designing transitional justice
mechanisms and tackling sexual violence in conflict. In
all cases the principle of national ownership is key, as it
alone can guarantee that the rule of law will continue to
prevail long after the departure of peacekeepers.
Countries emerging out of conflict usually face
a legacy of widespread and systematic human rights
abuses and grievances that, if unaddressed, may
reignite the cycle of violence. A well-functioning
and credible police force is a key element in building
security and lasting peace in a post-conflict setting.
Often, however, law-enforcement services have to
incorporate elements that participated in the conflict.
That can easily undercut a population’s trust in justice,
especially if they see their former abusers in uniform.
Therefore, the stringent vetting of personnel, the
establishment of internal accountability mechanisms
and training on human rights and gender awareness are
essential and have been supported by United Nations
peacekeeping and special political missions within the
framework of rule-of-law mandates.
Accountability for crimes against humanity,
genocide and war crimes is key to progress on the
path of reconciliation and peace. It is the primary
responsibility of national justice systems to investigate
and prosecute such crimes.
United Nations missions play an important role
in supporting the efforts of national authorities,
through assistance in the establishment of truth and
reconciliation commissions as well as transitional
justice mechanisms, the development of investigative
capacities, and the reform of legal and judicial
institutions.
However, where national judicial systems fail
to tackle impunity for the most serious crimes of
international concern, the Security Council should
be ready to use the full range of tools at its disposal,
including targeted sanctions and referrals to the

4/85

19/02/2014

International Criminal Court (ICC). As a founding
member of the ICC, Lithuania would welcome the
development of a more consistent framework for
referrals to the Court.
Discrimination, oppression, exclusion, lingering
grievances, unresolved disputes, abuses of power and
a deficit of democratic governance — all of this, if
unaddressed, will, sooner or later, erupt into violence
and conflict. We see this all over the world, and sadly
close to home, in the middle of Europe today. Ukraine is
burning with protests. Clashes between the Government
and protesters have led to injuries and deaths. We must
use all means at our disposal to stop the bloodshed
immediately and to hold the perpetrators to account.
Restoring the rule of law is essential to beginning a
genuine dialogue on constitutional reform, an inclusive
Government and preventing further violence.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to members of the Council.
Mr. Moreno Charme (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like at the outset to thank Lithuania for having
taken the initiative of convening this open debate on the
promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The rule of law is the basic guarantee of very
society, protecting the right of each citizen to exercise
his or her rights responsibly. In addition, it is a limit to
arbitrariness, both in relations between the State and
individuals as well as in relations among States.
Multilateral action in this area in linked to the duty
to cooperate. That is why Chile has contributed to all
United Nations efforts to achieve universal acceptance
of the rule of law, which is a topic of legitimate
interest to the international community. That was the
meaning of the commitments of the Heads of State and
Government made in 2005 and the 2012 Declaration of
the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on the
Rule of Law at the National and International Levels
(General Assembly resolution 67/1).
Chile is convinced that the rule of law should be at
the centre of the post-2015 development agenda.
The rule of law, human rights and democracy
are fundamental United Nations values that are
mutually reinforcing and form an indivisible whole.
Internationally, the rule of law is founded on the

14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

Charter of the United Nations, as demonstrated by the
fact that by virtue of its Article 103, the Charter takes
precedence over other agreements of Member States.
The linkage between the rule of law and the
maintenance of international peace and security
is today indisputable. That is evident from the
increasingly important role of the rule of law in the
multidimensional mandates of peacekeeping missions
and operations, designed to facilitate the creation
or reconstruction of the public institutions of a State
emerging from conflict, particularly in the areas of
justice, policing and the prison system and, of course,
support for constitutional and legislative reforms.
This issue arises regularly in the Security Council,
be it in the framing of mandates, at the stage of practical
implementation or at the stage of lessons learned.
However, the ultimate goal is usually the same: to help
to create the conditions for sustainable peace in order to
prevent the country from reverting to a state of conflict.
Here the United Nations plays a role of facilitation
and accompaniment rather than that of a stand-in for
the parties. In addition, mandates with rule-of-law
elements must adopt a comprehensive and systematic
approach. In that connection, I should like to share
some brief thoughts with the Council.
First, mandates must respect the principle of
national ownership. In other words, States and their
societies must lead their own peacebuilding processes,
with the assistance of the international community and
of the United Nations. Accordingly, mandates must
respond to local needs. It is the local situation that must
determine the content of the mandate, rather than vice
versa. There is no one size fits all in this connection.
Mandates must be clear and precise not only with respect
to the goals sought but also to means of attaining them
and obtaining the resources to do so.
One particularly important aspect is the
strengthening of the judicial system, especially in
societies that are going to apply transitional justice in
the post-conflict period. Chile also emphasizes here the
importance of reparations for the victims of violence
and violations and abuses of human rights. Reparations
promote the healing process and the reconciliation of
society.
Mandates must also facilitate accountability,
either before national courts or before the International
Criminal Court, in accordance with the principle
of complementarity, The Security Council must

S/PV.7113

actively follow up the cases examined and refer to the
International Criminal Court cases of genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity. Chile believes
that this is an effective way of helping to end impunity
for such atrocities.
Similarly, where appropriate, programmes should
include the concept of the responsibility to protect in its
preventive aspect, in other words, in its first and second
pillars. Mandates on the rule of law must address the
gender issues that arise and ensure adequate legal
protection for children in armed conflict. It is also
important to consider greater involvement on the part
of regional organizations in this exercise, in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the Charter. The physical
proximity of such organizations to the countries in
question and the community of cultural, historical and
political ties give these bodies considerable legitimacy
as an instrument. The goal is thus to incorporate the
regional dimension of the rule of law and to make the
most of obvious comparative advantages.
The United Nations system as a whole should involve
itself in those processes in a coordinated and coherent
manner, avoiding potential duplications. We welcome
the progress made here regarding coordination.
Lastly, we would simply like to add that we
appreciate the efforts made by the Secretary-General to
mainstream the rule-of-law perspective in the work of
the United Nations, and we encourage the Organization
to continue working to establish indicators and to
measure the progress made as regards the rule of law.
Probably the greatest practical challenge facing us
today is the need to develop the ability to evaluate the
rule of law as incorporated in mandates.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I wish to thank you, Sir,
for having convened this debate and for presiding over it
personally today. We also thank the Secretary-General
for updating us on the recent steps taken to improve the
Secretariat’s capacity to deliver the Council’s rule-oflaw mandates.
Strengthening the rule of law, as the SecretaryGeneral has reminded us this morning, is a critical pillar,
as we know, of both conflict prevention and effective
post-conflict peacebuilding that makes this, as he has
said, core business for the Council and for Councilmandated peace operations. Successful rule-of-law
interventions can significantly reduce the likelihood of
conflict occurring or recurring. It is therefore essential
that the Council provide United Nations peacekeeping

14-238905/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

and special political missions with sufficient authority,
clarity and direction to carry out well-targeted and
achievable rule-of-law mandates. Their implementation
needs to be appropriately prioritized within a mission.
While the first priority must be the immediate
stabilization of a given security situation, planning for
the implementation of rule-of-law tasks needs to start
immediately.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s advice
about the institutional changes within the United
Nations to address rule- of-law issues. The conferral
of strengthened responsibility on the senior United
Nations official in country, who will now be
responsible and accountable for guiding the rule-oflaw strategy and supporting its implementation, is an
important advance. We also welcome the designation
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
United Nations Development Programme as the joint
global focal point for the rule of law, which we trust
will result in improved coordination and coherence of
the United Nations rule-of-law efforts.
For all aspects of peacekeeping mandates and
special political missions, including the rule of law,
it is essential, as we know, to learn from both success
and failure. In developing and reviewing rule-oflaw mandates, the Council needs to be informed by
a clear understanding of what works and what does
not work. While we welcome the Secretary-General’s
recent report on measuring the effectiveness of the
support provided by the United Nations system in
conflict and post-conflict situations in respect of the
rule of law (S/2013/341), it is clear from the report’s
recommendations that there is still some way to go.
Qualitative assessments of the impact of the United
Nations interventions are required. It is not a simple
question of the number of police officers trained or
workshops held. We support the United Nations use of
the rule-of-law indicators in that regard.
At the national level, the rule of law is at the heart
of the social contract between the State and its citizens.
Ensuring that justice permeates society at every level
and that Governments are accountable, it underpins
stability and effective State protection and ensures
human rights are protected.
Supporting the development of police, corrections,
prosecutorial and judicial capacities that enable the
investigation and prosecution of crimes — and here
I am referring to national law and translating that
into international practice and prosecuted — is a
6/85

19/02/2014

core mandate for many United Nations missions. A
recent positive development was the authorization of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali to use all the necessary
means to support the efforts of the transitional
authorities in Mali to bring to justice those responsible
for serious international crimes, taking into account the
jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
The Council similarly encouraged the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to use its existing authority to
assist the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to hold accountable those responsible war
crimes and crimes against humanity in the country,
including through its ongoing cooperation with the ICC.
The Council should consider whether similar
mandates should be given to other peacekeeping
operations. Such an approach could be part of the
broader support from the Council to the International
Criminal Court. The Court is an essential partner for
the Council on rule-of-law matters, and the Council
needs to do more to support its work.
Finally, I shall make some comment on policing.
The police components of United Nations peacekeeping
operations need closer attention. United Nations police
strengthen the rule of law in conflict and post-conflict
situations, both where they provide interim policing
and through assistance to reform and rebuild national
police and other law enforcement agencies. Given
the breadth and complexity of policing roles, there
is further scope for the Council to provide greater
strategic direction in mandates to effectively guide
police components and mission management. At an
operational level, predeployment training on cultural
issues enables deployed police to better relate to their
host-nation counterparts. The United Nations Police
Division is doing important work on mission-specific
induction training. The recent pilot effort in the United
Nations Mission in Liberia sets a strong example.
I should say, as I approach the end of my statement,
that we hope that we will be able to successfully
finalize our negotiations to adopt a presidential text on
the rule of law. We have done so before, and we must
do so again.
Successfully strengthening the rule of law within a
country requires long-term engagement. It is important,
therefore, that from the very outset of planning the
rule-of-law component of a United Nations mission,
there also needs to be consideration of the transition
14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

of rule-of-law functions from the United Nations peace
operation to the national authorities. Robust institutions
must stand on their own foundations — that will be the
true measure of our success.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): Thank you,
Sir, for convening this debate.
France aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.
I would like to focus on three aspects.
The first is the exemplary nature of peacekeeping
operations and more broadly of the Organization in
the field of the rule of law. For United Nations action
to be legitimate and effective, it must be based on
the principles of transparency, respect for rights and
accountability. In that regard, France welcomes the
Secretary-General’s policies in those areas, including
the zero-tolerance policy for sexual abuse, the due
diligence policy on human rights, the screening policy
and the guidelines on limiting contacts with persons
subject to arrest warrants from the International
Criminal Court.
All staff of the Organization at all levels must
be aware of those rules. The United Nations cannot
provide support in the field of security to entities that
do not respect human rights or that recruit children. The
United Nations cannot deal with criminals as part of
its normal activities. The Office of Legal Affairs is the
guarantor of the proper application of those guidelines,
and we welcome once again the rigour of the services of
the Legal Adviser. We must be beyond reproach.
Secondly, I turn to the appropriateness of the
mandates of peacekeeping operations and special
political missions to the needs on the ground with
regard to the rule of law. Faced with conflict situations,
when the States concerned are weak or have even failed,
the Council has, over the years, identified several
key areas for action: support for the criminal justice
process, an independent judiciary, the prison system,
comprehensive security-sector reform, institutional
strengthening and support for international criminal
justice.
The Council has therefore specified in mandates
for several peacekeeping operations the contribution
that Blue Helmets can make to the fight against
impunity for the perpetrators of genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes. We have given them
mandates to assist national authorities to cooperate

S/PV.7113

with the International Criminal Court. The role of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali in supporting national authorities
should be highlighted in that respect.
If people still doubt that all the tasks I have
listed must be an integral part of the maintenance of
international peace and security, they need only look
at the Central African Republic. In that country, to
date — thanks to the work of the African forces with the
support of France — large-scale massacres have been
avoided. However, we are facing a general situation
of insecurity as a result of the collapse of the Central
African State. It is therefore essential, in parallel with
action on security, to act now to get the institutions
back on track and restore State authority. To do that,
it is crucial to ensure that officials are paid as soon as
possible, which will get the police, gendarmerie, courts
and detention centres back up and running. We must
also continue working towards the objective of holding
elections no later than February 2015.
The United Nations has an indispensable role
to play in those priority areas, at present through the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
the Central African Republic and, as soon as possible,
through a peacekeeping operation. To get the State of the
Central African Republic functioning again and assist
it in establishing the rule of law, those projects need
resources. Members of the international community
must strengthen their mobilization.
My third point is adapting to cross-cutting threats.
In recent years, the Security Council has shown its
ability to adapt to new challenges. The support provided
to addressing judicial and prison aspects of the fight
against piracy off the coast of Somalia is an example.
Today, we must mobilize to build the capacity of the
States of the Sahel to fight drug-trafficking. France
again welcomes the United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel, which allows all actors of the system to
be brought together to work against the development
of a criminality that threatens the stability of the
States of the region. Significant efforts are also being
made to enable States to regain control over the trade
of natural resources for the benefit of their citizens.
The grip on such resources by armed groups fuels
conflicts and deprives States of income. Once again,
the maintenance of peace and nation-building are part
of the same reasoning.

14-238907/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

In that context, it is regrettable that the Council
has not yet mentioned in a statement or a resolution the
most expensive trafficking for the African continent
after drug trafficking, namely, wildlife trafficking. It
involves not only protecting threatened species, such
as elephants or rhinoceroses, but also dealing with
the issue from the aspect of organized crime. France
carefully follows the initiatives launched on that
topic at the United Nations, in particular by Gabon
and Germany, and we welcome the conference very
recently hosted by the United Kingdom. The Council
should address the issue.
Promoting the rule of law is part of the Organization’s
DNA. In 2012, the General Assembly devoted a highlevel declaration to it, enshrined in resolution 67/1.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and our
peacekeeping operations, missions and teams on the
ground devote a large part of their work and resources
to it.
We can certainly further improve the alignment
of such mandates with needs. In that regard, I am
thinking of South Sudan. We can certainly work more
on mobilizing civilian capacities and devote more
efforts to planning transitions between peacekeeping
operations and country teams. However, promoting the
rule of law is fundamental to our mandate. France will
continue to support that goal within the Council. Today,
the urgent need is in the Central African Republic.
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan): We
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this debate on
the promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in the
maintenance of international peace and security and for
the concept note setting out the terms of the discussion
(S/2014/75, annex). We thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing and for his report, entitled “Measuring
the effectiveness of the support provided by the United
Nations system for the promotion of the rule of law in
conflict and post-conflict situations” (S/2013/341). We
also support the issuance of a presidential statement
by the Council on this item, as well as the inclusion of
a reference in it to the International Criminal Court,
believing that for us not to do so, especially under this
item, will only be farcical.
Before my delegation offers some observations
on the Secretary-General’s report, I wish to conduct a
short retrospective on this item in general terms.

8/85

19/02/2014

I start by returning to the inaugural debate that
we had on this item in the Security Council on 24 and
30 September 2003 (see S/PV.4833 and S/PV.4835), three
years after the submission of the report of the Panel on
United Nations Peace Operations (S/2000/809), chaired
by Lakhdar Brahimi, in August 2000, and 11 years
after the United Nations Transitional Authority in
Cambodia had relaunched the United Nations into more
complex peacekeeping operations. Those 11 years were
characterized by much trial and error, for that decade
provided the United Nations with recurring and painful
examples of what happens when the rule of law is not
positioned high enough on the ladder of immediate
priorities. Each transitional administration established
in that period came to realize, perhaps what remains
the harshest and saddest lesson of war, that in war there
is a clear winner. It is, as it always has been, of course,
the war profiteer, namely, often transnational criminal
networks wielding immense power inside and beyond
post-conflict theatres once the cessation of hostilities
has taken effect.
Brahimi’s chief proposal in 2000, which triggered
our first rule-of-law discussion at the United
Nations (see S/PV.4220), centred on the need for
an interim or model criminal code in a transitional
administration — an idea that was not accepted at the
time in the General Assembly not because there was
insufficient appreciation by members over the need for
it, but because there was no agreement about whether
the Security Council or the General Assembly should
be the guide on such issues. Instead, the Secretariat,
acting on the General Assembly’s instruction, began
the slow march towards building some capacity within
it by creating the Criminal Law and Judiciary Advisory
Unit, staffed by two people, within the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO).
At that point, we had the first debate in the
Chamber, at the initiative of the United Kingdom. At
the time, I noted in our statement on 30 September
2003 (see S/PV.4835) that, ultimately, not only should
the Criminal Law and Judiciary Advisory Unit be
expanded but that, eventually, it should itself be a part
of a justice and rule of law division.
Where are we today? Reading the SecretaryGeneral’s report, it is clear that the rule of law, no
matter how exquisite the language of our presidential
statements or whatever we say in our declarations, is still
being underserved by us, the Member States. Because
we have long departed from the controlled discussion

14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

over the rule of law that we once had and, instead,
have chosen to expand it over 13 years to the extent
that it now covers every aspect of the legal universe,
the United Nations is left with no real clarity or any
strategic direction over it, let alone any thorough ability
to create baseline data and precise measurements of the
overall effectiveness. That is all evident from the report
itself.
It is true that we can celebrate joint visits by the
global focal point arrangement to five mission areas and
note that 336 Judicial Affairs Officers are deployed by
the Office of the Assistant Secretary-General for Rule
of Law and Security Institutions in 18 field operations,
acknowledging that many of them are outstanding
professionals. However, those Judicial Affairs
Officers are, in aggregate, still only less than 1 per
cent — actually far less than 1 per cent, 0.28 per cent
to be precise — of the total number of field personnel
deployed in the field operations led by DPKO and the
Department of Political Affairs. Because of us Member
States, their work is often haphazard and is not linear or
sequenced. And it falls well within the shadow of their
host country’s needs, which are, by contrast, vast and
almost beyond comprehension.
What we must therefore do, if we are indeed
serious about the rule of law, is to return to basics. We
need to once again ask ourselves: what are the top two
preconditions for the recovery of a war-torn society
given its realities? And what does the United Nations
need to do to realize those preconditions effectively?
We would submit, in answer to that, that when it
comes to post-conflict environments, the two most
fundamental preconditions for any international
endeavour to succeed in rehabilitating a largely
destroyed country or region are, first, the provision
of security, which we must undertake, and, secondly,
together with humanitarian support, the administration
of justice. All other development activity can wait for
subsequent stages, or best be left to others.
What we need immediately, therefore, in a postconflict environment are effective and fair criminal
and financial courts, which, given the often devastated
infrastructure of the host State, leaves us with no
realistic option, if we are to admit it openly, but for
the international community to manage the courts
themselves, with the United Nations itself imposing,
at the request of the host country, an adapted model
criminal code until the country in question can
regain its footing and itself take over the running and

S/PV.7113

management of such courts. The United Nations would
therefore need substantial capabilities and much greater
support than it has now.
Yet, almost 11 years after our first debate here,
notwithstanding the tremendous efforts of the
Secretary-General and the Deputy Secretary-General
to promote the rule of law — and we applaud them for
that — we still have no rule-of-law department or a
structure of a size that reflects the crucial importance
of this subject matter.
The global focal point, while a welcome attempt
to fuse the United Nations Development Programme
with DPKO, remains very small and not what we had
in mind many years ago. Incidentally, we are puzzled
as to why the Peacebuilding Support Office was never
included in that, at least insofar as the countries on its
agenda are concerned.
The Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group,
notwithstanding the outstanding leadership provided by
the Deputy Secretary-General in that regard, cannot, in
our opinion, be the best way to deal with the issue. The
very idea of first scattering the rule-of-law functions
among all the various funds, agencies and programmes,
which the United Nations consented to many years ago,
only for it to now feel crushed by the need to coordinate
all of that at the top, is unfortunate.
In essence, the United Nations created a problem
for itself so impossibly complicated that it had no prayer
of ever solving it. Better for us, therefore, to admit now
that the scattered approach, however brilliantly it may
be coordinated now, is a doomed proposition in the long
term.
I therefore conclude by repeating what Council
members said at the first debate here in 2003, namely,
that there has to be one address for the rule of law
in the form of a stand-alone department, of a size
commensurate with its overriding importance, where
all of the expertise and knowledge on the issue can
be housed under one United Nations roof, where we
will find not only experts in the promulgation of draft
constitutions and model criminal codes but also former
practitioners steeped in every aspect of the major
legal traditions, including common law, civil law and
mixed systems of law, as well as sharia law; experts in
criminal procedure and in the conduct of trials; experts
and investigators who have worked in financial courts;
experts in court management systems, in particular in
their design; experts in legal aid; and experts in judicial

14-238909/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

and prosecutorial reform — and all of that in addition
to all of the relevant expertise required in policing and
prison administration.
Only then will the United Nations have a capability
that can meet both the demands of the Council in respect
of the rule of law and the expectations of the host and
requesting countries, which so desperately need it.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation would like to thank the Lithuanian
presidency of the Security Council for convening this
important open debate. It is our pleasure to see you
again, Minister Linkevičius, presiding over a meeting
of the Council, and we look forward to the participation
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the sisterly
Republic of Chile. We also thank the Secretary-General
for introducing his report (S/2013/341). Allow me to
respectfully note the presence of Deputy SecretaryGeneral Eliasson. Rights are, first and foremost, key to
achieving the goals underscoring this debate.
The Security Council has recognized the importance
of the rule of law in ensuring legitimate institutions and
in matters of international peace and security, as has
the Organization as a whole, particularly the General
Assembly in its adoption of the High-level Declaration
of 24 September 2012 (General Assembly resolution
67/1). Yet no clear answers have come to light, only
profound questions.
How can the Council and the Organization ensure
the rule of law in conflict or post-conflict societies or
in communities experiencing poverty and instability as
the result of massacres and violence that have wounded,
humiliated and killed people? How can we promote
and strengthen the rule of law at a time of unequal
sovereignty, as seen today? At a time of increasing
interdependence, enormous transfers of power from
State to non-State entities have led to lawless and
weakened State institutions, affecting the basic
principles of peace, security and fundamental rights.
It is therefore our challenge and responsibility to
strengthen international institutions to safeguard peace
and security. That involves the legitimate and peaceful
resolution of disputes, including regulating trade and
promoting, protecting and guaranteeing human rights
and the fundamental rights of all, as well as sovereignty
over water, air, soil, mineral and energy and agricultural
resources.
How can we ensure that efforts to establish the
rule of law and democracy also address human rights
10/85

19/02/2014

violations in terms of current norms and that crimes
against humanity will not go unpunished? We must
ensure that social progress overcomes criminal terrorism
and the criminal authoritarian powers and terrorist and
mafia groups, and that massacres and indiscriminate
attacks against civilians, ethnic cleansing, forced
disappearances, extrajudicial executions, violence
against women, torture, illegal detentions, arms
trafficking, violations of the rights of children, drugs
and human trafficking and the so-called “gulags” of
our time will be overcome, leading to a life of dignity
and freedom for peoples and individuals.
Argentina is convinced that such atrocities
proliferate because, in the face of those atrocious
crimes, impunity remains an unwritten rule. Impunity
is the so-called other face of human rights and the rule
of law that is seen in most parts of the international
community, particularly among the most powerful. In
that context, it is exactly in conflict and post-conflict
situations that it becomes urgently necessary to ensure
that impunity is not allowed to prevail. That is why it
is important to establish an independent judicial power
and police and prison systems that adhere to the norms
of human rights law.
Commissions of inquiry, whether national or
international, play a fundamental role. Argentina
welcomes the fact that the Council has expressed its
willingness to refer situations to the International FactFinding Commission established by the first Protocol
additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August
1949.
Some national justice systems include referral to the
International Criminal Court (ICC) by the Council or
by States members themselves. In that respect, United
Nations operations and missions play an important
role in strengthening efforts of States and the ICC.
Particularly relevant in that regard are the SecretaryGeneral’s guidance on contacts with persons who are
the subject of arrest warrants or summonses issued by
the ICC.
Sometimes we encounter catastrophic news
headlines regarding our countries of the South.
A few days ago, there was a discussion about an
abysmal situation in my country. I am referring to a
specific matter. On Monday it was reported that in my
province, Mendoza, in 2013, certain unconstitutional
laws involving impunity were repealed based on a
noteworthy case from the province. Forty-one people
were charged with committing more than 200 crimes
14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

against humanity. The accused were not only police,
military and prison staff, but also judges and public
prosecutors and defenders. They had refused to listen
to the victims; they had refused to carry out justice.
That is why I say that sometimes the measures of
the levels of civilization or barbarity that continue to
be used to describe or to rank countries, as mentioned
in the report, cannot be used in decisions regarding
peacekeeping operations or special political missions.
We want countries to be treated equally in matters
of human rights and democracy and in matters
involving strict respect for human rights. Argentina
has not invented anything new in that regard. We are
simply stating that which is contained the “Declaration
of the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly
on the Rule of Law at the National and International
Levels”, namely,
“that the rule of law and development are strongly
interrelated and mutually reinforcing, that the
advancement of the rule of law at the national
and international levels is essential for sustained
and inclusive economic growth, sustainable
development, the eradication of poverty and
hunger and the full realization of all human rights
and fundamental freedoms, including the right to
development, all of which in turn reinforce the rule
of law”. (General Assembly resolution 67/1, para. 7)
In conclusion, I believe that Council members
are aware that the Organization is experiencing a
crucial moment. It is the era between the Millennium
Development Goals and the sustainable development
goals. Let us therefore set the goal of achieving the
reality of the Charter of the United Nations.
Truly, scandalous inequality must end. Although it
is not reflected in international treaties, we can ensure
peace and security only through international social
policies based on human rights, rather than relying
solely on aid. To achieve that, the commitment of the
international community is essential. Inequality in
access to rights must be eliminated. In other words,
we need to deal with the various forms of insecurity. If
insecurity grows, there will not be lasting peace.
In conclusion, I would like to stress the need to
free ourselves from the yoke of uniformity, the unjust
predominance of categorization and the authoritarian
trap of imposing a one-size-fits-all criterion on
countries. That is why Argentina, like the SecretaryGeneral in his report, feels that it would be useful to

S/PV.7113

have a method by which Member States, together with
the Organization, could assess the impact of activities
in the area of the rule of law. Those basic guidelines
should be universal with regard to human rights, but
matters should be put in context and be very specific,
so as to be able to take into account the multiplicity and
diversity of our worlds, our potentials, our differences
and our respective dignities. Therefore, the issue is not
about trying to build the rule of law so as to impose
homogeneity or to manipulate States with one single
model for a State. What we need to do is to listen,
consider, understand, feel, include and express through
our work the concerns and the life plans and social
contracts of various peoples, not just democracy. We
must also think about a rule of law that is legitimate,
realistic and effective.
We need to recognize that the strengthening of the
rule of law at the national level goes a lot further than
the mandates of peacekeeping operations and special
political missions. Together with national ownership,
Argentina firmly believes in the validity of regional
mechanisms that are democratic, such as the kind we
have seen in Latin America and the Caribbean. This
debate reaffirms something we sometimes tend to
forget, namely, that the elements that underpin the
Declaration of the High-level Meeting of the General
Assembly are all interlinked: human rights, the rule of
law and democracy.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate on the
promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in the
maintenance of international peace and security. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing, as well as all those who spoke before me for
their valuable contributions.
Chad welcomes the growing number of Security
Council initiatives to hold such important debates as the
meeting this morning, with the adoption of important
presidential statements as well. The work done in this
field by the Secretary-General and the increasing
efforts of the Secretary-General in implementing and
following up on the conclusions of those initiatives
demonstrates the relevance of the subjects addressed
and the convergence of views within the international
community with regard to the need for continued
deliberations in order to reach the goals we have set out.
One of the consequences of war, as we know, is
the obliteration of the rule of law, because, during war
or following war, State institutions and laws are sorely

14-2389011/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

tested. The judiciary no longer plays its traditional
role as arbiter, adjuster or controller of the law. In the
wake of that situation, impunity and disorder take root
at all levels. Security can no longer be guaranteed,
because the forces usually responsible for maintaining
public order are inoperative. Violence against women,
children and other vulnerable persons assumes an
extraordinary scale. In sum, the State in all its forms
is shattered. There are ample examples throughout
the world, particularly in Africa and the Middle East,
where public opinion is dominated by the quest for
peace and security, the restoration of State authority,
the fight against impunity and the reorganization of the
army and security service and so on.
The widespread United Nations missions and
offices and deployments of regional forces — African
and European — in Mali, the Central African Republic,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia,
Darfur, South Sudan and Yemen, for example, all show
the concern of the international community to address
the gravity of those situations. Commendable efforts
continue to be made to address them. In that context,
the rule of law remains a long-standing quest, because
the very foundations of the State must be rebuilt. Some
countries, although they may not have experienced war,
may still be fragile States, owing to social, cultural and
historical legacies, but above all, perhaps, because of
poor governance, which explains the poor performance
of their institutions.
The solutions advocated to promote and bolster
the rule of law, including reinforcing or re-establishing
national legislation and institutions, and the training
and establishment of transitional justice, are, of
course, effective. However, they must be supported by
commensurate efforts to combat poverty and illiteracy.
Establishing democracy and good governance in States
can be the best way to ensure the strengthening or
restoration of the rule of law, because in a democratic
State there is no place for injustice, corruption and
human rights violations. Impunity is the primary
source of crime in most countries, and countries must
mercilessly combat crime with the appropriate means.
At the national level, the involvement of civil society
and religious and traditional leaders in prevention and
conflict-resolution mechanisms is increasingly being
encouraged, as is the case in Chad and, more recently,
in the Central African Republic and Mali.
The Declaration of the High-Level Meeting of the
General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the National

12/85

19/02/2014

and International Levels (General Assembly resolution
67/1) established a close linkage between the rule of
law and the three pillars of the United Nations, namely,
peace and security, human rights and development.
That makes it possible for United Nations efforts to take
concrete form, not only in the area of human rights but
also with respect to women and children, international
justice, the limitation of small arms and light weapons
and other actions, such as combating corruption and
international crime and access to genetic resources.
Those are all aspects of the rule of law.
It is important to underscore that the question of
international justice is rightfully within the framework
of international law issues. Combating impunity
at the national level should be supplemented by
increased efforts to combat that phenomenon at the
international level. That requires reaffirming the role
of international criminal justice by guaranteeing that
it has the necessary resources to discharge its duty.
Terrorism and international crime must be combated
by the United Nations in close cooperation with States
and international organizations.
The efforts being made by the States of the Sahel
to pool their resources to combat terrorism, as part of
the Nouakchott process, with the recent establishment
by the group of five of the Sahel — Burkina Faso,
Mali, Mauritania, the Niger and Chad — deserves to
be welcomed and supported by the entire international
community, given the scale of the threats to which
our people are exposed as a result of the terrorists and
narcotraffickers who are pillaging the region.
In conclusion, strengthening the rule of law at
the international level should be based on a holistic
strategy that is clear and precise, involving regional
and subregional entities. That strategy must include
conflict-prevention mechanisms, a prohibition on small
arms, the strengthening of the fight against impunity
through legal cooperation, and the strengthening of
national and international tribunals.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, for your presence here today and for
organizing this debate on the vitally important issue of
the rule of law. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his valuable comments.
Respect for the rule of law is critical for the
establishment of stable, secure and democratic postconflict societies, but it takes hard work, sustained over
a long period of time, to build a culture of respect for

14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

the rule of law in a post-conflict context, and it takes
the support of the international community. As a result,
it is important for us to consider what tools the United
Nations can use to help foster the rule of law in nations
emerging from conflict.
In the wake of conflict, United Nations involvement
often comes in the form of peacekeeping operations,
and peacekeeping operations are particularly well
positioned to spearhead the strengthening of rule-oflaw institutions. Peacekeeping missions should always
include rule-of-law experts who can serve on the
front lines of efforts to support national justice and
accountability.
For example, the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) assisted the Government
after conflict in restoring a civilian policing presence
throughout the country and restructuring the internal
security services. It also supported the Ministry of
the Interior and Security in developing draft laws and
regulations on the organizational structure, jurisdiction
and functioning of the national police. As part of that,
with the United Nations country team, UNOCI provided
training to some 500 members of the national security
forces on the protection of civilians. Meanwhile, in
Haiti, the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti’s investment in the Haitian National Police as
part of a broad effort to promote the rule of law has
reduced Haiti’s reliance on international military forces
to provide day-to-day security.
Against that backdrop, peacekeeping missions can
also play an important role in supporting national and
international efforts to bring to justice those responsible
for war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide,
including through support for the apprehension of
fugitives.
In addition to peacekeeping, United Nations
development programmes have made significant
contributions to the rule of law. For example, the
United Nations Development Programme rule of law
programme in Darfur raises awareness of human
rights and the rule of law. It works with local leaders,
organizations and authorities to help end violations
of international human rights law. The goal is both to
restore people’s confidence in rule-of-law institutions
and to gradually build a culture of rule of law and justice
in the region. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the United Nations has assisted in the establishment
of mobile courts that have helped the country’s justice

S/PV.7113

system tackle the challenge of sexual and gender-based
violence in the conflict-ridden east.
While it is important to consider the individual
tools that are available, it is also important that the
United Nations rule-of-law activities take a holistic,
integrated and balanced approach. The SecretaryGeneral’s institutional reforms in that respect are
especially welcome. The strategic role of the Rule of
Law Coordination and Resource Group, chaired by
the Deputy Secretary-General, and the United Nations
global focal point arrangement on the rule of law, where
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations works
with the United Nations Development Programme,
could help enhance coordination and lead to concrete
results on the ground. We are encouraged that those
United Nations entities are joining forces to develop
and implement common police, justice and corrections
programmes. We hope that those efforts will remove
the disconnect that sometimes exists between New
York and the field. In that context, we understand that
the global focal point is now coordinating on rule-oflaw issues in Mali, and we look forward to the outcome
of that work.
Ultimately, national ownership is essential in
successfully advancing the rule of law. Governments at
all levels must buy into the core tenets of the rule of law.
That includes the central principle that Governments
are accountable to the law and that no person is above
the law. Only through a commitment to the rule of
law at the highest levels can the rule of law permeate
through all levels of society.
Let me reiterate that we strongly support the United
Nations doing its part in promoting the rule of law and
encourage it to foster a culture of accountability in all
of its work.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by commending the Lithuanian presidency
of the Security Council for having convened this open
debate on the promotion and strengthening of the rule
of law in the maintenance of international peace and
security, a topic that is particularly close to our heart.
I also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and
his report (S/2013/341) on measuring the effectiveness
of the support provided by the United Nations system
for the promotion of the rule of law in conflict and postconflict situations.
I fully agree with the statement to be made by the
observer of the European Union.

14-2389013/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

We welcome the fact that the Security Council has
repeatedly made the issue of the rule of law the theme
of its debates. Today, it is widely accepted that the
restoration of the rule of law in post-conflict societies
is a crucial element to prevent the resurgence of
conflict. National reconciliation and transitional justice
are closely linked to that. Since the adoption in 1993
by the General Assembly of the first resolution on the
rule of law (resolution 48/132), the concept of the rule
of law has been established as the essential element of
any system of governance based on democratic values​​
and the primacy of the law, whether at the national or
international level.
The work of the United Nations to promote the rule
of law is essential to international peace and security.
During conflicts and afterwards, it is important to help
countries restore the rule of law by ensuring respect
for the principle of accountability, providing assistance
to victims, improving the normative framework for
transitional justice and restoring citizens’ confidence
in their legal institutions and security bodies.
The 2012 Declaration of the High-level Meeting
of the General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the
National and International Levels (General Assembly
resolution 67/1) rightly emphasized the need to help
countries develop more effective civilian capacities and
strengthen their institutions in the aftermath of conflict,
including through peacekeeping and peacebuilding
missions. Given the scope of the undertaking, it is
important that the Organization plan its missions
through a coordinated and strategic approach. In
that regard, we welcome the appointment of a global
focal point that links the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the United Nations Development
Programme in overseeing the areas of the police,
justice and prison systems and the empowerment of
those working in the field.
The Council also has an active role in promoting
the rule of law. As the Secretary-General recalled
this morning, currently 18 of the 28 United Nations
missions are mandated to promote the rule of law. The
most recent case is the mission in the Central African
Republic. By adopting resolution 2134 (2014), we
also strengthened the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African
Republic in its support for the strengthening of the rule
of law.
The belief that crime will not go unpunished is an
integral part of the very notion of justice. Therefore,
14/85

19/02/2014

there can be no amnesty for perpetrators of the most
serious crimes, namely, genocide, crimes against
humanity, war crimes and crimes of aggression. The
establishment of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
is a result of such thinking, and it has strengthened the
fight against impunity for those crimes as well as the
credibility of the rule of law.
As we have noted many times before in the Council,
the roles of the Security Council and the International
Criminal Court are also complementary, insofar as
the two institutions are working for peace and justice.
Resolution 2100 (2013), on Mali, therefore mandates
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali to contribute to the
work of the Malian authorities to bring to justice the
perpetrators of war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed in Mali, taking into account the fact that
they have referred the situation in their country to
the ICC. That example clearly illustrates the support
that United Nations missions can provide national and
international justice.
I should like to stress in this context the importance
of the Secretariat’s fully applying, including for current
operations on the ground, the guidelines that exist with
regard to relations between United Nations officials
and those subject to an arrest warrant or called upon to
appear before the International Criminal Court.
The report of the Secretary-General quite rightly
stresses that the strengthening of national capacities
in the area of collecting, verifying and analysing data
should be an integral part of the design of projects and
programmes, in order to strengthen cooperation in the
area of analysing the results. I welcome the elaboration
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
High Commissioner for Human Rights of a number of
benchmarks for the rule of law that make it possible to
assess progress in conflict and post-conflict situations.
We are particularly pleased to hear that this project,
which Luxembourg actively supports, has already
proved worthwhile in Haiti, Liberia and South Sudan. In
order to best promote the rule of law, the effectiveness
of institutions must be judged according to empirical
criteria.
Allow me to conclude by stating the importance
of taking into account the protection of children in
the promotion and strengthening of the rule of law.
Children are very often the first victims of conflicts,
and sometimes they are even forced to become
combatants. They therefore have very specific needs
14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

that must be taken into account in conflict and postconflict situations, including in the framework of
programmes relating to disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration; security-sector reform; and
transitional justice.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, allow me to thank the Lithuanian
presidency for holding today’s meeting. We are grateful
to the Secretary-General for his participation in the
meeting and for his comprehensive briefing.
The Russian Federation is firmly committed to the
rule of law at the national and international levels. We
believe that the primary focus for the United Nations
should be on the maintenance of the rule of law at
the international level, incorporating the Security
Council’s primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security.
We see that there is great potential for improving
the situation in terms of ensuring strict compliance by
Member States with their international obligations and
resolving international disputes by peaceful means.
Evidence that problems exist in the area of the rule of
law at the international level can be seen, for example, in
the continuing attempts to use force or the threat of the
use of force at the international level, in circumvention
of the Charter of the United Nations, and in attempts
to interfere in the internal affairs of States involved in
complex internal political processes.
The rule of law is of fundamental importance
for peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities. Many
United Nations operations and special political missions
are being deployed in States that are far from having
overcome their internal political crises, and United
Nations missions are forced to assume those functions
that States are unable to fulfil fully in the immediate
aftermath of the hot phase of a conflict.
The Security Council, in responding to changing
international realities, is giving those missions more
integrated mandates that include peacebuilding
components,
namely,
security-sector
reform;
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration; and
support for the restoration of the rule of law. We are
convinced that mandates, despite their multifaceted
nature, should be as clear and as achieveable as possible
in the field and encompass those tasks that must be
addressed to overcome the causes of conflict and to
meet the real needs of specific post-conflict States.

S/PV.7113

The main objective of peacebuilding is to eradicate
the root causes of conflict in order to prevent them from
recurring. That is primarily an internal State process
in which the United Nations and regional organizations
are given the role of supporting national efforts. In the
process of the provision of support, it is imperative to
abide by the principles of respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of post-conflict States and to
recognize national responsibility for peacebuilding.
The focus should be on developing balanced legal
mechanisms for reconciliation and integration in conflict
and post-conflict societies, based on a well-thought-out
and pragmatic approach. The Organization’s efforts
in the area of constitution-building and strengthening
justice and governance institutions must unconditionally
include the principle of non-interference in States’
internal affairs.
It is also important to take account of political,
historical, legal, cultural, religious and other
specificities and to avoid the introduction of elements
unsuited to local circumstances.
In the rule-of-law activities of the United Nations,
there is an increasing focus not on the international but
the national aspect of the rule of law. We are concerned
in that context by rule-of-law policy dimensions in
different countries that are based on single indicators
that were not previously agreed with States.
Mention has already been made of the fact that
this methodology is being used not only in postconflict peacebuilding settings but in other spheres, in
particular in the context of preparing for the post-2015
development agenda. We do not believe that the rule
of law can be measured in this way. The unique and
diverse nature of national rule-of-law models makes
it impossible to develop a single measurement for all.
Given the importance and sensitivity of this issue,
States should be included in work on the rule of law at
all stages of project development and implementation.
It is States that should determine the strategic areas of
work in this field. Only on that basis will it be possible in
principle to use the expert capacity of civil society. We
call on the Secretariat to ensure that work in this area
is carried out with full transparency and accountability.
In the light of the Secretariat’s institutional reforms
and the importance of this area, we think that it would be
useful to conduct a comprehensive external assessment
of the effectiveness of the work of the existing United

14-2389015/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

Nations rule-of-law mechanisms in order to optimize
their structures and functions.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I should like to
thank you, Sir, and the Lithuanian presidency for having
convened this important debate with the participation
of the wider membership. I also extend my appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his presentation, which
articulated many important aspects that will help us
focus on the topic.
The Republic of Korea reiterates its commitment to
an international order based on a global legal framework
and the rule of law with the United Nations at its centre.
The strengthening of the rule of law contributes to the
promotion of human rights as well as sustainable peace
and development. Historically, their neglect has been
both a cause and a consequence of conflict. As clearly
stated in presidential statement S/PRST/2012/1,
“sustainable peace requires an integrated approach
based on coherence between political, security,
development, human rights, including gender
equality, and rule of law and justice activities”.
It is encouraging that the Security Council has been
making a growing contribution to the rule of law, with
18 current United Nations field missions already having
rule-of-law dimensions. Council-mandated tasks are
wide-ranging and include the drafting of constitutions
and legislative reform, the strengthening of institutions
and support to transitional justice processes.
We would also like to highlight the Council’s
continued commitment to improving the overall
effectiveness and efficiency of peacekeeping operations
by incorporating tasks related to the rule of law as
well as to the promotion of gender equality and the
empowerment of women.
Accountability is at the heart of the rule of law,
and combating impunity is a vital aspect of its effective
application. Following the blueprint established by
the post-war Nuremberg and Tokyo trials, in 1993 the
Council revived the concept of international criminal
justice. The Council established the International
Criminal Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and for
Rwanda, which served as a source of inspiration for
the establishment of the International Criminal Court.
We are pleased to note that this international criminal
justice system has made significant progress in the fight
against impunity. Perpetrators of serious international
humanitarian and human rights crimes must be held

16/85

19/02/2014

to account. Special consideration must also be given
to women, children and other vulnerable groups in
conflict and post-conflict situations.
The rule of law also has an important role to play
in the settlement of international disputes. Chapter VI
of the Charter of the United Nations details a number
of methods for that purpose. In particular, we note
that the 2012 Declaration of the High-level Meeting
of the General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the
National and International Levels (General Assembly
resolution 67/1) accurately reflects the basic principle
of the international community regarding Member
States seeking a peaceful solution of their own choice
to disputes, as stipulated in Article 33 of the Charter of
the United Nations.
We support the Secretary-General’s extensive
efforts to ensure greater coordination and coherence
in the United Nations rule-of-law activities in
conflict-affected societies. We welcome the enhanced
responsibility of those in the field, the increased
support at Headquarters and the designation of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and United
Nations Development Programme as the joint global
focal point that will play a Headquarters role. Given the
critical importance of coordination and coherence, we
call on all participating bodies to redouble their efforts
in that regard.
In conclusion, we reaffirm our commitment to
promoting the rule of law in all its dimensions. We will
strengthen our contribution to rule-of-law initiatives,
including by assisting in capacity-building for partner
countries around the world.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
commends Lithuania for its initiative in convening
this open debate on the rule of law. We welcome
Mr. Linkevičius, Lithuania’s Minister for Foreign
Affairs, to preside over today’s meeting. We listened
carefully to the briefing by Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon.
Building the rule of law is essential to achieving
and building peace in countries in conflict and postconflict situations. Strengthening the rule of law at the
international level is fundamental for the maintenance
of international peace and security and the promotion
of cooperation among States. It is also in the common
interests of all countries and those of the international
community. China would like to make the following
observations on the rule of law.

14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

First, all countries share the goal of achieving
the rule of law. Because of the differences in national
conditions and levels of development, there is no single
universal model for the rule of law for all. At the
national level, countries are entitled to independently
choose the paths towards the rule of law that suit their
national conditions. Countries with different rule-oflaw practices should learn from each other and seek
common development. To strengthen the rule of law at
the international level, it is necessary to strictly abide
by the norms of international law. In the conduct of
international affairs, it is critical to uphold the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
adhere to such important principles as the sovereign
equality of nations and non-interference in internal
affairs, reject power politics and aggression and honour
international obligations in good faith.
Secondly, the rule of law is an important guarantee
for friendly relations among nations as equals. The
Charter of the United Nations is the point of departure
for achieving the rule of law. The Charter and the basic
principles of international law it enshrines constitute
the core of the international legal order as well as the
foundation of the rule of law at the international level.
The purposes and principles of the Charter represent
the reflection of human society on war. It is imperative
that all countries uphold the authority of the Charter,
maintain the post-war international order and the
gains from the global anti-fascist war and deal with
international affairs in strict observance of the Charter
and the basic principles of international law. They must
strongly oppose any action contravening historical
justice, the human conscience and international norms.
Thirdly, the peaceful settlement of disputes is
a necessary component of the rule of law. Resolving
disputes through peaceful means represents the basic
principle of international law. It is inseparable from
building the rule of law at the international level. The
peaceful settlement of disputes and the non-use of
force are important components of the rule of law at the
international level and both constitute core principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and the foundation
of contemporary international law. They represent
international obligations that all countries should
honour. Charter VI of the Charter provides for various
means to resolve disputes peacefully. We support the
resolution of disputes through peaceful means, in
keeping with the Charter, and call on all countries to
respect each other’s legitimate rights to choose its own
means of peacefully settling disputes.

S/PV.7113

Fourthly, an integrated approach should be
taken to establishing the rule of law in countries in
conflict and post-conflict situations. To ensure the
effectiveness and sustainability of the rule of law in
such countries, it is critical to promote coordinated and
mutually reinforcing progress in the rule of law, the
political process, economic development and national
reconciliation. It is important to respect the sovereignty
of countries in conflict and post-conflict situations
and work to enhance their capacity in nation-building.
Efforts to strengthen the rule of law in such countries
should take into account the reality and the needs on
the ground, so that the building of the rule of law will
accord with their national condintions and needs.
Fifthly, it is important to properly handle the
relationship between keeping peace and seeking
judicial justice. Peace and justice are two worthy goals
pursued by humankind. They complement and reinforce
each other. Achieving judicial justice is not simply a
legal issue; it is closely linked to political, economic
and cultural factors. The pursuit of judicial justice
should be conducive to achieving reconciliation and
stability, rather than sacrificing the peace process and
undermining national reconciliation in the countries
concerned.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): Thank
you, Sir, for having organized and for presiding over
this important debate. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and the DeputySecretary-General for his presence today and his
personal leadership on this issue.
We strongly support the draft presidential statement
proposed by Lithuania and call on all Member States to
do likewise.
As we seek to prevent conflict, halt violence and
build lasting peace around the world, we must not
overlook the importance of justice, accountability
and the protection of human rights. Strengthening the
rule of law should be a core priority for the Council.
Equally, the United Nations should be at the forefront
of international efforts to support countries emerging
from conflict to improve their rule-of-law systems.
History has taught us that one cannot have lasting
peace without justice, accountability and reconciliation.
Popular uprisings around the world demonstrate that
nations cannot maintain lasting peace and prosperity
while denying their citizens basic rights and justice.
Effective, accountable and accessible security and

14-2389017/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

justice institutions protect individual rights and prevent
violent conflict.
Council-mandated missions working in coordination
with other parts of the United Nations system are critical
to strengthening national rule-of-law systems. For that
reason, the United Kingdom supports the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to strengthen the United Nations
institutional arrangements, in particular provisions
to empower field leaders and United Nations joint
work through a global focal point for police, justice
and corrections. We hope that those steps will make a
positive contribution to the quality of support delivered
to conflict-affected countries. We urge the SecretaryGeneral to continue to improve the Organization’s
ability to measure and to evaluate the effectiveness of
its support. We know that that is challenging, but the
United Nations must show evidence of the difference
that it makes on the ground in countries recovering
from conflict because, without such evidence, it risks
losing credibility in the eyes of those that it is trying
to help.
The United Kingdom is also playing its own part in
strengthening national rule-of-law systems in conflictaffected regions. This year, we will be the only Group
of 20 country to spend 0.7 per cent of our gross national
income on overseas aid, at least 30 per cent of which
will be spent in conflict-affected countries. We have
committed $84 million per year to helping improve
security and justice in 16 different countries, including
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Sierra
Leone. That will support a range of activities, including
facilitating access to security and justice for 10 million
women around the world.
Twenty years ago, impunity for war crimes was
the norm. We have worked hard to break that norm.
While there is still more work to do, in recent decades
we have entered a new age of accountability. We have
built the architecture of international justice so that
individuals responsible for appalling crimes have been
and are being prosecuted. There have been significant
advances in international law, such as defining gender
crimes and establishing that genocide can be committed
through rape and sexual violence. Efforts by some
Member States to oppose such gains are reprehensible
and must be resisted.
There must be no impunity for the most important
crimes. The perpetrators of crimes such as genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity must be held
accountable. The message of the past two decades is
18/85

19/02/2014

clear: those who commit heinous crimes will not rest
easily. International justice is patient and its reach is
long. There is no expiry date for such crimes. They will
be prosecuted.
The United Kingdom reiterates its call for States
to fully meet their obligations to the International
Criminal Court (ICC) — both those obligations that
fall to States parties to the Rome Statute and those
that follow from the decisions of the Council. We will
continue to use our voice in the Council to encourage
the effective follow-up of Council decisions with
respect to the ICC. We thank the United Nations for its
important contributions in the fight against impunity.
In particular, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
issuance of the latest guidance on contacts with
International Criminal Court indictees.
The United Kingdom is proud of its role in
strengthening the international rule of law. We are
engaged in all six existing international criminal
tribunals. We are the only permanent member to accept
the compulsory jurisdiction of the International Court
of Justice. We are one of only two permanent members
of the Security Council to have ratified the Rome Statute.
And we are steadfast supporters of the International
Criminal Court.
We must all use the Council’s authority to fight
impunity and help countries recovering from conflict
to rebuild their rule-of-law systems so that people
everywhere are safe and have access to the justice that
they so rightly deserve.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important open
debate on the rule of law. We believe that this debate
is a perfect continuation of the debate organized last
month by the Jordanian presidency on war, its lessons
and the search for a permanent peace (see S/PV.7105).
Indeed, there can be no permanent peace in countries
emerging from conflict without strong decisions, good
governance and the rule of law. I also thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his briefing and for his
tireless efforts in promoting the rule of law around the
world.
As the concept note for this debate (S/2014/75,
annex) highlights, many countries that have experienced
conflict face many challenges, including the potential
for a relapse into conflict. Once a country experiences
civil strife, it is prone to additional episodes of violence.
While there are many causes of that trend, the simple

14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

understanding is that either the arrangement in the
conflict settlement did not address the root causes of
the conflict or that post-conflict political institutions
are not able to meet the challenges of rebuilding the
society, including the establishment of effective
and functioning institutions and reconciliation and
accountability mechanisms.
Rwanda recognizes the importance of the rule
of law as a significant tool for conflict prevention,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding. We believe that
fighting impunity while strengthening national justice
mechanisms for the fair and full protection of all
promotes good governance, which mitigates conflict,
helps reduce the risk relapsing into further conflict and
creates the conditions conducive to development and
peace.
From our own experience since 1994, we can
testify that impunity is one of the factors that led to the
genocide and that, indeed, impunity breeds criminality.
As we commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the
1994 genocide against the Tutsis in Rwanda, I take
this opportunity to commend the countries that have
arrested and prosecuted perpetrators of that genocide.
We urge all States harbouring genocide suspects,
including leaders of the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda, to arrest, extradite or try such
suspects in their competent courts.
In Rwanda, the prevailing lawlessness, the collapse
of State institutions and anguish were among our
immediate challenges after the genocide. Mastering
those challenges was a good foundation for our
nation-building. We acted fast to put in place law and
order and provided venues for recourse, where both
the perpetrators and the victims felt safe and that were
credible for all to trust. Indeed, transitional justice
should be one of the key focuses in post-conflict
situations, in order both to confront and address the
culture of violence and impunity following mass
human rights violations and to begin a healing process
within the community through truth, reconciliation,
accountability and reparation.
When planning transitional justice institutions,
greater efforts should also be made to build the capacity
of a country’s justice system, which plays a crucial role
in post-conflict transitional justice. Governments that
function within a constitutional framework and that
allow the rule of law to flourish are much less likely
to face renewed violence in any form. A fair legal

S/PV.7113

framework that is backed by impartial enforcement
and promotes the equality of all before the law offers
combatants an alternative way out of war.
In post-conflict situations, rule-of-law reforms
have been characterized by a multiplicity of actors and
largely uncoordinated projects. While such multiplicity
is itself an advantage, we believe that better coordination
is needed if one is to achieve tangible results. For
Rwanda, as one of the “Delivering as one” pilot
countries, we can confirm that the coordination of all
activities of United Nations agencies and programmes
related to the rule of law generate more results with less
recources. We urge the United Nations Secretariat to go
beyond the pilot stage and to apply the One UN system
in all States Members of the United Nations.
Furthermore, as former Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), Rwanda also appreciates the
potential of the Commission to support peacebuilding
activities in the countries on its agenda. Given its
unique composition, its experience and its advisory role
to the Security Council, we believe that the United Nations
system should better coordinate with the PBC in order to
strengthen the rule of law in countries emerging from
conflict.
We support the strengthened leadership and the new
institutional arrangements in place for addressing the
challenges faced in strengthening the rule of law. We
note with satisfaction the designation of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the United Nations
Development Programme as a joint global focus point
for the police, justice and corrections areas in the rule of
law in post-conflict and other crisis situations. Rwanda
looks forward to strengthened collaboration with the
global focal point, not only as one of the leading troopand police-contributing countries but also as the current
Chair of the group of friends of corrections.
We commend the ongoing efforts to strengthen
national data collection and the country-level rule-oflaw assessments conducted jointly by United Nations
entities using an inter-disciplinary approach. However,
we are of the view that greater inclusion of concerned
Government institutions would add value, given that
such bodies better understand the local realities and
possess data that are inaccessible to development
partners.
In Rwanda, joint governance assessments
spearheaded by the Rwanda Government Board, the
United Nations Development Programme, the European

14-2389019/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

Union and many other development partners have been
conducted every two years since 2006. Their results are
credited with being accurate and objective. We think
that that is a best practice that can be applied by other
United Nations States Members.
Rwanda believes that the rule of law flourishes
or collapses at the national level. Let us all support
national institution-building, if we are to strengthen
the rule of law in Member States. In that respect, we do
not believe, as we have stated on many occasions in the
Council, that the International Criminal Court (ICC),
which is a politicized court that has so far exclusively
targeted Africans, could in any way contribute to the
rule of law in our countries. In any case, it is difficult
to argue that the ICC has strengthened the fight against
impunity for the most serious crimes, given that the
Court has issued only a single judgment in 12 years.
To conclude, let me stress the importance of
ensuring that international justice mechanisms are
not politicized, but are conducted in a businesslike, professional, impartial and fair manner, while
complementing national jurisdictions. That would
strengthen their credibility while at the same time
ensuring that the rule-of-law criterion is applied
equally to all States, as highlighted in the Declaration
of the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly of
24 September 2012 (General Assembly resolution 67/1).
Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): We commend your delegation,
Madam President, for its initiative in convening this
important debate to explore ways by which the rule
of law can be more effectively mainstreamed into
the maintenance of international peace and security.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his opening
remarks.
Respect for and observance of the rule of law is
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. It is
also a fundamental concern of both national and
international jurisprudence. The Security Council and
the wider United Nations system have had this cardinal
subject on their agendas for years, as illustrated by the
number of resolutions and presidential statements of
the Council, resolutions of the General Assembly and
the outcomes of high-level meetings, including the
Millennium Declaration and the 2005 World Summit
Outcome. Specifically, in September 2012, the General
Assembly adopted the Declaration of the High-level
Meeting of the General Assembly on the Rule of Law at
the National and International Levels. It is a landmark
document containing all of the essential elements of
20/85

19/02/2014

the rule of law at national and international levels. It
affirms that the rule of law applies to all States and to
international organizations and that
“respect for and promotion of the rule of law and
justice should guide all of their activities and accord
predictability and legitimacy to their actions”.
(General Assembly resolution 67/1, para. 2)
Nigeria believes that the Declaration, adopted
at the highest political level by Heads of State and
Government, should continue to serve as the core
values and principles of the rule of law. There should
be no derogation from them. They should not be applied
selectively, nor in a discriminatory manner. Nigeria
continues to support the observance of the rule of
law in all such human rights situations as have been
agreed to by all Member States, properly enunciated
in existing treatises and arrived at through inclusive
intergovernmental processes.
Issues pertaining to international peace and
security, peacekeeping operations, the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, women and peace and
security, children in armed conflict, terrorism and
transnational crimes, good governance, accountability,
impunity, democratic practice, security sector reform,
sexual violence in armed conflict and a host of
other subjects have intrinsic to them respect for and
observance of the rule of law. It is therefore an allencompassing topic with wide-ranging implications to
the work of the United Nations.
In the management of the transitional period in
the immediate aftermath of conflict, United Nations
operations in the countries concerned should be
given explicit mandates to support the rule-of-law
architecture of the host countries. They should assist in
building rule-of-law mechanisms that can enjoy public
confidence.
When necessary, it would be advisable to deploy
experts who would primarily provide technical
assistance in relevant fields, especially in the police and
the prosecutorial, judicial and corrections sectors. They
must be neutral, apolitical and responsive to national
requests and must always bear in mind the need for
national ownership of the mechanisms being instituted.
The training of national experts and institution­
building to support the rule of law at the national level
should follow in the wake of peacekeeping operations
in fragmented or weak States. Security sector reform
should aim to establish civilian oversight and control
14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

over the armed forces, the police and security agencies
in post-conflict societies.
It is necessary to adopt a comparative approach
to guiding efforts to build a strong rule-of-law
architecture. Governmental and non-governmental
sectors should both benefit from the process of building
national capacities. We believe that each country should
determine the focus of its national priorities regarding
activities that promote and support the rule of law.
During the transitional period, leaders and Government
officials should exercise their authority under the law as
they manage the human, material and natural resources
at their disposal.
Evidence shows that the refusal of leaders to respect
the rule of law and to subject themselves and their
actions to the scrutiny of the law has led to conflict and
crises. In the transitional period, efforts should be made
to eliminate tendencies to adopt policies and practices
that discriminate against women. It is important to
adopt laws and promote practices that will protect the
rights of women and other vulnerable groups in society.
Respect for the rule of law will ensure access by the
underprivileged to justice mechanisms and help secure
their dignity and empowerment.
We wish, at this juncture, to commend the SecretaryGeneral for his untiring advocacy and support for the
rule of law. We note his various reports and initiatives
in that regard, which have added considerable value to
our appreciation of the importance of the subject.
We also appreciate the recent formulation of the
“Rights up front” initiative, which seeks to address
early response to threats to national and international
peace and security and the protection of vulnerable
groups in conflict situations. The lives, rights and
dignity of women and all other vulnerable groups must
be protected under all circumstances, especially in
conflict situations. That is a requirement not only of the
rule of law, but also of basic human decency. Children
must be shielded from the excesses of conflict and must
not be treated in a degrading manner. The use of rape as
a weapon of war in conflict must be punished wherever
it occurs.
Nigeria remains deeply committed to the observance
of the rule of law, as clearly evidenced by the
participation of His Excellency President Goodluck
Ebele Jonathan in the high-level meeting on the rule of
law in September 2012.

S/PV.7113

We consider justice as a fundamental prerequisite
for the establishment of the rule of law and as the basis
for peaceful coexistence in the prevention of armed
conflict. We are convinced that, while discussing
practical approaches to improving the overall impact
of rule-of-law mandates, we should also consider how
to effectively measure the impact of the efforts made in
promoting the rule of law. That would require adopting
a yardstick to ascertain the success of our collective
efforts in that regard. There should be generally
acceptable parameters to measure the impact on the
world of United Nations efforts to promote the rule of
law. We believe that that is relevant to the debate taking
place today.
As the Secretary-General has indicated, he intends
to develop strategies for the United Nations system.
We encourage Member States to look forward to his
proposals, subject them to robust deliberations and
agree on the way forward. Respect for the rule of
law at all levels is essential for the maintenance of
international peace and security. The aspiration to
achieve a global system based on the rule of law, where
accountability and social justice are the foundations for
durable peace, should be a source of inspiration to all.
To that end, addressing the global rule-of-law deficit
should be a priority for the international community,
for world leaders and for citizens.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order that the Council may carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements
are kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing
and to deliver a condensed version. I wish to inform
participants that we will be continuing this open debate
right through the lunch hour, as we have a very large
number of speakers.
After saying that, which is not directly addressed
specifically to my friend Edgars Rinkēvičs, I am very
happy to give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Latvia.
Mr. Rinkēvičs (Latvia): Latvia aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered shortly on behalf of the
European Union. I should like to make the following
remarks in my national capacity.
First of all, allow me to congratulate Lithuania
on its first-ever assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council and for its initiative in organizing this
timely debate on the important topic of the rule of law.

14-2389021/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

History shows that a strong multilateral, inclusive,
rules-based international order is essential for the
maintenance of global peace and security. The rule of
law is one of the key elements of conflict prevention,
peacekeeping, conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
The United Nations plays an important role in each of
those processes, as do all its States Members, having
committed to implementing principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations.
There is an undeniable link between the rule of law
and the maintenance of peace and security. We welcome
the fact that the Security Council has already identified
strengthening rule-of-law institutions as a key part of
the mandate of United Nations missions. We urge the
Council to continue to integrate the rule-of-law aspect
in mission mandates in future.
In the Declaration of the High-level Meeting
of the General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the
National and International Levels (General Assembly
resolution 67/1) in 2012, we all stressed the necessity
for greater coordination among United Nations entities
and with other international and regional partners in
order to improve the effectiveness of capacity-building
activities in the field of the rule of law.
Latvia welcomes the reforms of institutional
arrangements undertaken by the Secretary-General in
that regard. Strengthened responsibilities for United
Nations field leadership, joint efforts by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the United Nations
Development Programme as a global focal point on
the rule of law, as well as the development of a United
Nations strategy on the rule of law, are certainly steps
in the right direction.
In its resolutions, the Council has already explicitly
recognized that the support of peacekeeping missions
to strengthening rule-of-law institutions in the host
country would be a vital contribution to building
peace and to ending impunity. To further improve the
effectiveness of missions, several steps should be taken,
namely, the adoption of an integrated and comprehensive
approach to the rule of law in peacekeeping mandates,
the development of a tailor-made approach to the
specific needs of a host country and the establishment
of an efficient reporting and information-collection
system to allow a smooth transition from peacekeeping
to peacebuilding.
The developments in Mali and the Central African
Republic are the most recent examples where we clearly

22/85

19/02/2014

can see that the re-establishment of the rule of law is
a primary precondition to ensure definitive conflict
resolution and sustainable progress.
After the restoration of its independence, Latvia,
along with other Baltic States, undertook democratic
transitions, putting into practice the principles of
justice and the rule of law. Our experience shows
that political will and concerted efforts on the part of
both the national Government and the international
community are crucial in building a strong rule-of-law
framework. A sense of national ownership and strong
domestic support are also essential.
Latvia actively contributes to the strengthening of
the rule of law in the world. We assist countries in that
field and we will further step up those efforts in future.
Latvia also provides expertise and technical assistance
in the field of justice. It contributes to institutional
capacity-building and supports legislative reforms in
a number of countries, with a particular focus on the
optimization of judicial proceedings, including the use
of information and communication technology.
We cannot discuss the concept of the rule of law
without reflecting on current developments in Ukraine.
With alarm, I follow events in Ukraine, which started
as a peaceful protest requesting to respect free choice,
the rule of law and justice in Ukraine. Latvia condemns
the violence that has resulted in the deaths of more
than 20 people, among them women. We request the
Government of Ukraine to refrain from the use of
force against civilians. We appeal to both sides to
refrain from further violent actions, to step back from
the confrontation and to return to negotiations in
order to restore the rule of law. The President and the
Government of Ukraine bear the ultimate responsibility
for the situation in the country. The rule of law is not
about bullets and water cannon restoring order; it is
about the legitimacy of power and political dialogue
with the people.
Latvia is particularly concerned about the growth
in the number of intra-State conflicts. The failure of
national institutions and the international community
to prevent and stop violence and serious violations
of international law dramatically affects the most
vulnerable in society, especially women and children.
The Council should continue to address the issue
in accordance with its primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security.

14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

Ending violence against women and preventing
discrimination, as well as addressing women’s
justice and security concerns, are integral parts
of strengthening the rule of law. No efforts should
be spared to protect women and girls from sexual
and gender-based violence and to end impunity for
those crimes once and for all. As a member of the
UN-Women Executive Board, Latvia actively engages
in activities aimed at addressing women’s justice and
security concerns worldwide. Latvia has taken part in
projects aimed at supporting and promoting the role of
women in Afghanistan, Iraq and other countries and
will continue its activities in that regard.
The Security Council has a unique role in the fight
against impunity. Accountability is an integral aspect
of the rule of law and offers effective means for the
maintenance of international peace and security. Latvia
believes that the establishment of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) represents an outstanding
achievement by the international community in
the struggle to end impunity. If the State’s primary
responsibility to protect the population from massive
and widespread violations of human rights cannot be
met, the fight against impunity has to be strengthened
at the international level. It should be done through
the work of the ICC, through ad hoc and mixed
tribunals and through other justice and accountability
mechanisms. Coherence in their respective approaches
through closer cooperation will send a clear signal that
the international community will not tolerate impunity.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate Latvia’s
commitment to the promotion and protection of the rule
of law, as well as our readiness to share our experience
and expertise. The rule of law plays a central role in
addressing current political, security and humanitarian
challenges. Restoring the rule of law is a long-term
process that requires the cooperation of all United
Nations States Members and agencies as well as other
actors in that regard. The Security Council’s continued
attention to the issue of the rule of law will be essential
in our view to reinforce international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Marcelino
Medina González, First Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Cuba.
Mr. Medina González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba reiterates its unwavering commitment to the
values of equity, solidarity and social justice, both at
the national level and through the establishment of a
democratic and just international order.

S/PV.7113

First of all, allow me clearly to state that, in Cuba’s
opinion, we are not referring here to a new category or
a new concept. What today is called the rule of law at
the international level is simply the full observance of
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the principles of international law.
Regardless of what we call it, respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of States, refraining from the use or the threat of
use of force, the self-determination of States and
non-interference in the internal affairs of States, as
clearly set out as early as 1970 in the Declaration on
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, is the essential
foundation of international law and serves as a
prerequisite for the peaceful coexistence of nations for
the sake of achieving peace and development, which
should be our ultimate goal.
It is difficult to believe that the so-called rule of law
does exist in international relations when unilateralism
and economic, commercial and financial policies and
measures contrary to international law contravene
its essential foundations, as do actions aimed at
imposing regime change and aimed at interference
and intervention, including through the incitement to
internal conflict in sovereign States based on foreign
agendas of domination and hegemonic influence.
Paragraphs 1 and 3 of the Declaration of the highlevel meeting of the General Assembly on the rule of
law at the national and international levels (General
Assembly resolution 67/1), adopted in September 2012,
clearly state that the sovereign equality of States, the
fulfilment in good faith of the obligations assumed by
them, the peaceful settlement of disputes, abstention
from the use or threat of use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any
State and non-interference in the internal affairs of
other members of the international community are
basic principles that cannot be violated under any
circumstances.
Neither can it be denied that the promotion
and strengthening of the so-called rule of law also
presupposes respect for the institutions sovereignly
established in each State, without discrimination or
double standards, and recognition of the legitimate
right of peoples to create institutions relevant to their
historic evolution, their needs and their economic,
sociopolitical and cultural interests. No one can replace

14-2389023/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

or interfere in the determination of national authorities
to strengthen their respective political, economic and
legal arrangements and in the functioning of their
institutions. States owe obedience only to the sovereign
will of their peoples and the international obligations
undertaken in implementation of that will.
The reform of the United Nations in such a way
that it becomes a standard of transparency, democracy
and participation of the entire international community
in resolving pressing global problems is a fundamental
component of the rule of law at the international level.
That requires a truly democratic and participatory
United Nations, with a transparent and democratized
Security Council and a revitalized General Assembly
that assumes the central role in the realization of the right
of peoples and every human being to a just, democratic
and equitable international order and supports the
efforts of States in the sovereign construction of the
future decided upon by each nation for itself.
In addition, international institutions must also
be democratized in the economic, monetary and
financial spheres so that they become tools serving
the development of peoples and of every human being,
leaving behind their despicable role as the guardians of
opulence and selfishness. That will require systems of
rules and institutions, at the national and international
levels, that ensure full participation by peoples and
by every human being in the adoption of decisions
involving them, the implementation of programmes and
policies aimed at promoting and consolidating equity
and social justice and the realization of all rights for all
peoples and persons.
The attempt to impose formally perfect laws and
institutions under certain preconceived canons that
have been laid out by the centres of power and the
manipulation of matters of global importance, such as
the promotion and protection of human rights, not only
distort that concept but make it inapplicable.
Therefore, Cuba strongly condemns any measure,
policy or unilateral law that is contrary to international
law and any attempt to minimize the implementation
of article 28 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, which states that everyone is entitled to a social
and international order in which the rights and freedoms
set forth in the Declaration can be fully realized.
Cuba reiterates its clear political will to keep
working with the other Member States for the
revitalization and strengthening of the Organization.

24/85

19/02/2014

Cuba will remain committed to achieving a democratic
and equitable international order that responds to the
calls for peace, development and justice by peoples the
world over.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I thank you especially,
Madam President, for organizing this open debate.
Brazil warmly welcomes the participation of Minister
for Foreign Affairs Moreno Charme of Chile. I also
recognize the speakers who preceded me: the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Latvia and the First Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba. Brazil also thanks
the Secretary-General for his briefing.
It is clear from the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2013/341) and from the concept note prepared for
this debate (S/2014/75, annex) that increased attention
has been paid to the need to strengthen and promote
the rule of law when implementing mandates related
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
The United Nations is therefore correct in seeking to
ensure greater system-wide coordination when trying
to improve the implementation of its mandate related
to the rule of law. In order to result in meaningful and
long-lasting consequences for the lives of millions
around the world, such initiatives must be built upon
certain premises, which Brazil would like to highlight.
First, there must be a holistic approach in supporting
the host country in its efforts to address the root
causes of conflict, advance peace and reconciliation
and enhance stability in the post-conflict period.
Tailoring and refining the implementation of rule-oflaw mandates to local circumstances and needs is key
to ensuring national ownership, without which the
sustainability of activities will be impaired.
In Haiti, the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti has helped Haitian authorities in the establishment
and strengthening of rule-of-law institutions, including
the development of the Haitian National Police. At
the same time, the Mission has carried out important
community violence-reduction programmes and
quick-impact projects, which are key to sustaining the
population’s confidence in the mandate and in the peace
dividends of stabilization.
Secondly, there must be an understanding that the
rule of law is not only a cause of development, but also
a consequence thereof. There is a crucial need for longterm commitment by the international community in
14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

supporting national efforts to build structural changes.
That presupposes a departure from all-too-common
short attention spans for countries in post-conflict
situations.
In the complex and non-linear path to sustainable
peace, let me single out the enormous potential of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), which Brazil
is honoured to chair. Brazil underscores the PBC’s
contribution as a uniquely designed political platform
that is able to bring together key actors and help forge
greater harmony among the subregional, regional and
international levels. There is also ample room in the
PBC for the promotion of rule-of-law institutions and
the empowerment of women and minority groups.
Third is a conceptual reflection. In Latin
languages, “rule of law” is translated as something
equivalent to “state of right”. In a broad sense, the true
name of the rule of law is social justice. What we are
actually seeking with the notion of the rule of law is a
State of rights in the plural — the establishment or the
improvement of a State capable of protecting rights and
promoting equal access, including legal access for all
citizens irrespective of their origin, sex, creed, political
affiliation or race.
We appreciate the most recent report of the
Secretary-General on the rule of law. It is worth recalling,
nevertheless, that there is no agreed or universal basis
on how to assess the levels of implementation of the
rule of law. The report itself clearly acknowledges
that measuring and evaluating the impact of rule-oflaw activities poses a number of challenges, as many
of those processes are non-quantifiable, outcomes may
take generations to be fully grasped and data collection
may prove to be particularly elusive on rule-of-law
activities. One should concentrate on the ability to have a
sophisticated, long-term, comprehensive understanding
of the plurality of countries’ circumstances, histories
and challenges.
A debate in the Council should be an occasion to
discuss the international dimension of the rule of law
as well. In today’s world, we are, fortunately, heading
for new models of global governance in many areas,
in which participation will necessarily be larger.
New actors, in particular developing countries, are
participating more fully in debates on extremely
important and vital areas such as human rights, trade,
finance and sustainable development.

S/PV.7113

Regarding the environment, for instance, global
governance has already included wide-ranging
participation by developing countries. No one would
dream of discussing climate change or biodiversity
without the important participation of all of the
stakeholder countries, including civil society and
academia.
In all of these cases, it is clear that this enlarged
participation has made a positive contribution to global
governance. Unfortunately, in the field of international
peace and security, progress has been much slower, but
is no less necessary.
The rule of law at the international level is essential
to remind us that no State is above the law and that
claims of exceptionalism are unacceptable in themselves
and extremely damaging to the multilateral system.
Multilateral cooperation for peace and security rests on
the foundation of the sovereign equality of States. We
must be aware of doctrines that seek to erode respect
for sovereignty in advancing unilateral agendas. The
more multipolar the world becomes, the stronger our
reliance must be on the rule of law at the international
level as a cornerstone of sustainable peace.
Upholding the rule of law at the international level
is part of the responsibilities of the Security Council.
We expect the Council to raise its voice against breaches
of the primacy of law in international affairs, such as
the acquisition of territory by force, disregard for and
lack of compliance with international commitments
and United Nations resolutions, be it for humanitarian
access or the elimination of nuclear weapons, and the
illicit flow of arms to conflict zones. These are goals
that we must pursue together.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden.
Mr. Grunditz (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
today on behalf of the Nordic countries — Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden.
We thank the Lithuanian presidency for arranging
this timely open debate and appreciate the opportunity
to share our views on the important topic of the rule of
law. We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
to the Council on the rule of law in conflict and postconflict situations. In particular, we wish to highlight
the reference in the report to the Declaration of the Highlevel Meeting of the General Assembly on the Rule of
Law, in 2012 (General Assembly resolution 67/1), which

14-2389025/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

emphasizes the importance of the rule of law as one of
the key elements of conflict prevention, peacekeeping,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding. The Declaration
stresses that justice, including transitional justice, is
a fundamental building block for sustainable peace in
countries in conflict and post-conflict situations.
In that context, we would also like to welcome
the work of the Secretary-General on furthering the
linkages between the rule of law and the three main
pillars of the United Nations.
The Nordic countries are pleased to note that the
promotion of the rule of law is now established as a
core United Nations task across the three pillars of
the United Nations: international peace and security,
development and human rights. It is both a goal in itself,
encompassing democracy, good governance and human
rights, and an indispensable means for the achievement
of other goals, including the promotion of peace and
security.
The New Deal for building peaceful States
expresses a similar message. It is thus both logical
and essential that the strengthening of the rule of law,
including police, justice and corrections institutions, be
a key part of Security Council-mandated peacekeeping
operations.
The inherent link between freedom from violence,
respect for human rights, the rule of law and development
makes this a central theme also in the post-2015 agenda.
The effective implementation of the Security
Council mandates requires certain arrangements
within the United Nations. We welcome the emphasis
on system-wide coordination and coherence, and
encourage the genuine use of the “delivering as one”
model also for the area of the rule of law.
The global focal point for police, justice and
corrections matters, at Headquarters level, carries
promise and should be strengthened. But the real and
visible effect will materialize and be felt only through
implementation and impact at the country level.
Efforts to ensure coherence and coordination at the
country level need to be intensified. Furthermore, the
transfer of tasks must be carefully managed when a
Security Council-mandated peacekeeping operation is
withdrawn or downsized.
At the heart of efforts to rebuild and strengthen the
rule of law in the wake of conflict and crisis is the need
to ensure that there are reliable and sustainable national

26/85

19/02/2014

institutions. However, the national political will and/
or capacity to build and properly manage them might
sometimes be insufficient. This political dimension of
the rule of law and approaches to address it require more
attention and financial support. Senior policy-makers,
United Nations mission leadership and country teams,
as well as bilateral partners and international financial
institutions, need to engage in a context-specific joint
dialogue to identify concrete challenges and ways to
support political commitment to reform. As part of
this, national constituencies should be included when
rule-of-law strategies and action plans are formulated.
This ought to be a matter of priority.
At the country level, the United Nations rule-oflaw indicators can be used by Governments to obtain
detailed information on their own law-enforcement
agencies, justice system and prison system, in support
of their rule-of-law reform efforts. As noted in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/341), the
indicators assist in measuring the transformation of
these institutions over time and in monitoring at the
country level.
Another important dimension of strengthening the
rule of law in post-conflict situations is to ensure that
mutually dependent sectors and actors can proceed in
joint processes in a mutually reinforcing manner. It is
obvious that courts cannot deliver justice without proper
investigation mechanisms, fair prosecution services
and functioning legal defence and prison systems.
For the Nordic countries, women’s access to
justice, material rights and to courts is a matter of
particular concern and importance. Women falling
victim to violations of their basic right often have very
limited access to justice and continue to be subjected to
discriminatory laws or application thereof. This does
not only exacerbate their situation but prevents them
from exercising full and equal participation in the
development of their societies.
Another issue of concern is that of legal identity, or
lack thereof. Every year 50 million children are born,
some of them without birth certificates or other proof of
legal identity. Without legal identity, individuals cannot
exercise their rights.
Finally, it is important to consistently support
engagement to curb impunity by focusing on
mechanisms that ensure accountability. It is very
difficult to see how the rule of law and trust can be
restored in societies traumatized by atrocities and other

14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

grave crimes without initiatives to reveal the truth and
hold those responsible accountable before the law. The
primary responsibility for this rests with States, and it
is vital that States be provided with sufficient support
for this purpose.
The international community can assist countries,
at their request, to develop capacities and institutions
that are sound, resilient and accountable, which can
help restore confidence and trust in the justice system.
The International Criminal Court plays a central,
complementary role in ensuring that those responsible
for committing war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide are brought to justice. The continued
involvement of the Security Council in the prevention
of such crimes, including in the fight against impunity,
is crucial. We urge the Council to assist the Court in
fulfilling its tasks, including through peacekeeping
mandates, following the example of those issued for
Mali and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Ms. Bolaños Pérez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the delegation of Lithuania for having
convened this open debate. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing.
As observed in the very instructive concept note
(S/2014/75, annex), the mandates of United Nations
field presences increasingly incorporate the rule of law
in the promotion of international peace and security.
In that regard, your delegation, Madam President,
has proposed that today’s debate focus on how such
mandates can be made more effective at strengthening
the rule of law and how to ensure continuity of rule-oflaw support beyond Security Council mandates. In
addressing those questions, our delegation believes
that, to generate a peace dividend, there is a need to
take a broad approach to both justice and development
in the work of the United Nations so as to break cycles
of violence, lay the foundations for lasting peace and
ultimately strengthen the rule of law.
The international community has witnessed a
profound, if gradual, shift in global norms with respect
to the use of force and violence in inter-State relations.
As a result, the rule of law has consolidated its place at
the heart of policymaking processes.
In our view, there have been two major developments
in the approach of the Security Council that have been

S/PV.7113

key to producing more effective mandates and sustaining
rule-of-law support in the long-term. The first is the
recognition of the inextricable link between peace
and development, which has enhanced the resilience
and adaptation of States to the outbreak, escalation or
recurrence of conflict. That recognition was the basis
for the establishment, in 2005, of the Peacebuilding
Commission to work with the other United Nations
entities to achieve lasting peace. Much could be said
about post-conflict peacebuilding, but time constraints
prevent me from going into detail.
The second development is the Security Council’s
role in promoting peace and justice, including by its
mandate to uphold the rule of law, maintain peace
and security and combat impunity while ensuring
accountability. Justice is crucial for breaking cycles of
violence and fragility. When that is ignored, peace and
reconciliation are jeopardized.
Among the tools at our disposal, the International
Criminal Court demonstrates the international
community’s clear commitment to deterring war crimes
and mass violations of human rights and humanitarian
law. The Court is already having an important impact
by putting would-be violators on notice that they cannot
be sure of impunity and by serving as a catalyst for
enacting national laws against the gravest international
crimes.
The International Criminal Court faces complex
situations in which the Security Council is trying
to achieve parallel objectives in its own sphere of
competence. In that sense, it is worth highlighting
resolution 2100 (2013), which authorized the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali to support national and international
justice efforts, including those concerning the
International Criminal Court. The members of the
Security Council, as well as the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, should be mindful of the
positive synergies between missions and the Court,
taking into account their respective mandates. For that
reason, we must avoid situations that undermine the
Court and existing mandates. In that regard, the United
Nations policy on non-essential contacts is helpful as
it ensures the enforcement of measures imposed by the
Security Council on States.
By embracing peace and development as well as
peace and justice, the Security Council has allowed
for all rule of law-related matters to be dealt with in

14-2389027/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

an holistic and comprehensive way. It has also opened
a window of opportunity for greater cooperation and
coordination among major stakeholders.
There is also an international dimension when it
comes to cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, especially as a number of regional
organizations have become key partners for the
United Nations in the implementation of Security
Council mandates. Beyond peacekeeping assistance,
we believe that it is also necessary to support regional
and subregional organizations in capacity-building
in political and electoral matters, governance, human
rights and the rule of law.
My delegation believes that the Security Council
plays an important role in the consolidation of a
worldwide system based on the rule of law. Today’s
debate should not only be concerned with the adequacy
of mandates, but also with whether the United Nations
is equipped to implement and fulfil them.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): I would like to recognize that
the presence of Deputy-Secretary-General Eliasson
brings additional awareness and attention to this
important subject.
In December 2010, a Tunisian police officer
confiscated the cart of a young street vendor. The
same young man had been harassed by local officials
for years. Instead of upholding the law, the police
demanded a bribe to return the card. Humiliated,
distraught and denied legal recourse, the young man
went to the headquarters of the provincial Government
and lit himself on fire. That young Tunisian became
a symbol for men and women in the Arab world who
long for freedom. Tens of millions of people understood
the desperation felt by that young vendor because they
too live in a society without an honest judiciary, an
independent media or free elections.
Across the Middle East and North Africa, nations
are sinking under the crippling weight of corruption,
tyranny and inequality. Mahatma Gandhi famously
said, “A nation’s greatness is measured by how it treats
its weakest members.”
In too many parts of the Middle East, the rule of
law is not used to protect and defend citizens but rather
to discriminate against them. Women are denied their
opportunities to make decisions about their future,

28/85

19/02/2014

such as getting an education, pursuing a profession and
earning money and choosing how to spend it. In Saudi
Arabia, women need a guardian’s permission to marry,
take classes and travel. That is also the only country
in the world that bans women from driving cars. Not
long ago, a few brave women defied the ban and were
detained by police and fined for the so-called crime of
tarnishing the Kingdom’s reputation. Tarnishing the
Kingdom’s reputation? The real stain on the Kingdom
is its failure to recognize that by relegating half of
its population to the back seat, Saudi Arabia is being
steered off course.
In addition to upholding draconian laws that
marginalize their civilians, the judicial systems in
many Arab nations subject women to unspeakable
injustice and violence. Syria and Iraq’s legal systems
allow rapists to avoid punishment by marrying their
victims, while Iranian women are arrested, beaten and
even mutilated with acid for not conforming to the
regime’s so-called moral code.
This past summer, three Iranian Christians were
found guilty of “crimes against State security” and
sentenced to 10 years in prison. What was the terrible
crime that threatened Iran’s security? The three
Christians were selling Bibles. Iran abuses its judicial
system to deny its citizens due process and subject
prisoners to inhumane and degrading punishments such
as lashings and execution. In 2013, 624 people were
executed in Iran, many in secret. Just a few weeks ago,
the regime hanged a poet for criticizing its treatment of
minorities.
Nation after nation in the Middle East mercilessly
persecutes its citizens and seeks to mandate what they
should believe, how they should act and whom they can
love. In Lebanon, in Egypt and in Syria, the penalty for
being gay is imprisonment, while in Yemen and Iran
the penalty is death.
In a region known for intolerance and repression,
Israel stands out for its commitment to the rule of law.
Our Declaration of Independence ensures that the
majority governs, while minorities enjoy equal rights.
In fact, our Arab citizens in Israel have more rights
than Arabs anywhere else in the Middle East.
While most nations in the region relegate women
to the margins of society, Israeli women are leaders
in every field and discipline, from courtrooms to
classrooms and from operating theatres to boardrooms.
More than 40 years ago, Golda Meir became Israel’s

14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

first female Prime Minister, making my country then
just the third in the world to elect a woman to its highest
office.
Israel’s commitment to the free exchange of ideas
has made it a destination of choice for reporters,
academics and human rights activists. They know that
they can speak freely without fear of arbitrary arrest,
imprisonment or execution. If someone here were
put on trial and had to pick which legal system in the
Middle East would hear their case, which nation would
they choose? I suspect they would select Israel, where
they are guaranteed their day in court, as opposed to
our neighbours, where the judicial system is nothing
short of a nightmare.
Israel’s commitment to freedom means that the
burden of condemnation falls disproportionately on
Israel. It also means that our struggle to combat terrorism
is made more difficult because of our determination to
respect the rule of law. As former Israeli Chief Justice
Aharon Barak said, “A democracy must sometimes
fight with one hand tied behind its back. Even so, a
democracy has the upper hand.”
The character of a society can be assessed by its
commitment to a system of laws that both protect and
liberate its citizens. Insecure tyrannies deny their
citizens the security of an impartial judiciary. Israel,
on the other hand, understands that the rule of law is
key to unlocking opportunity. By ensuring its citizens
enjoy freedom and empowerment, Israel has built a
thriving, prosperous and robust society. While those
freedoms present real challenges to our security, Israel
is secure in the knowledge that the long-term benefits
far outweigh the short-term costs.
A society cannot be truly free until its citizens
have the right to challenge the status quo and to openly
speak their minds. The Council should do everything
in its power to support the brave few who live and die
by such ideas.
Somewhere there is a soldier who knows that he is
outnumbered and outgunned but who stands tall at his
post. Somewhere there is a police officer who refuses
to take a bribe even as he struggles to feed his family.
Somewhere there is a peaceful protester raising her voice
against oppression, knowing that the consequences will
be grave. Such men and women are willing to risk their
lives because they believe that every person deserves
freedom and dignity. They are role models for us all.
Let us be inspired by their courage; let us be driven by

S/PV.7113

their strength; and let us strive to be worthy guardians
of their ideals.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I would like to
thank you, Madam President, for having convened
today’s debate. We would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report on measuring the
effectiveness of rule of law programmes (S/2013/341).
We are glad to see progress in establishing a culture
of measurement across the Organization in response to
calls both by this body and by the General Assembly,
while also recognizing that there are limits as to how
precise that exercise of measuring the United Nations
impact on the rule of law can be. Ensuring maximum
value for the money invested is of course an important
factor in improving the impact of rule-of-law mandates.
Perhaps an even more important factor, however, is
the political will to prioritize rule-of-law programmes
as a means of addressing conflict and post-conflict
situations. That is needed in particular at the country
level but also among donors, international organizations
and, certainly, the Security Council itself.
The Council’s commitment to and increasing
practice of promoting the rule of law, in particular by
including rule-of-law activities in mission mandates,
are encouraging and need to continue. But it also needs
to be more consistent, as is evident from the Council’s
own challenges in living up to rule-of-law principles, in
particular in the following areas.
The first area is ensuring the proper conduct of
United Nations personnel in the field. Peacekeeping
missions and other operations mandated by the Security
Council undertake crucial activities, many of them in
direct support of the rule-of-law architecture in the
respective host country. The importance of ensuring
that United Nations peacekeepers and other personnel
abide by the applicable laws and do not commit crimes
cannot be overstated. Much remains to be done to
effectively prevent such crimes and to ensure that the
perpetrators are brought to justice. Repatriation alone
is insufficient to bring about accountability. Greater
efforts must be made to prevent impunity for the sake
of the victims of such crimes and for the credibility and
effectiveness of support for the United Nations in the
countries concerned.
The second area is improving relations and
cooperation with the International Criminal Court

14-2389029/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

(ICC). Criminal accountability for the worst crimes
under international law is a core element of the rule
of law. More than 20 years ago, the Council itself
became the pioneer of international criminal justice
by establishing the ad hoc tribunals. Since then, it
has supported accountability mechanisms, such as the
Special Court for Sierra Leone and the Special Tribunal
for Lebanon. With the establishment of the ICC and the
possibility of Security Council referrals, the Council
received a powerful addition to its repertoire.
In theory, the power to refer makes it easier than
ever for the Council to promote the rule of law and
accountability by simply requesting the services of the
Court, which so far are free, in appropriate situations.
But practice has shown that the Council is still not fully
comfortable with the Court in several respects. The
Council has therefore refrained from referring to the
ICC several situations that cry out for criminal justice,
such as the crisis in Syria. The findings of the United
Nations commission of inquiry on human rights in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea challenge the
Council to seriously discuss a referral of that tragic
situation to the Court.
Where referrals have been made, the Council
tiptoes around urgently needed follow-up measures, in
particular regarding the Darfur situation. Where States
refuse to cooperate with the ICC in relation to Security
Council referrals, they effectively refuse to comply
with the Council’s own decisions. Nevertheless, the
Council has regularly failed to respond to notifications
of non-cooperation by the Court. It must do more to
address that problem. Making institutional arrangements
to improve communication and cooperation with
the Court would be a step in the right direction.
Furthermore, the Council should make greater use of
its own operations, such as peacekeeping missions and
Sanctions Committees, to support the Court’s work, in
particular regarding arrest and surrender.
The third area is improving due process standards
for sanctions listings. The European Court of Justice
recently reminded us in the Kadi II case about the
continuing difficulty of reconciling the Council’s
sanctions listing and delisting procedures with
international human rights law. We recognize that the
Council has made great progress in that regard as far
as the Al-Qaida sanctions are concerned thanks to the
improved legal mandate and the tireless efforts of the
Ombudsperson, Ms. Kimberly Prost. It is becoming
increasingly clear that the Council cannot continue

30/85

19/02/2014

to apply vastly different due process standards in
the various sanctions regimes. We therefore once
again call on the Council to consider expanding the
Ombudsperson’s mandate to other sanctions regimes
step by step and where appropriate.
Before concluding, I would like to briefly turn to
an issue that relates to the core of today’s topic, namely,
the rule of law in the maintenance of international
peace and security. Since the last open debate on this
issue, the Rome Statute’s amendments on the crime
of aggression have been ratified by 13 countries,
including my own. If the trend continues, we will
reach the required 30 ratifications within the next two
years. Once the Court’s jurisdiction over the crime of
aggression is activated in 2017, the Council will have
a new policy option for addressing the most serious
forms of the illegal use of force, in contravention of the
Charter of the United Nations. We continue to actively
promote ratifications of the Kampala amendments and
stand ready to provide technical assistance to any State
interested in ratifying them.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Ioannis
Vrailas, Deputy Head of Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour of speaking on
behalf of the European Union and its States members.
The candidate countries Montenegro and Serbia,
the countries of the Stabilization and Association
Process and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this
statement.
On 28 January, the Council adopted resolution 2134
(2014), on the Central African Republic, reinforcing the
mandate of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in the Central African Republic, including the
crucial aspect of supporting the strengthening of the
rule of law. The same resolution authorizes the European
Union (EU) to deploy a military operation in the Central
African Republic. The European Union is the largest
donor to the Central African Republic and has already
been involved in matters concerning the rule of law and
security sector reform. As soon as security conditions
allow, the EU stands ready to re-engage substantially
with the Central African Republic authorities in those
crucial areas. That will provide the basis for a viable
State in the future, in addition to the resumption of
all development projects that will contribute to the
reconstruction of the country.
14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

That engagement reflects the role played by the
European Union and its States members in supporting
United Nations actions toward building sustainable
peace. We fully share the view expressed in the
concept note for today’s debate (S/2014/75, annex) that
assisting the host countries’ efforts to strengthen the
rule of law is an important element of United Nations
peacekeeping and peacebuilding work. We thank the
Lithuanian presidency for having brought this critical
issue to the attention of the Security Council and hope
that the Council will continue holding open debates on
the rule of law on a regular basis. The United Nations
has a unique role in supporting the rule of law and its
benefits for countries and peoples.
We also reaffirm our attachment to the Declaration
adopted by the General Assembly at its High-level
Meeting on 24 September 2012 (General Assembly
resolution 67/1), which reaffirms that human rights, the
rule of law and democracy are interlinked and mutually
reinforcing and that the rule of law is a key element of
conflict prevention, peacekeeping, conflict resolution
and peacebuilding.
Judicial institutions in particular have a critical role
in the establishment of peace and security in conflict
and post-conflict situations. In countries affected by
conflict, it is essential to ensure accountability for the
most serious crimes of concern to the international
community. The perpetrators of such crimes must
be held accountable for their actions. We support an
effective and efficient interplay between national
justice systems and the International Criminal Court
(ICC) in the fight against impunity, in accordance
with the principle of complementarity enshrined in the
Rome Statute.
We pledged in September 2012 to support peace
and security in conflict and post-conflict situations,
in particular through supporting United Nations
engagement in the rule-of-law area. Since then, the EU
has continued to implement its plan of action to enhance
EU support to United Nations peacekeeping. In the
rule-of-law area, we share with the United Nations best
practices and lessons learned in developing civilian
capacities, training, and mutual support in developing
doctrine and concepts in the area of crisis management,
and we coordinate during the planning and conduct of
EU civilian missions deployed in support of United
Nations operations.
We have recently stepped up our efforts to enhance
the coherence and effectiveness of EU external policy

S/PV.7113

and action in conflict or crisis situations by defining a
comprehensive approach to external conflict and crisis.
That approach aims at coordination and, where possible,
a combination of policies, tools and instruments at
the EU’s disposal, including diplomatic tools, crisismanagement missions, trade instruments, development
cooperation and humanitarian aid. The comprehensive
approach also recognizes that the EU needs to engage
and work together with other international and regional
actors, including the United Nations.
We note the important role played in that respect by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
and the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) as the joint global focal point for the police,
justice and corrections areas in the rule of law in postconflict and other crisis situations. It is important that
the global focal point initiative also be implemented in
the field in order to ensure its impact at country level.
Somalia is another example where the EU is working
in close partnership with the United Nations in support
of the rule of law and security. Implemented by UNDP,
our support has, since 2007, taken a holistic approach.
We are working closely with the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to bring forward an integrated
support of the United Nations Support Assistance
Mission in Somalia and UNDP in the rule-of-law area.
The European Union is the main financial donor to the
African Union Mission in Somalia and supports the
training of defence forces under its training mission.
The EU also builds rule-of-law capacities in coastal and
maritime areas through EUCAP Nestor, its maritime
security capacity-building mission.
The high-level Declaration adopted by the General
Assembly on 24 September 2012 on the rule of law
stresses the need to strengthen support to States, upon
their request, through enhanced technical assistance
and capacity-building. We thank the Secretary-General
for his report of 11 June 2013 (S/2013/341) on measuring
the effectiveness of the support provided by the United
Nations system for the promotion of the rule of law in
conflict and post-conflict situations, which states that
“Building national data collection, monitoring
and evaluation capacity should be integrated into
project and programme design so as to enhance
cooperation in measuring results.” (S/2013/341,
para. 68)
We have set up indicators for progress regarding the
protection and empowerment of women in conflict and

14-2389031/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

post-conflict situations as part of our comprehensive
approach for implementing resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1820 (2008), on women and peace and security. In
that matter, we encourage operational cooperation and
strategic partnerships, as well as information sharing,
training and cooperation on the ground.
As identified in the concept note for today’s debate
(S/2014/75, annex), adequate human resources and
expertise are needed to support States in conflict and
post-conflict situations, and regional organizations can
help the United Nations in implementing the rule-oflaw aspects of its mandates. In that light, sharing
best practices and information between the EU and
the United Nations feeds into our respective civilian
capability-development processes, as both the United
Nations and the EU face similar challenges with regard
to civilian capabilities.
As a guiding principle, EU-United Nations
cooperation in crisis management is based on the
value added to both organizations and on producing
operational benefits building on complementary efforts
on the ground, within the overall aim of ensuring EUUnited Nations effectiveness and coherence on peace
and security.
We share the view stressed in the report of the
High-Level Panel of Eminent Persons on the Post-2015
Development Agenda that
“Freedom from conflict and violence is the
most fundamental human entitlement, and the
essential foundation for building peaceful and
prosperous societies.” (see A/67/890)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Ishikawa (Japan): I would like to begin by
expressing my appreciation to the Lithuanian presidency
for its leadership in convening today’s open debate on
what is an important issue for all and for ciculating a
draft presidential statement. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing,
which impressed upon us the importance of today’s
discussion.
Let me echo many other colleagues in stressing
the importance of promoting and strengthening the
rule of law in post-conflict situations. The rule of law
plays a significant role in preventing the recurrence
of conflicts and paving the road to sustainable peace.
Japan believes that in extending assistance in the field

32/85

19/02/2014

of the rule of law, the keys to success require a tailormade approach and long-term efforts.
It is very natural that the challenges a post-conflict
country faces in re-establishing the rule of law differ
from those that other post-conflict countries face.
Therefore, assistance in this field must be tailor-made
for the specific conditions of each host country and be
under its strong ownership. To that end, countries and
relevant international organizations offering assistance
must engage in close dialogue with the host country
to optimize their available assets as much as possible
through close coordination and by making use of their
comparative advantages. As a case in point, I would
like to share with the Council Japan’s effort to assist
Afghanistan in strengthening its security maintenance
capacity.
The transition in security from the International
Security Assistance Force to forces of the Government
of Afghanistan started in July 2011, and the need to
enhance Afghanistan’s capacity, both in quantity and
quality, cannot be stressed enough. In that context,
Japan has extended assistance in a variety of ways,
with special emphasis on supporting Afghanistan’s
self-reliance on a bilateral basis, as well as by working
in cooperation with other like-minded countries and
international organizations. In addition to bilateral
assistance for Afghan police salaries, which helped to
significantly increase the number of police officers,
Japan, with a view to enhancing the quality of police
officers, has implemented training programmes in
Turkey for 1,500 Afghan police officers, in cooperation
with the Government of Turkey; conducted literacy
education for the Afghan National Police in cooperation
with UNESCO; and assisted in criminal justice
capacity-building by constructing judicial facilities
and training judges and prosecutors through the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. I believe
that the experience of Japan in Afghanistan shows the
importance of capacity enhancement over a wide range
of aspects and with effective coordination among the
relevant partners, with their respective comparative
advantages in mind.
Secondly, I would like to stress that strengthening
rule-of-law institutions requires a long-term perspective
and enduring efforts on both on the assisting and the
receiving sides.
Let me now relate our experience gained in
assisting Cambodia in its efforts to rebuild its legal
and judicial systems. After the two-decade-long civil
14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

war, Cambodia suffered severely from the absence of
a system of fundamental legislation and from a lack
of competent legal officials. The Japan International
Cooperation Agency started the Legal and Judicial
Development Project in 1999, in which a JapanCambodia joint team drafted a civil code and a code
of civil procedure. Since their entry into force in 2007,
Japan has continued its assistance in formulating related
laws, reinforcing the Cambodian Ministry of Justice
and developing professional human resources. Human
resource development must be given special emphasis
in that field, because a country cannot proceed on the
path of the rule of law without its own sustainable
institutions. Our experience from over a decade in
Cambodia tells us that assistance in the rule of law must
be pursued from a long-term perspective.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that Japan stands
ready to support those countries working to rebuild
themselves in the aftermath of conflict and remains
committed to providing assistance in the field of the
rule of law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Rajah Zaib Shah (Malaysia): At the outset,
allow me to join others in thanking the delegation of
Lithuania for convening this open debate. We also
take the opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for
providing a briefing on this important topic.
Just a week ago, the Council convened an open
debate on the state of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and how peacekeeping missions can
further enhance the protection of civilians who are
trapped in harm’s way (see S/PV.7109). We believe
that an important element in making United Nations
missions effective, whether they be peacekeeping or
special political missions, is through the strengthening
and promotion of the rule of law.
Malaysia shares the view that the careful design of
peacekeeping and special political mission mandates
plays an important part in addressing the root causes
of conflict. The design of mandates is crucial in order
to ensure a good fit between the particular mission
and the challenges prevailing in the host country.
Mandates should not only be thematic in nature, but
must also be clear, measurable and achievable. The
Secretary-General’s report (S/2013/341) recommends
that more must be done to measure the Organization’s
effectiveness in the area of the rule of law, given the

S/PV.7113

weak existing monitoring and evaluation frameworks.
While Malaysia is not unaware of the complication of
such tasks, we believe nonetheless that it is imperative
for the Council to address the matter.
When designing mandates that promote the
strengthening of the rule of law, the principle of national
ownership must be seriously taken into consideration.
The process must be inclusive and take into account the
views of local authorities, civil societies and the public.
Whether the activities involve political dialogue,
reconciliation or peacekeeping, the involvement and
commitment on the part of local actors and authorities
cannot be put aside. That is important, as peacemaking
activities typically begin while the United Nations
mission is present and will eventually be led by local
stakeholders in later phases.
My delegation reiterates that there is no
one-size-fits-all approach to the process of designing
mandates. While the rule of law is paramount in
instilling public order in countries in conflict, mandates
must be specifically tailored to the challenges and needs
of the host country. We believe that consultations with
troop-contributing and police-contributing countries
are an important part of the process in the drafting of
mandates and would contribute to identifying relevant
sequences and methods in implementing activities.
My delegation understands that the development
of robust security, justice institutions and capacitybuilding in countries in conflict has been difficult and
complex. We are encouraged by the work of the United
Nations Rule of Law Unit in streamlining the security,
justice and corrections sections in all United Nations
missions to support the rule of law activities.
Nevertheless, we would like to underline the
importance of reflecting cultural and religious
sensitivities when carrying out rule-of-law activities
in a host country. We must be mindful that the United
Nations has 15 ongoing peacekeeping operations and
37 special political missions, and the issue of cultural
and religious sensitivities is vital to the success of
those missions. To illustrate it simply, conducting
capacity-building courses during prayer time would
hit a sensitive nerve in certain communities; similarly,
convening meetings during religious holidays would
also have that effect.
The nexus between peacekeeping and peacebuilding
is undeniable, as reflected in resolution 2086 (2013).
Malaysia is of the view that peace and security can be

14-2389033/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

approached only through a balanced and integrated
approach, from the deployment of peacekeeping and
special political missions to the involvement of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
Promoting the strengthening of the rule of law in
international peace and security must be done in an
integrated manner. We should not single out the rule
of law as the sole important pillar when supporting
countries in conflict. Often, countries in conflict
require that security and economic development be
established hand in hand. We must bear in mind that
developing justice, security and corrections institutions
requires that the host country has attained political
stability and economic growth. That is important, as
governance and the rule of law are interdependent and
not exclusive.
We are encouraged at the progress achieved
in the countries in transition on the Peacebuilding
Commission’s agenda. As members of the Commission,
those countries have demonstrated political will and
commitment to transcend from conflict to stability.
With continued international attention, my delegation
believes that they could progress further. The synergy
between United Nations missions and the Commission
could also be further strengthened when undertaking
mandates to promote and strengthen the rule of law.
The rule of law accords all States equal respect in
international relations. Respect for the Charter of the
United Nations is paramount in ensuring international
peace and security. Without the rule of law there would
not be a United Nations and the world would fall into
the disarray of competing nation States. In that regard,
my delegation views the work of promoting the rule
of law as equally important at the international and
regional levels.
To conclude, my delegation is of the view that the
promotion and strengthening of the rule of law remains
an integral part of the maintenance of international
peace and security. While the rule of law is not
exclusive, it requires United Nations missions and host
Governments not to overlook other equally important
fields in taking the process of transition from conflict to
stability. Malaysia values this open debate and believes
that it advances our agenda on the rule of law. We will
continue to support the work to promote the rule of law
in maintaining international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.

34/85

19/02/2014

Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): We
would like to thank the Lithuanian presidency of the
Security Council for convening today’s debate. We
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2013/341).
Belgium fully endorses the statement just made by
the observer of the European Union.
There can be no lasting peace without lasting
institutions. It is therefore clear that the mandate of
United Nations peacekeeping missions should include
a rule-of-law component that is detailed and concise
and allows us to measure progress accomplished. In my
statement, I should like to address certain aspects of
that mandate that we think are essential if one day we
hope to achieve the rule of law in a country emerging
from conflict.
How can we build lasting institutions when former
combatants are still circulating with weapons in hand
and there are latent tensions that can at any time spiral
into acts of violence, thereby spoiling all the efforts
undertaken? Disarming former parties to a conflict,
their demobilization and reintegration into civil society
are essentail elements in building a State based on
the rule of law. The disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) undertaking should be part and
parcel of peacekeeping missions, while appropriate
human and material resources should be provided in
agreed-upon budgets.
Moreover, security sector reform (SSR) is another
indispensable condition for the success of rebuilding
efforts for the institutions of a country. That entails
re-establishing citizens’ trust in the State and a feeling
of security for each individual, as well as by reforming
the military and establishing services in the areas of the
police, tribunals, prisons, border control mechanisms
and so on. Such services must work properly and be
subject to adequate oversight in line with rule-oflaw standards. Accomplishing those crucial tasks
undoubteldy requires strong political commitment
and national ownership on the part of the countries
concerned. Nevertheless, the mandates of peacekeeping
operations should provide for specific and substantive
support for those crucial reforms.
At each stage, the principle of accountability for
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide
should be applied. In the context of DDR and SSR
processes, there can be no amnesty provided for such
crimes, much less the reintegration of perpetrators into

14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7113

law enforcement forces. National jurisdictions should
therefore be swiftly made capable of prosecuting
perpetrators.

into account their situations and particular needs, are
yet other guarantees of the lasting nature of the national
ownership process.

The building of the rule of law and of democratic
institutions presupposes that animosity between former
fighters, and among the citizens themselves, should at
least have diminished somewhat since the end of the
conflict. To that end, and to avoid a return of violence,
United Nations peacekeeping operations should
endorse or even initiate all efforts that could bring
about a national reconciliation process. In that regard,
Belgium welcomes the project for the promotion of
dialogue and reconciliation between Muslim and
Christian communities in the Central African Republic
developed by the United Nations office responsible for
the responsibility to protect and prevent genocide.

The end of a peacekeeping operation mandate
should not in principle mean the end of the international
community’s support for the various processes of
credible institutional rebuilding in countries emerging
from conflict. Lasting transition strategies as well
as support strategies should be established that will
contribute to the efforts of the Government, other
United Nations bodies and bilateral and multilateral
donors. Furthermore, the Peacebuilding Commission,
which has been referred to many times today, is a
useful tool for following up the commitments of the
concerned State and those of its international partners
in re-establishing and upholding the soundness and
legitimacy of the institutions.

It is nevertheless clear that peacekeeping operations
can hardly tackle those problems head-on nor work
alone. The optimal sequence of priorities in this area is
a true challenge. Moreover, in addition to peacekeeping
operations, many players work on the ground in
countries emerging from conflict in the areas of DDR,
SSR and institutional reform, be it a United Nations
country team or bilateral or multilateral donors.
The effectiveness of United Nations activities on the
ground depends on the quality of coordination between
United Nations bodies and regional organizations
and countries concerned in bilateral efforts as well
as with the national authorities of the country. That
is a matter not only of preventing duplication, which
could be counter-productive, but primarily to guarantee
the most effective use of resources earmarked for the
establishment of institutions in line with the rule of law.
In that regard, Belgium believes it necessary, from
the very beginning of any international intervention,
for the United Nations to facilitate or guarantee
coordination of institution-rebuilding efforts backing
the State concerned, with the vision and national
ownership process of building the rule of law being
the end goal. We know that national ownership in the
context of a fragile State just coming out of conflict
could be a hollow concept if there is no genuine political
commitment from the local authorities in carrying out
this objective. Of course, such commitment should
be supported by the resources of the international
community but also progressively by the resources of
the national budget of the State concerned. Finally,
consulting with and bringing women to participate in
the institutional rebuilding process, as well as taking

Finally, strengthening the rule of law is something
that every State must undertake. In September 2012,
during the General Assembly High-level Meeting
on the Rule of Law at the National and International
Levels, Belgium undertook seventeen specific
commitments; today most of them have been achieved.
For example, we established predeployment training
with training units on sexual violence and gender
mainstreaming. As well, together with the Kingdom
of the Netherlands and other countries, we brought
together a number of States from all continents for a
project for negotiating a multilateral treaty regarding
extradition and judiciary proceedings for the national
prosecution of the most serious international crimes, so
as to facilitate in practice judicial cooperation between
States undertaking investigations and the prosecution
of such crimes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Thoms (Germany): I should like to thank the
Lithuanian presidency for the preparation of this open
debate and the Secretary-General for his instructive
briefing.
At the outset we align ourselves with the statement
made by the delegation of the European Union.
As a country that has experienced the disastrous
consequences of disregarding the most basic rules
and standards, Germany today strongly reaffirms its
commitment to support all efforts to strengthen and
promote the rule of law as an essential contribution
to peace and security. Strengthening the rule of

14-2389035/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

law is a priority in our foreign policy, both bilateral
and multilateral. Within our conflict-prevention
management activities we are currently providing
rule-of-law assistance in a number of crisis and postconflict situations around the world.
We welcome the growing awareness that the rule
of law and peace and security are interconnected and
mutually dependent. We also welcome the efforts of the
Secretary-General to mainstream the rule of law in all
areas of the work of the United Nations, and especially
the growing focus of peacekeeping and political
missions on strengthening institutions for the rule of
law.
Germany pursues a holistic approach in its conflict
prevention and management efforts. We apply an
integrated set of measures of which efforts to strengthen
the rule of law institutions are a key pillar. Let me just
mention three important fields in this regard.
First, in close cooperation with Department of
Peacekeeping Operations Office of the Rule of Law and
Security Institutions, we support and promote the global
exchange of experiences of United Nations experts in
the area of the rule of law. In past years, our Centre for
International Peace Operations and the United Nations
System Staff College in partnership organized a
dialogue series for deputy special representatives of the
Secretary-General in United Nations peace operations
and the focal point for the rule of law, and we are
committed to continue our support in coming years.
Secondly, supporting United Nations policing is
another key pillar of our engagement in the United
Nations. An international police conference held
in Berlin in October 2012 led to the establishment
of the group of friends of United Nations police. As
was rightly pointed out in the concept paper for this
debate (S/2014/75, annex), we need to ensure the
sustainability of our efforts in the area of the rule of
law in peacekeeping missions. Rule-of-law institutions
for training and support must be made more consistent
with the development of standards and guidance
through more systematic training of police officers
and civilian experts in missions and through longerterm commitments of police-contributing countries to
specialized areas of training. Germany stands ready to
continue its support for the Office of the Rule of Law
and Security Institutions in that endeavour.
Thirdly, we support the establishment of the global
focal point for the rule of law, inter alia, with a seconded

36/85

19/02/2014

expert. We are confident that the appointment of the
global focal point will contribute to the promotion of
the rule of law by the United Nations through better
and faster coordination. In addition, it should make our
efforts in the area of the rule of law more sustainable by
ensuring better transitions from peacekeeping missions
to the United Nations country team in post-conflict
situations.
Lastly, truth-finding efforts and the fight for
accountability and against impunity are crucial for the
establishment of lasting peace in post-conflict settings.
They are fostered by the work undertaken by national
and international justice mechanisms, especially the
International Criminal Court.
Current crises such as in Mali, South Sudan and the
Central African Republic have shown the importance
of building rule-of-law institutions in crisis and
post-conflict situations. Strengthening rule-of-law
institutions should thus be at the centre of our efforts
for peacebuilding and conflict prevention.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Kolga (Estonia): At the outset, let me also thank
the Lithuanian presidency for the initiative of convening
this timely open debate and for the comprehensive
concept note (S/2014/75, annex). I should also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his statement.
I give credit to the holding of open debates as a
measure of greater transparency and for the inclusion
of the broader United Nations membership in the issues
discussed by the Council, and I recommend that every
presidency follow suit.
Estonia fully aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union. The longer version of our statement
will be distributed.
The rule of law is a core principle of governance that
ensures justice and fairness and in which all persons,
as well as the State itself, are accountable to laws that
are equally enforced and independently adjudicated.
Adherence to the rule of law at home makes it more
probable that we will also follow the principle in our
interactions abroad. At the international level, the rule
of law accords predictability and legitimacy to the
actions of States and forms a fundamental framework
for the conduct of relations among them.
The rule of law provides keys to conflict prevention.
It is also an important element of peacekeeping,
14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

conflict resolution and peacebuilding. Following
the rule of law and delivering justice builds public
trust in national Government institutions, which is
essential for developing a safe environment for us to
live in. Moreover, the preventative nature of strong and
consistent rule-of-law institutions helps to reduce the
risk of further conflicts. Therefore, Estonia welcomes
the approach of the Security Council in identifying the
strengthening of rule-of-law institutions as an integral
part of the United Nations mission mandates designated
for the upkeep of peace and security.
Justice is necessary for sustainable development
and security in any post-conflict society. Impunity
provides fertile ground for the recurrence of conflicts
and breeds instability. Consistent prosecution, either
domestically or internationally, is a most effective tool
to combat international crimes. I therefore welcome
that the Secretary-General’s report (S/2013/341) on
the strengthening of the rule of law also reflects
the important role of international criminal justice
and emphasizes the necessity to cooperate with the
International Criminal Court (ICC).
I should like to reiterate Estonia’s call upon all
countries that have not yet done so to join the Rome
Statute system, and I would likewise urge States parties
to join in the ratification of the Kampala amendments.
The universality of international law and adherence by
all to the same principles are essential to improving
the world in which we live. In that regard, countries,
whether they have joined the Rome Statute or not, must
set an example of non-aggression, self-restraint and
respect for the rule of law.
I commend the continued cooperation of the
United Nations with the ICC, particularly in the
provision of logistical support for field operations and
the submission of documents to the Prosecutor and
defence counsel. Nevertheless, we should continue to
improve that relationship to enhance the legitimacy
and success of the Court. In that regard, States parties,
as well as non-States parties on the Security Council
who contribute to referring situations to the ICC,
should ensure that adequate cooperation is consistently
provided to the ICC.
However, States must also acknowledge that it
is first and foremost their responsibility to develop
national capacities to investigate and prosecute serious
international crimes. As the concept note for this open
debate rightly describes, the development of national
capacity should include a comprehensive legislative

S/PV.7113

framework to ensure the investigation and prosecution
of crimes and the incorporation of Rome Statute crimes
into domestic criminal codes and should ensure robust
witness protection programmes, so that those who are
brave enough to come forward are safe enough to do so.
Estonia firmly believes that commitment to
fighting impunity at all levels is the only way to
deter those who might commit crimes in future. The
enforcement of sentences of the respective international
courts and tribunals is vital for international criminal
law to have a deterrent effect. To help to sustain that
effect and in coherence with the principles of rule of
law, Estonia signed an agreement on the enforcement of
sentences with the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia, which allows persons convicted
before the Tribunal to serve their sentences in prisons
within Estonia. In the most recent example, just two
weeks ago, on 10 February, a third person convicted of
crimes against humanity and violations of the laws and
customs of war committed in the former Yugoslavia
was transferred to Estonia to serve his sentence.
Of course, it must be stressed that supporting and
developing the rule of law is not just about international
criminal law; it is about all sectors of national and
international governance. To ensure the effectiveness of
rule-of-law efforts they must be better coordinated at the
international level. Estonia agrees, as also recognized
by the High-Level Panel on the Post-2015 Development
Agenda, that responsive institutions promoting the
rule of law and access to justice are necessary for
transformative shifts enabling development and for
building peace and effective open and accountable
institutions for all. We strongly believe that good
governance, democracy and the rule of law must be
emphasized in the future sustainable development
agenda among the sustainable development goals.
Estonia also fully supports the initiative for
rule-of-law pledges launched at the General Assembly’s
2012 High-level Meeting by the Heads of State and
Government. States should recognize their role and
commitment to contribute towards reaching more
inclusive, transparent and empowering societies in
which everyone can enjoy human rights and in which
men and women are treated equally. State and civil
society partnerships and the inclusion of the private
sector are more successful if we act in this systematic
and coordinated manner.
Estonia has completed two out of our four pledges
for ratifying the Kampala amendments to the Rome

14-2389037/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

Statute and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra Velásquez (Peru) (spoke
in Spanish): We would also like to congratulate the
Government of Lithuania for organizing the current
debate, and we are thankful for the invitation to share
Peru’s point of view on this topic. It is one to which
we attach great importance, because throughout its
history Peru has been committed to promoting and
strengthening the rule of law and to international peace
and security, international law and the Charter of the
United Nations.
Peru agrees with the approach taken in this open
debate. In particular, we stress the need to exchange
points of view on the obvious link between the rule of
law and the maintenance of international peace and
security. We believe that the exchange of post-conflict
experiences, be they domestic or international, should
be used to the fullest and taken into account so as to
include aspects of the rule of law in the mandates for
peacekeeping operations. With respect to the SecretaryGeneral’s report on measuring the effectiveness of the
support provided by the United Nations system for the
promotion of the rule of law in conflict and post-conflict
situations (S/2013/341), there is a need to identify
experts with specialized capabilities and knowledge
who could participate in and also advise peacekeeping
operations, as well as special political missions and the
Peacebuilding Commission.
Peru, for example, has been able to overcome
situations of internal conflict and violence. Today we
live in peace domestically and internationally, and we
are enjoying a prosperity new in our republican history.
That is largely due to our commitment to the rule of law
and to the capabilities that we have developed.
Peru is a country that has strengthened its
democracy and its institutions, with an independent
judicial system that respects and promotes human
rights. We comply with our commitments, defend
international law and invest in regional integration
and conflict prevention. Hence, we have contributed to
maintaining international, regional and national peace
and security while advancing progress for our people.
Internationally, the mutual trust that Peru has built
with its neighbours is based largely on its observance of
international law and the promotion of trust.
38/85

19/02/2014

Just three weeks ago the International Court of
Justice issued a judgement establishing the maritime
boundary between Peru and Chile. We are pleased to
note that both Governments have been carrying out
the judgement in a good-neighbourly spirit. With the
peaceful settlement of the dispute, both countries have
renewed their willingness to work together for the
integration and progress of our peoples.
Another example of neighbourly integration based
on the rule of law can be seen in the development on
the border that Peru and Ecuador have been promoting
since 1998. In that context, the coordinated work of the
Peruvian and Ecuadorian armies for the humanitarian
demining of the common border should be pointed out.
The capacities generated have contributed to the recent
establishment of a bi-national demining unit that both
countries will make available to the United Nations.
Internally, our experience in fighting terrorism
shows how violent situations can fortunately be
overcome, thanks to the rule of law and the democratic
and humanitarian values that that implies. Along
those lines, Peru also points out the need to strengthen
international cooperation to tackle the global drug
problem and transnational organized crime, which
undermine sustainable development and the rule of law.
I will conclude by stressing that the rule of law
nationally and internationally is fundamental for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Through the rule of law countries not only manage to
overcome their conflicts but also gain the stability and
social cohesion that sustainable development requires.
In reaffirming Peru’s commitment to the rule of
law, we point out the need for peacekeeping operations
to contribute to promoting and strengthening the
rule of law in order to overcome conflict and postconflict situations and to produce the conditions that
are conducive to sustainable development. In this spirit
we reiterate our willingness to continue contributing
to these operations, providing our experience and the
capabilities we have developed in this area.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The presidency’s choice of this theme at this
time is of the utmost importance, because the issue of
the rule of law, particularly at the international level, has
become a genuine concern to many States, especially
developing States. The law has been neutralized — in
14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

spirit in most cases, and in letter in many cases — to
serve interpretations in the interest of certain States
and groups of States.
We are not trying to reinvent the wheel and start,
regardless of the Charter’s provisions, to lay down
the bases of international relations and national
commitments and their rules anew when we talk about
the rule of law as a means to maintain international
peace and security. Instead, we must evaluate what has
been achieved and identify shortcomings in order to
find the ways likely to deal with them, to establish the
rule of law pursuant to the Charter’s provisions and the
values of our international organizations.
The rule of law is an indivisible whole. It is
unreasonable and unacceptable to concentrate on the
rule of law at the national level only and ignore it at
the international level. Respect for the principles of
international law and the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations is the cornerstone on which to
establish the rule of law in general.
Furthermore, respect for the rule of law at
the international level could create the necessary
environment to achieve the rule of law at the national
level. The rule of law at the international level can
help to maintain international peace and security, for it
helps prevent conflicts and contributes to active efforts
to resolve whatever conflicts might break out before
they become worse. The absence of the rule of law at
the international level would open wide the door to
foreign intervention in the affairs of States and to their
destabilization. That has happened since the end of the
Cold War, and unfortunately it continues to happen.
Experience has shown that the challenges to the
rule of law at the international level have not resulted
from a lack of international mechanisms or instruments.
Rather, they have been caused by the selectivity
and double-standards approach adopted by certain
influential States in dealing with international law.
Those States have attempted to impose their hegemony
and unilateral decisions on other States, using flagrant
interventionist methods, provoking trouble and sedition
and threatening to use force or actually using it,
devising pompous concepts that serve their interests
while at the same time politicizing other concepts that
are already established.
The crisis in my country, Syria, is clear evidence
of the policies of flagrant intervention in the internal
affairs of States and the endeavours to destabilize

S/PV.7113

its security, stability, unity and territorial integrity
through the actions of Governments of States — which
have become known to all — to support, fund and arm
extremist terrorist elements and foreign mercenaries
and send them to Syria to ravage, terror and devastate.
Is the reason behind that behaviour the alleged
concern by those States for the rule of law? Is the targeting
of national law enforcement institutions — police
stations, courts and civil archives and real estate
records— the work of those who are concerned for
the rule of law? On the other hand, can we consider as
implementation of the rule of law the unilateral coercive
measures imposed by some States Members of this
Organization against my country, which have negative
effects on the livelihood of Syrians and deprive them
of the basic daily needs of life? Can we consider the
continuing Israeli occupation of the occupied Syrian
Golan and other Arab occupied lands — for decades
now — or their continuing violation of human rights and
international humanitarian law to be implementation of
the rule of law?
The answer to such questions is clear and does not
call for any interpretation or explanation: those acts are
a flagrant violation of the most fundamental principles
of international law, the Charter of the United Nations,
the principles of friendly relations among States and the
international instruments on counter-terrorism.
The fundamental objective behind enacting
laws, signing of treaties and adopting United
Nations resolutions on counter-terrorism is to ensure
commitment from the very outset to preventing the
spread of terrorism and combating its existing forms.
However, some Member States in this very Council
and outside it have closed their eyes and ears to our
repeated calls — for more than two years — in our
statements and through hundreds of formal letters, for
the United Nations to shoulder its responsibilities in
confronting the terrorist threat facing Syria, as a State
and as a people.
This is a terrorist menace that threatens security and
stability in the region and in the world. Those Member
States have turned a blind eye to the need to ensure
the rule of law through their failure to hold accountable
the Governments of Member States that support
such terrorism with money, weapons and disgusting
extremist Takfirist fatwas. The danger of terrorism in
Syria has been heightened and its impact has become a
threat to peace and security in other States, including
Kyrgyzstan, which announced few days ago the arrest

14-2389039/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

of a network of terrorists returning from Syria who had
been plotting terrorist acts in the country.
After all that, some States very belatedly have
begun to take measures to address their failure to
commit to the international instruments on counterterrorism, such as stripping citizenship from those
of their citizens involved in terrorist acts in Syria
and preventing them from returning to their home
countries, as if they are saying to them — to those
terrorists — “continue fighting in Syria until you are
killed or until whomever sent you to Syria moves you
to another State whose stability and security are to be
destabilized”.
As for those States that export terrorism and
blind extremist ideology — with Saudi Arabia at the
forefront — following the exposure of their role in
supporting terrorism, they have attempted to improve
their image with regard to international public opinion
by adopting sham legislation, threatening to prosecute
terrorists returning from Syria but not those who are
being sent to it.
Nevertheless, can any reasonable person believe
that the Saudi regime and its intelligence apparatus
were not aware that thousands of Saudi extremists had
joined what they call “the holy war in Syria” with the
blessing of the promoters of the Takfirist fatwas and
direct incitement from the Saudi regime’s Foreign
Minister?
We have heard recently, following the killing of
thousands and of innocent Syrians, many statements
by Ministers for Foreign Affairs and security affairs
in many Member States warning against the danger of
terrorists active in Syria. In that context, the Director
of National Intelligence in the United States, James
Clapper, confirmed that 20,000 to 26,000 extremists are
working in the terrorist armed groups active in Syria,
including 7,500 foreign terrorists from 50 countries,
including some former elements from Al-Qaida who
had participated in wars in Afghanistan and Pakistan
and are looking forward to attacking Europe and the
United States.
The Kuwaiti Member of Parliament Nabeel Al-Fadl
also stated recently that his country for two decades
had suffered from the loss of its sons in Afghanistan
and Chechnya, after instigators managed to mislead
and send them to fight under so-called legitimate
justification. He added that Kuwait continued to receive
the bodies of its dead sons who were sent with the

40/85

19/02/2014

same misleading fatwas to Syria. His colleague Saleh
Ashour warned that no less than 20,000 Gulf and Arab
fighters had decided to move to Kuwait completing
their terrorist actitivies in Syria, stressing that changes
on the ground in Syria were rapidly evolving, forcing
many non-Syrians to exit the struggle there.
That is all a drop in the bucket. Instead of hearing
about efforts to promote the rule of law — the subject
of this meeting — and to coordinate efforts to combat
terrorism, the United States media informs us of a
secret meeting held in Washington, D.C., recently that
included heads of Arab and Western intelligence organs,
including members from this Council, to provide
military support to the so-called Syrian opposition, in
a clear breach of the rules of international law and its
principles.
In conclusion, my country, Syria, stresses its
support for efforts aimed at promoting the rule of
law internationally and nationally, and underscores
that providing assistance to achieve that objective
necessarily requires that we abstain from turning the
issue into a pretext to to interfere in the internal affairs
of States or undermine its sovereignty.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mr. Montaño (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico
would like to thank the delegation of Lithuania for
convening this important debate. We would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing, which
reflects the commitment to support the efforts of the
United Nations to promote the rule of law.
In the Declaration of the High-level Meeting
of the General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the
National and International Levels (General Assembly
resolution 67/1), we see that the rule of law is a key
to the development of the pillars on which the work
of the United Nations is based — international peace
and security, human rights and development. Mexico
supports the principle that the rule of law should be a
sine qua non in the post-2015 development agenda. The
rule of law and development are very closely linked and
mutually strengthen each other. We believe that progress
in the rule of law is crucial for sustained economic
growth, as well as for the eradication of poverty and
the fulfilment of all fundamental freedoms, including
the right to development.
It is crucial for the decisions of the Security Council
to respect and strengthen the principles of the rule of
14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

law in order to guarantee legitimacy for their actions,
and also, of course, for the Security Council to comply
with international law.
Our Constitution states that respect for international
instruments is essential to preventing conflicts.
Although the Security Council has made progress in
this area, it has yet to ensure that the actions that it
decides upon must be undertaken based on international
law in every way.
The peaceful settlement of disputes is part of our
history and diplomatic currency. Mexico has resorted
several times to the means provided for in Article 33 of
the Charter of the United Nations as a party to arbitration
proceedings or trials by international tribunals, as
a friendly activist on behalf of and promoter of such
mechanisms for the peaceful settlement of conflicts in
the Latin American and the Caribbean region and in the
defence of its citizens’ rights.
The Declaration of the High-level Meeting also
recognizes the contribution of the decisions of the
International Court of Justice regarding disputes
between States and the value of the Court’s promotion
of the rule of law. We reaffirm States’ obligations to
comply with the Court’s decisions in cases in which they
are involved. We therefore also urge those that have not
already done so to consider accepting the jurisdiction of
the Court in accordance with its Statute. Mexico calls on
States that have expressed non-technical reservations
to the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice
to consider withdrawing such reservations as soon as
possible.
The permanent members of the Security Council
have a special responsibility in the maintenance of
international peace and security. Therefore, their
acceptance of the Court’s compulsory jurisdiction
would encourage other States to follow that example
and to comply with international norms on the rule of
law. A key issue is the role the Council should play in
complying with the Court’s rulings. Non-compliance
with the Court’s rulings has occurred in the past
and could occur in the future. Mexico reiterates that
non-compliance with the rulings and decisions of the
Court is in direct contravention of international law. It
is clear that, in cases of non-compliance, Article 94,
paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United Nations sets
out the process to be followed in such cases. We would
recall that the States involved in a dispute before the
Court can resort to that option or request the Secretary-

S/PV.7113

General to employ his good offices to facilitate and
ensure the implementation of a ruling.
As the very insightful report of the SecretaryGeneral states, the promotion and strengthening
of rule-of-law mandates and their impact have an
intrinsic connection to the work of maintaining and
consolidating international peace and security as laid
out by the Security Council.
Mexico welcomes the decision to appoint a global
focal point responsible for issues concerning the police,
justice and prison systems in the context of the rule of
law in post-conflict situations and other crisis situations.
We also welcome the proposal by the Secretary-General
to develop a series of assessment principles to enable
measuring the impact of the support provided by the
Organization to Member States. We are at a unique
juncture, where Member States can continue to promote
the rule of law, consolidate peace and justice and put
an end impunity. We must not waste the opportunity
afforded to us.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Costa Rica thanks the presidency of the Council for
having organized this debate.
My delegation recognizes the Security Council’s
key role in promoting and strengthening the rule of law
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
Since the Secretary-General made ​recommendations
to the Council in his report contained in document
S/2004/616 to include the issue of the rule of law in its
resolutions and mandates, the Council has demonstrated
and reiterated its commitment to the establishment and
strengthening of the rule of law in conflict and postconflict situations. That has been clear in its inclusion,
in resolutions on peacekeeping, of issues such as
security for civilians, institutional reforms and greater
respect for human rights. Moreover, since the rule of
law was established as an agenda item, in 2003, almost
all peacekeeping operations have included rule-oflaw and human rights components. But how can we
get peacekeeping operations to effectively support
and strengthen the rule of law in the host country in a
sustainable manner? That poses a significant challenge.
To achieve true peace, our interventions must
adopt a holistic and coherent approach that is focused
on people and takes into account the issues of security,

14-2389041/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

justice, human rights, the rule of law and, of course,
development. Costa Rica believes that, in addition
to including those elements in the mandates of
peacekeeping operations, the United Nations must take
the necessary follow-up measures to ensure compliance
with those elements, starting with mission officials,
who have the responsibility to respect the law and
the rights of the people whome they are charged with
protecting.
In that respect, we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s decision to implement a “Delivering as one”
approach by assigning the responsibility of aligning
and monitoring strategies for the rule of law, resolving
potential political obstacles to its implementation and
coordinating on-site assistance to some of the most
experienced United Nations administrators in the field.
We also welcome the designation of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the United Nations
Development Programme as the global focal point
on police, justice and prison systems in post-conflict
situations.
My delegation believes it is crucial for missions
to work in close coordination and collaboration with
national authorities from the very beginning of their
mandates, thus promoting national ownership and the
national identity of the peace process. We should not
forget that one of the main objectives of such missions
is strengthening national capacities in order to lay the
foundations for a successful transition and conclusion
of the operation’s mandate. Without that, the mission’s
work will not be sustainable over time.
Costa Rica believes that, with that support, missions
can play an important role in building the necessary
national capacity to comply with the responsibility to
protect. In particular, they can improve operational
links between the responsibility to protect and the
prevention of atrocities within the structures responsible
for promoting human rights, the rule of law, prevention
and mediation and the protection of civilians, among
others.
Experience has shown that there cannot be lasting
peace without justice. To fully exercise its responsibility
for the “maintenance of international peace and
security”, the Security Council has a duty to promote
the full realization of international justice. Its role is
crucial when it comes to bringing justice to the victims
of the worst crimes against humanity, as impunity for
such crimes should never be an option.

42/85

19/02/2014

The Declaration of the High-level Meeting of the
General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the National
and International Levels (General Assembly resolution
67/1), of 24 September 2012, clearly states that
accountability is an integral part of the rule of law and
that impunity will not be tolerated in cases of genocide,
war crimes, crimes against humanity, violations
of international humanitarian law and systematic
violations of human rights law. Such violations will be
investigated and punished, in the first instance through
domestic mechanisms but, if necessary, using regional
or international mechanisms pursuant to international
law. That is consistent with the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2012/1) adopted by the Council at its most
recent open debate on the rule of law (see S/PV.6705),
on 19 January 2012, in which the Council reiterates
its opposition to impunity for serious violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law.
A crucially important part of the Council’s work in
maintaining international peace and security and in the
fight against impunity is its power and responsibility
to refer situations to the International Criminal Court,
pursuant to article 13 of the Rome Statute. Such action
can be undertaken while peacekeeping operations are
deployed.
In that regard and with reference to what is perhaps
the most serious humanitarian situation at this time,
we call once again for the Security Council to take the
necessary measures to protect the civilian population
in Syria by referring the situation in that country to the
International Criminal Court, as it was urged to do by
Switzerland and 57 other States, including Costa Rica,
in the note sent to the Council on 14 January 2013.
Furthermore, we underscore the proposal presented
by the Group of Five Small Nations requesting that the
permanent members of the Security Council commit to
refraining from using the veto on draft resolutions that
address atrocity crimes.
Let us not forget that it is equally important for
there to be due follow-up to referrals once made. The
Council should take the actions needed to enforce the
decisions of the Court, in particular its arrest warrants.
In that regard, we recall the presidential statement
of 2008 (S/PRST/2008/21) that called on officials of the
Sudanese Government to comply with arrest warrants
against them, so that the legal proceedings under way
against them could proceed.

14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

In the debate organized by Guatemala on
17 October 2012 on cooperation between the Council
and the International Criminal Court (see S/PV.6849),
more than 50 States made suggestions to the Council.
On 20 November 2012, together with Liechtenstein
and Jordan, we sent a note formally proposing
the establishment of a subsidiary body to deal
systematically with issues related to the relationship
between the Council and the International Criminal
Court and the extension of the mandate of the informal
working group. That proposal remains valid.
Another recent topic of the utmost importance
relating to United Nations missions is that of the
authorization of the use of force. Although both cases
were in response to calls from African countries, which
enhances their legitimacy, if the trend of deploying
peacekeepers with more robust mandates continues, it
will be necessary to work on a new definition of the
limits of such mandates.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to state that
it agrees with the report of the Secretary-General on the
importance of an independent and robust monitoring
and evaluation system for peacekeeping operations.
That would undoubtedly enhance the design and
implementation of operations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Croatia joins others in
welcoming Lithuania’s initiative to hold an open debate
on the promotion and strengthening of the rule of law
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
It is a well-chosen topic, whose importance is growing
day by day. I would also like to express my sincere
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2013/341) and for his comprehensive briefing today.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union. I would like to add the
following remarks in my national capacity.
The rule of law constitutes the very essence
of the social contract between individuals and the
Government, under which citizens are granted
transparency, non-discrimination, fairness and equality
in their standing before the law and in their social
interactions. Competent, credible, efficient, responsible
and legitimate institutions are the guarantors of those
principles and serve as providers of confidence, which
allows individuals and communities to resolve their
disputes peacefully.

S/PV.7113

The lack of good governance and the rule of law,
on the other hand, often lies at the root of conflicts.
Therefore, as noted in the Secretary-General’s report,
strong, inclusive and accountable institutions that
demonstrate the equitable application of the rule of law
are crucial for conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
Croatia recognizes the paramount importance of
the rule of law in conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
post-conflict peacebuilding. It is equally important for
achieving lasting peace and for sustainable development
in all its aspects. The functional and efficient rule of
law is as much an issue of security and stability as one
of economic and democratic development.
The rule of law has tremendous transformative
power and should be regarded as an essential instrument
for positive change. Simply put, it is the best investment
in a prosperous future.
Re-establishing, strengthening and reforming
judicial and legal systems and law enforcement
institutions, which provide a legal framework that
will stimulate the economy and safeguard democracy,
is a long-term process that requires not only political
determination, but also human and material resources,
skills and knowledge. The metaphor of growing an
oak tree seems appropriate: it takes time, patience,
determination and a lot of care, but with every year
the roots get deeper and the canopy wider, until the
tree becomes strong enough to withstand any storm.
Nonetheless, the early growing years are of decisive
importance.
We welcome the multidimensional approach to
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, which places equal
emphasis on security sector reform, institution-building,
the protection of human rights, the restoration of the
social fabric of a country, the rejuvenation of the
economy and the protection of natural resources. In
all of those aspects, the rule of law plays a crucial and
indispensable role.
Against that backdrop, Croatia advocates for
devoting particular attention to rebuilding national
civilian capacities and institutions, while recognizing
the specific needs of each country and fully respecting
the principle of national ownership. We strongly
support the Civilian Capacities Initiative. Broadening
and deepening civilian capacity pools significantly
enhances the ability of peacekeeping operations to
achieve their goals.

14-2389043/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

Promoting the principle of the rule of law is
also a central part of the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission. Croatia, as a current Vice-Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, stands ready to do its part
in supporting countries emerging from conflict in their
efforts towards sustainable peace and development.
We are willing to share our empirical knowledge and
expertise in that field.
Accountability is an important aspect of the
principle of the rule of law. We see the fight against
impunity for war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide as an important element in conflict
prevention. Such crimes must not go unpunished and
their effective prosecution has to be ensured. It is of
the utmost importance to put an end to the culture of
impunity.
We highly value the contributions of international
courts and tribunals in advancing the rule of law at the
international and national levels. The ad hoc tribunals
have profoundly changed the landscape of international
criminal justice and paved the way for the International
Criminal Court, whose work we strongly advocate.
We would also like to underline once again
the important role that women can play in conflict
prevention and resolution and in peacebuilding. It is
crucial to put in place gender-responsive transitional
justice measures as a key element in the process of
restoring the rule of law and governance systems in any
conflict-affected situation. Putting a country back on its
feet is a remarkable opportunity to strengthen women’s
rights, leadership and empowerment. In that regard, the
appropriate legal framework is a vital instrument.
Finally, let me conclude by saying that without peace
and the rule of law there can be no true development.
The rule of law is the very essence and bedrock of any
democratic and successful society. That must be kept in
mind when contemplating each and every peacekeeping
and peacebuilding strategy.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Moldova.
Mr. Lupan (Republic of Moldova): As this is my
first opportunity to speak in the Security Council this
year, I would like to congratulate Lithuania on it having
being elected to serve on this body and to express our
appreciation for the organization of this important
debate in a format in which we all can contribute.

44/85

19/02/2014

I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for the
report before us today (S/2013/341) and for his strong
commitment to strengthening and mainstreaming
United Nations support for the rule of law in all
areas of its activities, in this particular instance in
the maintenance of international peace and security,
including in peacekeeping operations. I would also
like to commend the increased United Nations
attention to the rule of law and justice through highlevel meetings on the topic, during discussions in the
General Assembly and the Security Council and in
consultations on the connection between the rule of law
and conflict prevention and post-conflict peacebuilding
and on the sustainable development goals, as well as in
various other activities in the United Nations system.
The recent changes in many parts of the world and the
new threats and challenges to international peace and
security further strengthen the idea that all aspects of
the rule of law, ranging from citizen security to respect
for the rights and freedoms of the people, should be
ever present on the United Nations agenda.
The Republic of Moldova aligns itself with the
statement of the European Union, delivered earlier
today.
During open debates on the sustainable
development goals, the rule of law and conflict
prevention and post-conflict peacebuilding, we have
already drawn attention to the fact that one aspect of
the process is often overlooked — the need to promote
and strengthen the rule of law in areas affected by
protracted conflicts, which has not been adequately
addressed in previous debates. Nevertheless, that, too,
requires our full attention, and I will mention it further
on in my statement.
The security environment in our world is constantly
changing and the proliferation and diversification
of the risks and threats are an ongoing cause of
concern. Issues such as international terrorism, good
governance, internal conflicts and cybersecurity are
being discussed by the international community more
than before. Hence, respect for the rule of law at the
international and national levels remains as important
as ever.
From the international point of view, the principles
of sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-interference
in the internal affairs of a State remain valid and
pertinent. My country’s experience is clear proof of
that.

14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

As I have already stated, we align ourselves with
the statement of the European Union, in which today’s
main hotspots at the international level were mentioned.
The Government of the Republic of Moldova is also
watching, and continues to follow with deep concern,
the situation in Ukraine. We are extremely saddened
by the loss of life there. Our sincere sympathy goes to
the relatives of the deceased, along with our wishes to
the injured for their speedy recovery. The Government
further urges the parties to refrain from violent actions,
to defuse the situation and to establish an open dialogue
that leads to reconciliation and identifies ways to
overcome the political crisis. All differences in that
neighbouring and friendly country are critical to the
stability of the region as a whole. We are therefore
watching for a way to solve those differences to be
found exclusively by peaceful means, in accordance
with democratic norms, as violence is never a solution.
Returning to the matter of the rule of law at the
national level, from our perspective, the rule of law
has several implications, one of which is that it is a
precondition for better development. We believe that
the security of the State starts from the security of the
citizen. In a State governed by the rule of law, people
need to at least have a judicial system as a guarantor of
their security. A State that genuinely strives for the rule
of law creates greater trust among the population, even
in conflict-affected areas, as well as in the conflict
resolution process. Moreover, we can do more to
uphold international law through our national systems
by the effective implementation of the international
conventions upon which we have agreed.
We should also acknowledge the need for a
framework of institutions aimed at supporting
international law and peace and security. Peacekeeping
therefore remains an important mechanism in assisting
countries through the difficult transition from conflict
to peace and is a collective effort supported by us all. In
that regard, Moldova contributes to the United Nations
and NATO peacekeeping efforts in Kosovo with a
military contingent. That means that every country
can contribute to such a process. That is an important
message for us all.
Let me also refer to the situation in my own
country, the Republic of Moldova, which has continued
to be affected by the unresolved Transnistria conflict
for more than 20 years. A peacekeeping mechanism to
deal, inter alia, with incidents in the conflict zone was
created after the cessation of military hostilities in 1992.

S/PV.7113

But today, the incidents that we are dealing with in the
former conflict zone are no longer related to military
security. They are usually breaches of public order. In
that context, we believe that a civilian peacekeeping
mission that meets United Nations principles and
standards, in line with the rule of law concept for the
purposes of durable and just peace and security, would
be much more relevant.
Not to overlook a more grassroots level, one should
mention that confidence-building measures (CBMs) are
also very important, in particular in conflict prevention
and often in peacekeeping efforts. By way of example, a
number of CBMs are being implemented in our country,
the Republic of Moldova, as part of the Transnistria
conflict resolution process. CBM programmes in the
case of Moldova cover matters related to rebuilding and
reconnecting infrastructure, freedom of movement,
education, ecology and socioeconomic activities.
Such CBMs will also be essential for post-conflict
rehabilitation and reconstruction and are again valid for
many other conflict resolution processes.
Another element that is increasingly linked to the
rule of law is security sector reform, along with the
potential post-conflict disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of military and paramilitary elements,
whose successful reintegration may, in some cases,
be closely related to the sustainability of the peace.
Such topics can and should be the focus of both the
Government and the United Nations or United Nationsmandated organizations, since regional cooperation is
also important in that context, as I have already said.
We should also mention the important role of both
national contributions to rule of law efforts and to
the justice institutions that we support. The Republic
of Moldova has been present, with our lawyers and
judges, at the highest level in Timor-Leste, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Kosovo. At the same time, we have
demonstrated our clear support for the International
Court of Justice in the peaceful settlement of disputes
and, in our capacity as a State party to the Rome
Statute, for the importance and increased role of the
International Criminal Court, which complements
national jurisdictions in fighting impunity for the
crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity and war
crimes in conflict and post-conflict situations.
As such examples show, we remain deeply
committed to our general aim of upholding and
developing an international order based on the rule
of law, where international law, including human

14-2389045/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

rights, is fully respected and implemented and where
accountability is important for maintaining a sense of
responsibility for all. Hence, either through national
participation or international support, every State has
an opportunity to contribute to the rule of law and
international peace and security, as I mentioned earlier.
With regard to human rights, which my delegation
mentioned earlier in the context of conflict resolution
efforts, we would recall that, among many factors, it
is also important to have free, independent, pluralistic
and responsible media. In a globalized world, such
media could serve as a window for dialogue, peace
and reconciliation, as well as a conduit for a correct
or balanced understanding of development and conflict
resolution matters. Concerning the situation concerning
the freedom of the media in the Transnistrian region
of the Republic of Moldova, we must acknowledge that
media outlets in that region are fully controlled by or
experience significant pressure from the administrating
authorities there, and that is not a positive factor in the
overall context of conflict resolution anywhere.
We will probably again sound similar to our
European Union colleague, who spoke in October 2013
at a meeting of the Sixth Committee of the General
Assembly regarding agenda item 85, when we say that
the rule of law presumes full respect for human rights,
which, our own experience shows, is particularly
important for societies in conflict areas.
The “Rights up front” initiative, recently launched
at the United Nations, designates human rights
violations as indictors of potential conflict and ongoing
violations of human rights in conflict areas as conflict
aggravators. In that respect, the need for the United
Nations to monitor human rights situations has been
stressed, along with the idea that promoting respect for
human rights may reduce existing problems in conflict
areas.
In that context, we again invoke the example of my
country, where the unfortunate reality is that we have
a conflict situation. United Nations expert Thomas
Hammarberg, former Human Rights Commissioner
of the Council of Europe, conducted, at the request of
the Moldovan Government, a human rights survey in
2012 in that conflict area, where, unfortunately, the
human rights situation, in particular with regard to
children’s right to education, has worsened. The need
to respect human rights, given our concrete experience
in the Transnistrian region of the Republic of Moldova,
raises another valid point, namely, that respect for
46/85

19/02/2014

human rights is essential from the view of both the
humanitarian perspective and conflict resolution as a
whole.
That is in line with an idea already voiced in the
Council, namely, that the promotion of the rule of law
and universal human rights constitute fundamental
requirements for achieving sustainable peace. In that
regard, we commend the Security Council for its
increasing attention to the promotion of justice and
the rule of law in the context of sustainable peace and
security.
While the rule of law presumes respect for human
rights and freedoms, it is also important for the
purposes of conflict resolution to understand that the
involvement of various State and non-State actors in
mediation, conflict resolution and development efforts
has to take into account the fact that a conflict is in
itself an extremely sensitive situation, and hence needs
a coordinated approach.
In conclusion, I refer once again to the Highlevel Meeting on the Rule of Law at the National and
International Levels and the Declaration unanimously
adopted by all Member States (General Assembly
resolution 67/1), which strengthens the links between the
rule of law and the three pillars of the United Nations,
that is, peace and security, sustainable development
and human rights. The Republic of Moldova remains
directly interested and committed to continuing to
actively participate in all efforts aimed at promoting
and strengthening the rule of law at the international
and national levels for the purpose of ensuring peace
and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mrs. Carrión (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
join others in thanking your country, Madam President,
for convening this important and timely open debate.
My country understands that peace and security must
be viewed in a framework in which both concepts and
their meanings are considered from the point of view of
the rule of law.
All here present have in mind the Declaration of the
High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on the Rule
of Law at the National and International Levels, adopted
on 24 September 2012 (General Assembly resolution
67/1). We also recall the intensive negotiations during
the year to ensure that all Member States achieved
consensus on the text of the Declaration.
14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

Even in those cases where the international
community is unable to resolve conflicts between or
within countries, a legal framework is needed to enable
such societies to go on to develop and become viable.
We believe that that can be achieved only when laws
are fully enforced, with a separation of powers and
the presence of State authority throughout the national
territory.
In that respect, we consider peace and security and
the rule of law to be fully complementary and mutually
reinforcing values. We believe that, in the twenty-first
century, it is not possible to discuss peace and security
without referring to the rule of law, both nationally and
internationally.
The recognition of the rule of law at the national
and international levels is of paramount importance
to the promotion of political dialogue, the peaceful
resolution of conflicts and international cooperation,
concepts that strengthen the three pillars on which
United Nations efforts are based, namely, peace and
security, human rights and development.
My delegation notes with satisfaction that 18 of
the 28 Security Council missions have a mandate to
strengthen rule-of-law institutions. We believe that,
while each mission relates to a different reality, all
mandates should include rule-of-law principles and aim
at the weakest points indicated in each case.
That is clearly insufficient in and of itself for
achieving peace, but we must strengthen efforts towards
peace. If we agree on the benefits provided by the rule of
law to the international community and today’s society,
it would also be desirable for national and international
justice systems to prosecute those responsible for
massacres and killings around the world, which may be
the result of the use of conventional weapons or, even
worse, of the use of weapons banned by international
law.
In that regard, although our country — as is wellknown — opposes the use of the veto, we urge the
permanent members of the Security Council to refrain
from the use of the veto, especially in cases of war
crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and mass
atrocities.
To conclude, my delegation believes that, beyond
the inclusion of the rule of law and its various facets
as the objective of missions mandated by the Security
Council, it is essential to create the necessary conditions
in countries that are, unfortunately, plagued by violence

S/PV.7113

and disregard for human rights so that, through the
implementation of national and international law,
including humanitarian and human rights law, societies
can finally advance towards improved development in
peaceful and secure conditions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Lasso Mendoza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
It is a special pleasure for my country to participate
in this open debate organized by the presidency of
the Security Council under the leadership of the
representative of Lithuania, whom we thank for this
opportunity.
My country firmly believes that the existence of
a set of common values and principles forms the basis
of harmonious coexistence. Under those premises, we
consider the rule of law as a pillar of governance and
of peaceful coexistence among citizens and nations.
That is why we defend the equality of citizens before
the law and the sovereign equality of States as set forth
in the Charter of the United Nations. We believe that
a strong State with effective institutions is crucial
in order to promote the development of a country,
not only guaranteeing security for its citizens and
ensuring respect for sovereignty but also preventing
abuses by certain economic parties to the detriment
of the majority of the population. We reiterate our
traditional commitment to the rule of law at both the
national and the international levels, two areas that are
equally important and complementary. There can be no
progress if one of them is ignored.
We feel that it is also crucial to establish the root
causes of conflicts, and we reject any effort to link
them to poverty, perversely imputing responsibility
to poor countries, forgetting the fact that those who
manufacture weapons in industrialized countries are
part of the problem and that they aggravate the problem
through their financial and logistical support as well as
with the shipment of weapons of all calibres to groups
of combatants. Looking for the roots of conflicts solely
in internal factors is absurd and hypocritical, because it
seeks to avoid recognizing that the use of force without
express authorization by the Security Council is one of
the main sources of conflicts in the world.
My delegation believes that it is essential to
make a very clear distinction between violence and
conflict situations, as was pointed out clearly by the
delegations of Brazil and Nicaragua during the debate

14-2389047/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

on sustainable development goals. While violence
can be the result of individual actions without any
connection to international relations, conflicts and
wars can be the result of political decisions— which
implies that different types of response are required
to the two situations. While conflicts and wars can be
tackled through collective actions, strictly based on
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations,
violence is a matter that comes under the purview of
the authorities of each country and is subject to national
legislation.
Consequently, the maintenance of international
peace and security necessarily involves strengthening
regional support for democracy. By strengthening the
sovereign decisions of peoples and their legitimately
constituted Governments, the possibility of violence
is diminished. In that regard, I should point out the
existence of the democracy clause agreed to by the
Heads of State of the Union of South American Nations,
which seeks to guarantee democracy in the region.
My delegation continues to attach particular
importance to the development of the rule of law at the
international level. In that respect, we have the utmost
faith in the work done by the General Assembly, the
role of which cannot be and should not be replaced by
committees of eminent individuals or by international
forums outside the General Assembly, which is the
highest legislative body of the Organization and the
only international forum with sufficient authority to
lead the process of development and strengthen the
rule of law. In accordance with that value, we cannot
accept that officials of the Secretariat might claim to be
supervisors of the implementation of the rule of law at
the national level, nor can we accept the establishment
of a single model that would be imposed on the entire
world or the linking of compliance with the supposed
parameters of the rule of law to international assistance
for the development of poor countries.
We believe it is crucial to promote the reform of the
Security Council, an organ with an outdated structure
that maintains unacceptable privileges for certain
States to the detriment of others. We must conclude
negotiations on the matter and proceed to Security
Council reform, thereby making the actions of that
body more democratic and transparent.
My country vigorously rejects the extraterritorial
application of national laws, spying on Heads of State
or Government, the application of unilateral measures,

48/85

19/02/2014

the practice of selective assassinations, as well as the
use or the threat of the use of force without express
authorization from the Security Council.
For Ecuador, the gradual universalization of the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court is a
huge step in favour of the rule of law at the international
level.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Makharoblishvili (Georgia): At the outset,
Madam President, let me express our gratitude to the
presidency of the Republic of Lithuania for organizing
today’s open debate, and personally to His Excellency
Mr. Linas Linkevičius, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Lithuania, for his statement, which
has significantly contributed to the constructive and
comprehensive nature of our deliberations today.
Georgia fully associates itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union earlier
today. In addition, I would like to make some comments
in my national capacity.
We consider regular open debates on the rule of law
in the Security Council an essential part of the United
Nations work to advance and strengthen the unique
role of the Organization, as recognized by the States
Members of the United Nations in the Declaration
of the High-Level Meeting of the General Assembly
on the Rule of Law at the National and International
Levels (General Assembly resolution 67/1), adopted on
24 September 2012.
As that Declaration so rightly underlines, the rule
of law is of fundamental importance for strengthening
the three main pillars upon which the United Nations
is built — international peace and security, human
rights and development. The rule of law is indeed a key
element of conflict prevention, peacekeeping, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding, with justice as a critical
element for achieving peace and security in countries in
conflict and post-conflict situations. In that regard, we
fully share the position of the European Union, which
supports an effective and efficient interplay between
national justice systems and the International Criminal
Court in the fight against impunity, in accordance with
the principles enshrined in the Rome Statute.
In that connection, my Government has been
working to adapt Georgian legislation to the best
international standards and intends to further its work

14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

in that direction. Georgia is party to the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court, and the Parliament
of Georgia has adopted a law on cooperation with the
Court.
We would also like to stress that strengthening
the rule of law, as a long-term process, presupposes
the sovereign right and primary responsibility of the
country concerned to determine its national approach
and priorities. We fully share the view expressed in the
presidency’s concept note for today’s debate (S/2014/75,
annex) that it should be a nationally owned process
rooted in the particular needs and conditions, culture
and traditions of the country in question. The successful
coordination of efforts to promote the rule of law must
be based on national consensus and driven by political
leadership and political will.
With that in mind, we welcome the attribution of
the strategic leadership role on the matter to the Rule
of Law Coordination and Resource Group, and we
support its greater engagement with Member States
and other key rule-of-law actors, including regional
organizations, with the aim of continuing to enhance
policy coherence within the United Nations system.
Reiterating that a holistic and coherent United
Nations approach to security sector reform is vital,
Georgia supports the development of a comprehensive
United Nations strategy on the rule of law, taking into
account its multidisciplinary nature. As one of the
important elements, close thematic links to security
sector reform should be further studied and reflected in
our work on the rule-of-law strategy. Georgia is ready
to work closely with the Rule of Law Coordination
and Resource Group, as well as with the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the United Nations
Development Programme, which serve as the joint
global focal point for the police, justice and corrections
areas in the promotion of the rule of law in post-conflict
and other crisis situations, with the aim of equipping
the Organization with common principles and high
standards, a system-wide approach, the requisite
resources and, in some cases, with the capacities to
deliver efficient support to national authorities.
We believe that the United Nations strategy on the
rule of law should be developed in close cooperation
with all stakeholders, including individual Member
States and regional organizations. That would be
useful for sharing experience and developing practical
guidelines to be encompassed by the strategy and would

S/PV.7113

represent a good platform for the provision of adequate
human resources and expertise as needed to support
States in conflict and post-conflict situations.
In our view, the process should also include the
development of a strategy for evaluating the concept of
the rule of law. We fully agree with the recommendation
of the Secretary-General contained in his report of
11 June 2013 (S/2013/341) that such a strategy should
be a goal of the United Nations system, supported by
Member States.
In the meantime, we share the concern expressed
by the Secretary-General that, although a culture of
measurement is gradually taking root in the United
Nations, it still falls short of providing systematic
baseline data on the rule of law. We are mindful of
the significant challenges that exist in measuring and
evaluating the impact of rule-of-law activities, as reliable
rule-of-law data continue not to be available owing to
the lack of access in many conflict-affected countries.
We would support drawing up additional measures to
cover such shortcomings in data collection, which are
often caused by a lack of political will on the part of
the actors in control of conflict areas. Such measures
should be in line with and reinforce the capacities of
United Nations field missions in their efforts to support
national data collection and analysis.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand welcomes
the commitment to the rule of law shown by the Security
Council and thanks Lithuania for convening this very
important debate.
We now have a substantive body of Council
resolutions, presidential statements and mandates
emphasizing the importance of the rule of law as a key
element in conflict prevention, peacekeeping, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding. The real challenge
for the Council, and for the broader United Nations
membership, lies in the substantive, effective and
timely implementation of those principles. And that
challenge is stark.
For New Zealand, it is no longer acceptable to
confine such discussions to an abstract legal principle.
We must focus on the practical actions of the Council
and the impact of those actions on creating and
sustaining international peace and security. In that
regard, we recall that a major theme from last month’s

14-2389049/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

open debate on “War, its lessons, and the search for
permanent peace” (see S/PV.7105) was the importance
of building a genuine rule-of-law environment for
sustainable peace.
It is New Zealand’s view that the rule of law must
be a core priority in all mission planning. The initial
phases of planning all peacekeeping operations must
include effective early peacebuilding initiatives, not
least by mainstreaming rule-of-law activities. New
Zealand urges an integrated, flexible and mobile
approach, supported by personnel capable of carrying
out the functions required by very complex missions.
Through our participation in peacebuilding
activities in our own region, New Zealand has learned
that an early focus on building effective and accountable
rule-of-law institutions is central to success. It helps
shift power from those who might gain from conflict
to those who would uphold good governance and the
rule of law.
Strengthening rule-of-law institutions also
requires a long-term focus. Fundamental change, such
as building the capacity of genuinely independent legal
institutions and staff, moving law reform forward and
strengthening engagement with traditional justice
systems, requires a commitment lasting decades
rather than just months. It is therefore vital that the
Council provide the strategic direction and oversight
that is needed to ensure that efforts are coordinated
and sequenced, and are adapted to the context. In that
respect, New Zealand welcomes recent coordination
efforts between the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the United Nations Development
Programme; plans by the Rule of Law Coordination
and Resource Group to increase cooperation and
coordination; and the Secretary-General’s suggestion
that the Council consider mandating rule-of-law
evaluation capacity in all of its missions. Such efforts
will help the United Nations to focus on activities that
have the greatest actual impact.
To be effective, efforts to strengthen the rule of
law must be tailored to the culture and traditions of
the host country. In our practical experience, three
key features contribute to a successful mandate. First,
support for the rule of law should be in partnership with
the host country and must accommodate the needs and
traditions of the various groups that might be involved.
Secondly, support should include regional expertise,
endorsement and participation. Thirdly, support should

50/85

19/02/2014

be provided under a clear legal framework, including
a strong emphasis on consultation and coordination.
Operating in such a manner would also focus rule-oflaw activities on building the host country’s capacity to
meet its own protection obligations towards its citizens.
Accountability is a critical element of the rule of
law, as has been emphasized by many Member States.
The lack of accountability undermines not only the rule
of law itself, but also any prospects for reconciliation
and sustainable peace. No two cases are the same. A
model that works in one place may not be right for
another. But the Council must never lose sight of the
need to address individual accountability in some
manner.
The International Criminal Court (ICC), ad hoc
tribunals, regional courts and domestic institutions all
play an important role. New Zealand supports the ICC,
but we are looking for it to perform in a more sensitive
and appropriate manner under its newly amended rules
of procedure. Its ability to ensure accountability relies
on its being not only independent, but also flexible
enough to respond to the needs of its constituents.
The Council also has an important role to play. It
must be more supportive of the ICC in a practical way,
so that the Court remains an effective accountability
tool. But the Council must also be wise when it comes
to exercising its power of referral, and more sensitive to
regional concerns when considering issues of deferral.
New Zealand is a strong supporter of models such
as the hybrid courts in Cambodia and Sierra Leone.
They have played a vital role in developing national
legal systems, in promoting the rule of law and in
ensuring accountability. These and other models placed
in a local setting allow far greater local ownership
and participation, and can enable a greater level of
reconciliation. New Zealand would therefore welcome
their wider use in appropriate circumstances.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Senegal.
Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): At
the outset, let me wish you, Madam, my warmest
congratulations upon your delegation’s assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of February. I also wish to thank your predecessor, His
Royal Highness Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein,
Permanent Representative of the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan, for all that he accomplished while leading

14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7113

this body. I would also like to assure you of the full
cooperation of my delegation in the exercise of your
lofty and important responsibility.

between the need for reconciliation and the need to
fight impunity, as difficult as that may be, in order to
ensure lasting peace.

I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2013/341), which places particular emphasis
on the evaluation of the United Nations contributions
to efforts to incorporate the rule of law at the heart
of the activities of the international community in
maintaining peace and international security.

Today, the multifaceted nature of peacekeeping
operations is welcomed by all. However, bitter failures
in certain transition processes lead us to revisit one of
the fundamental elements of peacekeeping operations,
namely, the promotion of the rule of law on the basis of
strong and democratic institutions, in particular in the
peacebuilding phase. We would like to clarify that it is
the primary responsibility of Governments to establish
a democratic system and set in motion a process that
brings those who have perpetrated human-rights abuses
to justice. In that regard, my delegation would advocate
a holistic strategy for better coherence among the
activities of deployed missions in the political, security,
development, human-rights and rule-of-law fields.

We are gathered here once again to consider
together how to strengthen the rule of law in the
maintenance of peace and international security, a
topic that illustrates, in many ways, the urgent need to
end impunity and underlines the Council’s unwavering
commitment to doing so. The interrelationship between
the rule of law and peace means that we must take a
stand against impunity in armed conflicts and take
decisive action on the best ways to mainstream the rule
of law as a foundation for lasting peace in the context
of peacekeeping operations.
As highlighted by the Declaration of the Highlevel Meeting of the General Assembly on the Rule
of Law at the National and International Levels
(General Assembly resolution 67/1), impunity cannot
be tolerated, especially when we are faced with the
most heinous crimes, such as genocide, war crimes and
other crimes against humanity. The Council members’
common duty, as members of the organ with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, is to prevent humankind from
ever again facing genocide and other crimes against
humanity.
In several theatres of operation, the seeds of
conflict between communities are sprouting and
growing as they are fed by impunity. In addition to
causing conflicts, the scourge of impunity unleashes a
desire for vengeance, which causes fresh outbursts of
violence in countries that would otherwise be focused
on post-conflict reconstruction.
That raises the overarching issue of the
administration of transitional justice, which is believed
to ensure a definitive return to peace in countries in
conflict. In fact, the adoption of amnesty laws, the
establishment of truth and reconciliation commissions
and the integration of rebel forces into the ranks of the
regular army should, in no case, prevent perpetrators
of war crimes or crimes against humanity from being
brought to justice. Therefore, a balance must be struck

In that respect, it is of the utmost importance
that the Council highlight the need to improve the
effectiveness of such missions, taking into account the
challenges encountered in the fight against impunity.
Along those lines, United Nations missions’ activities
on the ground should be concentrated on strengthening
judiciary and security bodies, such as law enforcement,
the justice system and the prison system. It follows
that the rule of law is the touchstone of any system for
conflict prevention and settlement, peacekeeping or
peacebuilding.
I would therefore like to welcome and highlight
the close relationship between the rule of law and the
aims of our Organization, which are threefold: peace
and security, human rights, and development. I can
assure the Council that my country remains committed
to those ideals, which are the basis for a viable future
in any society.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Mr. Ruiz (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I would like
to thank you, Madam President, for having organized
this open debate on a topic of great importance for
all Member States, namely, justice and the rule of
law. I would like to acknowledge all those who have
spoken before me and welcome the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2013/341) on measuring the effectiveness
of the support provided by the United Nations for
the promotion of the rule of law in conflict and postconflict situations.

14-2389051/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

Colombia attaches great importance to the rule of
law and sees it as a key element in the maintenance
and strengthening of institutions and the efficient
administration of justice. For example, in Colombia,
international treaties on human rights and international
humanitarian law are part of our constitutional body
of law, which, according to our national jurisprudence,
means that their provisions are binding and normative
as constitutional provisions that supersede domestic
law. In applying those principles, we act in accordance
with the principles that underlie such treaties and in line
with our country’s belief that efforts to strengthen the
rule of law should be based on States’ own initiatives,
in accordance with their particular needs and their
institutional capacities.
Colombia believes that the administration of
justice is one of the primary roles of States and that
the strength of their democratic institutions depends
on it. We therefore welcome the interest shown during
the development and implementation of measures
launched by the Government of Colombia to ensure
the rights of victims to truth, justice and reparations,
which go hand in hand with a system of reforms to the
justice system. Among those reforms, I would like to
highlight Law No. 975 of 2005, known as the Justice
and Peace Act, which lays out the provisions for the
social reintegration of illegal armed groups, and Law
No. 1448 of 2011, or the Victims and Land Restitution
Act, which establishes measures to provide assistance
and comprehensive reparations to the victims of my
country’s internal armed conflict. In addition, we have
tools such as the Legislative Act No. 01 of 2012, which
altered the political Constitution of our country and is
known as the Legal Framework for Peace, which is a
transitional justice strategy to investigate and punish
serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. Those provisions could serve as
a point of reference for programmes that seek to
strengthen the rule of law in countries in situations
similar to Colombia’s.
While Colombia recognizes the importance of
the International Criminal Court in the fight against
impunity for the most heinous crimes against humanity,
it must also be stressed that strengthening States’
national capacities to prosecute and punish such crimes
is in the interest of lasting and sustainable peace.
We are aware of the challenges posed by the full
implementation of the rule of law. We are committed
to continuing to try to work towards that end and to

52/85

19/02/2014

achieve well-being and prosperity for all of our citizens.
In that context, we welcome the support that the United
Nations can provide us in our efforts to strengthen the
rule of law in Colombia.
We are also well aware of the responsibilities
associated with the proper administration of justice.
Under Law No. 1395 of 2010, we are seeking to
eliminate bottlenecks in the judicial sector, so as to
make it a more effective tool for a more speedy and
complete justice for all citizens.
Colombia would like to stress how important it
is for the analysis of different situations to take into
account the particular characteristics of each situation,
including the different legal traditions and systems
and challenges of different kinds, in order to avoid
conceptualizations or generalizations that cannot be
adapted to the realities on the ground.
It is extremely important that the United Nations,
and in particular the Security Council, adopt a
cooperative approach with States when it comes to
strengthening the various areas that could be improved
in the rule of law. Hence it is important to broaden
communication between the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and the Security Council.
To conclude, I should like to stress that the actions
taken by the United Nations in this field are most
effective when they complement the efforts made
by States. It would be very difficult to understand
if decisions taken by the Security Council in the
framework of abstract topics of general application
were to be applied to specific situations against the
course set by legitimately constituted authorities with
a view to strengthening the rule of law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): We thank His Excellency
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Lithuania for presiding over the earlier segment of
this meeting, and we also thank His Excellency the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
Promoting and strengthening the rule of law
at the national and international levels is of utmost
importance to the State of Palestine. In recent years, our
country has progressively built and continues to build
its State institutions, specifically regarding the rule of
law and governance at the national level. Currently, this
effort is supported through the 2014-2016 Development

14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

Assistance Framework concluded between the State of
Palestine and the United Nations; governance, rule of
law, justice and human rights are one of the six pillars
of the agreement.
While we continue to make progress in promoting
and strengthening the rule of law nationally, the rule of
law internationally continues, regrettably, to founder.
This is what the international community, specifically
this Council, must address, based on the conviction that
the rule of law at the international level is the key to
the maintenance of international peace and security,
its Charter mandate. We hold that the rule of law is
also the key to ending Israel’s nearly 47-year military
occupation.
The challenge for the State of Palestine is that the
Council too often protects the powerful and deflects
the weak. That is evident in that Israel, the occupying
Power, continues to colonize Palestinian land, carry
on with illegal practices and commit war crimes,
setting back our development, curtailing our rights and
sabotaging the possibility of peace and the credibility
of the international legal system.
In the case of the question of Palestine, the shelving
of international law has led only to a chronic failure
to achieve peace and the compounding of the conflict
and the human suffering it is inflicting. Today’s debate
concerns a broader theme, and we welcome that; yet it
is imperative to be realists, as there is a simple reality:
without justice you cannot have peace, and without law
you cannot have justice. Further, without compliance
with the law, chaos will prevail, and the outcomes will
be difficult to fully predict.
If we are to succeed in our endeavour of building
and institutionalizing a culture of law, we must ensure
that the Israeli occupation ends and that the conflict
is resolved on the basis of law. In the case of the State
of Palestine, the law has, at best, been sidelined and,
at worst, transgressed in the most egregious manner.
The rights of the Palestine refugees have been ignored.
The human rights of the Palestinian people have been
systematically violated. The humanitarian rights of the
Palestinian people as protected persons continue to be
trampled. Their rights under the Charter are perpetually
denied, particularly the right to self-determination.
It is accurate to say that this is an unprecedented
case of lack of rule of law. The Security Council has
failed to implement its own resolutions; it has failed
for over 46 years to prevent the insidious and active

S/PV.7113

colonization of Palestinian land and the constant
attempts to change the status of Jerusalem, a city of
international importance; and it has failed to be faithful
to the purposes and principles of the Charter. Through
the Council’s failure to uphold the law, it has created an
environment of impunity, allowing a State to continue
acting above the law.
The Declaration of the high-level meeting of the
General Assembly on the rule of law states:
“We commit to ensuring that impunity is not
tolerated for genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity or for violations of international
humanitarian law and gross violations of human
rights law, and that such violations are properly
investigated and appropriately sanctioned, including
by bringing the perpetrators of any crimes to
justice, through national mechanisms or, where
appropriate, regional or international mechanisms,
in accordance with international law, and for this
purpose we encourage States to strengthen national
judicial systems and institutions.” (General
Assembly resolution 67/1, para. 22)
Time is of the essence for the international
community to act to prevent Israel’s settlement
annexation enterprise from destroying the viability
of and the prospects for a negotiated two-State
solution based on the pre-1967 borders and the longstanding international consensus. We urge all States
to take concerted, collective action to disassociate
their economies and institutions from Israel’s illegal
practices, specifically settlements, and to insist on
respect for the rule of law, as enshrined in the Charter,
international covenants and conventions and United
Nations resolutions, so as to justly resolve this decadeslong conflict.
In this regard, we welcome initiatives by the
European Union and other States to deny any funding
to Israeli entities in the occupied Arab territories, and
those States, such as South Africa, that have begun
labelling Israeli settlement products as such. We
encourage others to follow, with the hope of salvaging
the prospects for a just and peaceful two-State solution
strengthened by the rule of law.
The Palestinian people continue to wait for the
international community to fulfil its pledges and
continue to be not the exception to the rule, but an
example of the achievement of freedom, peace and
justice through the rule of law.

14-2389053/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): Madam
President, we would like to thank you for having
convened this debate. We also welcome the Security
Council’s practice regarding the inclusion of the rule
of law in peacekeeping missions. In that context, we
welcome the recent efforts of the Secretary-General
to ensure greater coordination on the ground by, inter
alia, designating the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the United Nations Development
Programme as the joint global focal point for the police,
justice and corrections areas in the rule of law in postconflict and other crisis situations.
On the institutional front, we believe that the Rule
of Law Unit of the Secretariat has an important role to
play in defining a consistent and coordinated approach
to the rule of law throughout the United Nations system.
We hope that pooling our efforts will make a difference
on the ground.
That said, restoring and strengthening the rule of
law in the aftermath of conflict and building national
capacities are challenges that require our attention
in both mission and non-mission settings. We must
be consistent in our efforts from the very outset and
sustain our efforts in the long term.
Madam, we thank your presidency for preparing a
concept note (S/2014/75, annex) that rightly highlights a
number of important steps that could be taken to ensure
that rule-of-law mandates are more effective. It is
very important that mandates be spelled out in a more
specific fashion to improve monitoring. Moreover,
mandates must be tailored to specific situations, inter
alia, through consultations with the host country, local
actors and other stakeholders.
In that regard, special political missions and United
Nations country teams could also be mandated in a
more systematic manner to do political work and to
promote the rule of law.
Mandates that assist international criminal justice
efforts by supporting both national processes and the
International Criminal Court, as was the case for Mali
in resolution 2100 (2013), are extremely important.
In order for them to be successfully implemented,
however, the international community must stand
firmly behind them.

54/85

19/02/2014

Switzerland also wishes to draw the attention of
Member States to the fact that the Criminal Law and
Judicial Advisory Service of the Office of the Rule of
Law and Security Institutions is increasingly short of
funds and resources, although it supports and provides
advice to operations on the ground. As a result, experts
who should be quickly made available to support the
rule of law cannot be deployed in a timely manner in the
field. We therefore encourage the Secretary-General to
submit an appropriate budget proposal to the General
Assembly.
Finally, the United Nations must itself adhere to the
principle of the rule of law in order to credibly promote
it. We should continue to consider options to fill
existing gaps, in particular by holding United Nations
personnel accountable for any abuses.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I thank you,
Madam President, for organizing this important debate
on the promotion and strengthening of the rule of law
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
The concept note prepared by Lithuania (S/2014/75,
annex) explores in an excellent way the challenges and
opportunities in this field.
My country aligns itself with the statement made
by the observer of the European Union, and my full
statement is available.
In our view, respect for the rule of law is an
essential condition for peace and for lasting economic
development. It is inextricably linked to the protection
of human rights and fundamental freedoms. As an open
society and an open economy, the Netherlands depends
on a strong international order. Our Constitution even
obligates our Government to promote the international
legal order, and as my Minister, Mr. Timmermans, has
said, in Europe we have traded the rule of the strongest
for the rule of law.
I would like to make three specific points.
First, for the Netherlands, international law and the
legal order are crucial. International legal institutions,
such as the various courts and tribunals in The Hague,
make a positive contribution to preventing conflicts, to
strengthening the rule of law and to combating impunity
by holding to account those who have perpetrated
mass-atrocity crimes. International efforts should be
complementary to efforts under national law. States

14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

have a fundamental responsibility to pursue the rule of
law towards everyone within their jurisdiction.
The Netherlands strongly believes that the Security
Council should refer the current mass atrocities in Syria
to the International Criminal Court. In general, the
interaction between this Council and the International
Criminal Court must be improved. More generally,
the international legal order will be strengthened if
all States Members of the United Nations accept the
compulsory jurisdiction of the International Court of
Justice in The Hague.
My second point is that in our view, the rule of law
is essential for sustainable development. Security and
the rule of law are important development outcomes in
their own right. They are also critical building blocks
for sustainable development and inclusive economic
growth. Therefore, we want to see the rule of law and
justice for all included in the post-2015 framework.
Peace and inclusive and effective institutions require
the leadership and ownership of the countries involved,
supported by the United Nations upon request. That can
be achieved only through the acceptance, involvement
and participation of citizens and communities. Women,
especially, are drivers of development.
Countries without a functioning system that
guarantees the rule of law will be unable to reach their
development goals. Bilateral efforts must complement
multilateral efforts. One of the four pillars of the Dutch
development cooperation policy is security and the
rule of law. I am proud to say that we have very active
bilateral cooperation programmes with both Uganda
and with Rwanda in this field.
The third point is that we need a comprehensive
approach. Let me recall the High-level Meeting of the
General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the National
and International Levels, which took place in September
2012. It was the first United Nations summit of its
kind. The Declaration that was adopted at that meeting
(General Assembly resolution 67/1) requests greater
coordination and coherence among the United Nations
entities and with donors and recipients with the aim of
improving the effectiveness of rule-of-law capacitybuilding activities in countries. The Netherlands fully
agrees with that statement.
We therefore support United Nations engagement on
the rule of law through the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), the Department of Peacekeeping

S/PV.7113

Operations (DPKO) and the Peacebuilding Fund.
We support the decision of the Secretary-General to
appoint DPKO and UNDP as the focal point for police,
justice and corrections activities. We urge all involved
to continue strengthening the implementation of that
initiative, as requested by United Nations missions and
offices in the field. More generally, we believe that the
Security Council mandates for peacekeeping operations
should include provisions on the rule of law.
To ensure growth and development, the rule of
law is especially essential for States coming out of
conflict. We need to address the causes of conflict and
fragility so as to break the cycle and make development
possible. However, that works only if a coordinated
and comprehensive strategy is in place early on, one
to which bilateral and multilateral actors are truly
committed. National ownership and vision must guide
it in order to meet expectations and to maintain the
momentum and credibility of the process. There can
be no lasting peace without justice, accountability and
reconciliation.
To conclude, let me underline the relevance of the
rule of law for the people that we represent here at the
United Nations. As the Dutch philosopher Spinoza,
who lived some 350 years ago, said, the goal of the
State is actually freedom. For citizens worldwide, the
rule of law, safety and justice are crucial to guarantee
that freedom, to achieve lasting prosperity and to
prevent violence and conflict. Country leadership
and ownership are essential, and where needed, the
international community should stand ready with
coordinated and long-term assistance. The Netherlands
is and will continue to be a partner for peace, justice
and development to both the United Nations and its
Member States in that respect.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
presence this morning and the Lithuanian presidency
for having organized this debate.
Spain fully associates itself with the statement
made this morning by the observer of the European
Union.
I will distribute in the Chamber the full version of
my statement. However, given the long list of speakers,
I will extract the paragraphs and statements that, in my
opinion, are the most interesting.

14-2389055/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

19/02/2014

The strengthening of the rule of law is absolutely
key in conflict prevention and peacebuilding. The
international community should assist and support
those countries in conflict and post-conflict situations.

peacekeeping operations. Such experience demonstrates
to the Spanish people that strengthening the rule of law
is an essential pillar of conflict prevention and ensuring
durable peace.

Spain believes that the strengthening of the rule of
law should be an essential component of mandates of
United Nations missions. In countries that have recently
experienced a conflict, moreover, the role of transitional
justice is particularly important. Transitional justice
should be aimed at the prosecution of serious crimes
and human rights violations perpetrated during the
conflict.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.

In the process of strengthening the rule of law,
women should occupy a central place. There are many
measures, but I will mention only one: women should
be given a relevant role in the decision-making process.
At the United Nations, we talk a great deal about
ownership. National ownership is absolutely key to
success. We therefore fully share the position expressed
in the excellent concept note prepared by the Lithuanian
presidency (S/2014/75, annex). National actors must
build institutions and make them their own. No one
likes to have institutions imposed from outside.
There must also be adequate planning for all
actions. To that end, we must always adopt a gradual
approach that includes flexibility.
It is also necessary to ensure that United Nations
missions receive adequate and predictable resources. In
that context I wish to highlight two issues. Predictability
necessitates knowing at a given time how to tackle new
situations, which will continue to arise. On the other
hand, within the context of the United Nations system,
the relationship between the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) and United Nations missions in post-conflict
situations must be strengthened.
I will conclude by mentioning Spain. My country
has placed the rule of law at the very core of its foreign
policy. We have supported capacity-building in the
justice and security sectors and established training
programmes on many diverse topics. We have organized
seminars, courses and workshops devoted to the justice
sector in several Latin American countries and also
worked in the Arab world, where, since 2010, Spain
has promoted the “Masar” programme focused on
promoting democratic governance in the Arab world.
Spain has broad experience in cooperation
with other countries and participates extensively in

56/85

Mr. Logar (Slovenia): I would like to join the
others in expressing its appreciation to your delegation,
Madam, for organizing this debate on the promotion
and strengthening of the rule of law.
My delegation fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union. In
addition, we would like to make a few comments in our
national capacity about topics of special interest.
The rule of law is key not only to international
peace and security, but also to sustainable development,
respect for human rights and the fight against impunity.
It is also a precondition for success in those areas. The
international community, including the organs of the
United Nations, must therefore step up its efforts to
strengthen its support to countries requiring assistance
in establishing, upholding and respecting the rule of
law.
My delegation recognizes the linkages between the
rule of law and the maintenance of peace and security.
We therefore welcome the inclusion of rule-of-law
parameters in several of the mandates adopted by the
Security Council. The inclusion of clear, tailor-made
rule-of-law activities is of significant importance in
securing stability in conflict and post-conflict areas in
the future. In that regard, we believe that feasible time
lines, a follow-up mechanism and strict accountability
for actions taken should be included in the mandates.
Cooperation between the international community and
experts in diverse security situations might be also
useful.
Regional organizations, and especially local
stakeholders, should also be included in the process
of establishing the rule of law, as national ownership
of the process is crucial in upholding the rule of law
after the expiration of a mandate. Therefore, technical
assistance to local judicial institutions is vital, and
evaluation and monitoring of our work in enhancing
the rule of law are of great importance. It is essential
that international organizations and other stakeholders
work together towards a balanced, fair and just world
that can only be achieved in the presence of functioning
rule-of-law institutions.
14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

Cooperation at the national and international levels
must be enhanced, and the various international and
regional organizations should become involved in
specific situations. The role of individual international
organizations should be based on their mandates,
expertise, facilities and other comparative advantages.
Their role should be clearly defined, duplication of
efforts avoided and information on good practices and
lessons learned exchanged.
In that regard, we recognize that the activities
of NATO have contributed towards a stable security
environment, enabling other international organizations
and stakeholders to implement various aspects of
stabilization and reconstruction.
The rule of law also includes the fight against
impunity. We believe that the role of international
criminal courts and tribunals, in particular the
International Criminal Court (ICC), is essential
in establishing the rule of law. The prosecution of
international crimes should remain the primary
responsibility of States, according to the principle of
complementarity. The role of the ICC takes on particular
importance in cases where States are unable or unwilling
to prosecute perpetrators of the most heinous crimes. In
that context, we emphasize the need to strengthen the
international legal framework for judicial assistance
and extradition between States in order to support the
effective prosecution of international crimes at the
national level.
Having recognized that legal gap, Slovenia, the
Netherlands, Belgium and Argentina have been working
together on an initiative to consider the possibility of
adopting a new international instrument on mutual
legal assistance and extradition so as to ensure effective
investigation and prosecution of the most serious crimes
of international concern by domestic jurisdictions.
To conclude, as a staunch supporter of the ICC,
Slovenia would like to encourage the Council to
seriously consider referrals to the International
Criminal Court as one of the tools for establishing the
rule of law. In that connection, an effective follow-up of
the referred cases is equally essential.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Albania.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me start by thanking the
Lithuanian presidency of the Security Council for its
initiative to hold this open debate on the promotion and

S/PV.7113

strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security, and for preparing the
concept note thereto (S/2014/75, annex).
Albania has aligned itself with the statement made
earlier on behalf of the European Union (EU), and I will
therefore limit myself to some remarks in my national
capacity.
The correlation between rule-of-law institutions
and the maintenance of peace and security in conflict
and post-conflict situations and in the context of many
other diverse fragile situations resulting from economic,
political and social downturns, as well as their impact
on development, social cohesion and human rights, has
been established beyond any doubt. It is now known
only too well that, when rule-of-law institutions fail or
lack strength, peace, with all its benefits of development
and human flourishing, cannot be sustained. In many
examples around the world, Adam Smith’s words — a
society, while it can exist with some inequality, cannot
exist without justice — remain so true.
For that reason, the role of the United Nations, and
especially of the Security Council — as the body tasked
with maintaining collective security — is central
when it comes to ensuring that peacekeeping and the
peacemaking operations under its mandate include
the restoration of justice and of institutions seeking to
strengthen the rule of law.
I would like to make a couple of remarks on some
issues that my delegation believes are interconnected,
which is why efforts to address them ought to be
concerted as well.
First, regarding the design of mandates, we think
that clarity on issues such as the accountability of the
actors involved in peacekeeping and peacemaking
operations, transitional justice and rule-of-law
processes, and the transparency of activities are
indispensable to enhancing legitimacy and improving
performance.
For rule-of-law policies to be effective, they
should respond to the demands of particular situations
and reflect the diverse social, political and economic
conditions and imperatives of local societies. That
approach does not betray the universal principle at hand
here, which is to seek justice; rather, it raises awareness
of the blind spots and tensions that can be found in
policies, and consequently creates better conditions for
the implementation of rule-of-law reforms.

14-2389057/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

Secondly, on the sequencing and continuity of
support, my delegation believes that United Nations
mandates ought to ensure that the attention and focus on
rule-of-law reforms do not displace attention from other
aspects of societies in transition, namely, economic
development and general human development. Hence,
a holistic approach is needed to embrace other vital
aspects of development. Furthermore, long-term
commitment is essential in creating conditions that
build trust in rule-of-law institutions and in supporting
local actors that have a vital stake in restoring and
consolidating justice.
Thirdly and lastly, there must be cooperation with
local actors and coordination of activities. National
ownership and the internalization of rule-of-law
institutions are conditions that can be created through
an inclusive process and by embracing various local
actors. That approach favours the democratization
of local societies and builds trust that solutions to
problems can be found locally.
The rule of law would mean little without the
guarantee of respect for human rights and building
civilian capacities as indispensable tracks for building
trust, for reconciliation and for re-assembling societies
scattered in pain and hatred. Hard decisions that
many countries have made to bring the perpetrators
of huge injustices before the international criminal
courts — like the International Criminal Court and the
ad hoc tribunals, particularly the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia — are signs of
healing and an embracing of the principle of impunity.
Safeguarding that legacy and further building upon it is
an obligation for all nations.
The rule of law is a pervasive concept, and thus
every actor involved might contribute a bit to further
strengthen it. In that respect, I would like to particularly
point out the precious contribution and achievements of
regional organizations such as the European Union in
support of rule-of-law reforms, within the EU and in its
neighbourhood. The Security Council and the United
Nations can only benefit from the knowledge and
resources of regional organizations, in particular by
relying on them to provide further rule-of-law reforms
and to monitor local conditions and situations.
I conclude by reiterating Albania’s firm commitment
to the rule of law and justice and to the efforts to
embrace it in all activities of the United Nations.

58/85

19/02/2014

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Sheikha Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to thank you, Madam President, for convening this
open debate. It also gives us great pleasure to welcome
the participation of His Excellency the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the friendly Republic of Lithuania in
conducting the discussion this morning. I would like to
commend the comprehensive concept note (S/2014/75,
annex) that you have introduced. I would be remiss if I
did not pay tribute to the role the Security Council and
His Excellency the Secretary-General for continuing
discussion of this subject, given the importance the
international community attaches to the promotion of
the rule of law at the national and international levels.
The definition by the international community
of the elements included in the concept of the rule of
law affirms the interrelationship between the rule of
law and the three pillars of the United Nations, that
is, international peace and security, development
and human rights. It is also a culmination of the
international efforts in that regard. Therefore, the State
of Qatar renews its support to what was stated by the
Heads of States and Governments in the Declaration of
the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on the
Rule of Law at the National and International Levels
(General Assembly resolution 67/1) and in the other
resolutions adopted in that connection, which stress
the need for clear legal frameworks to mainstream
the rule of law in all aspects of life and at all national,
regional and international levels. Hence, the promotion
of international peace and security, which we all seek,
depends upon the ability of States to respect and follow
up the implementation of those legal frameworks.
The commitment by States to respect the rule of
law and its entrenchment in all spheres of life is the
cornerstone of the maintenance of international peace
and security. Also, the protection of human rights and
the achievement of development and social justice are
at the very heart of the responsibilities of States at the
national and international levels. The commitment to
them is a translation of the principles of the rule of law.
International instruments have provided for the need
to respect and to enforce the rule of law and equality
before the law and to act accordingly That cannot be
achieved without taking accountability measures,
preventing grave violations of international law and
international humanitarian law and other international

14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

crimes, and ensuring that perpertrators do not enjoy
impunity and that subjective political interests are not
allowed to undermine justice.
If we look at the situations that threaten international
peace and security, we conclude that the reasons behind
them include the absence of the rule of law in some
States. That has led to the emergence of despotic regimes
that disregard the law and the will of their peoples;
rather, they violate their basic rights to justice, freedom
and decent life. Those regimes have become a source of
threats to regional and international peace and security.
The promotion and implementation of the principle of
the rule of law threfore require respect for mechanisms
agreed upon by the international community in order to
put an end to grave violations of human rights, combat
impunity, support United Nations efforts to achieve
the peaceful settlement of disputes, empower women,
combat corruption and ensure respect for the right of
peoples to self-determination, in a manner that paves
the way for achieving international peace and security.
Believing as it does in the principle of the peaceful
settlement of disputes on the basis of international law
and the Charter of the United Nations, and recognizing
the importance of international cooperation, the State of
Qatar has sought to contribute effectively to promoting
the efforts of the international community to achieve
international peace and security. It has contributed, in
coordination with the Security Council and the relevant
international organizations, to achieving a peaceful
settlement to a number of disputes.
As an affirmation of the commitment of the State
of Qatar to the responsibility of Member States to
participate in promoting the principle of the rule of law
on the basis of United Nations resolutions, and with
a view to supporting the international community’s
efforts in this area, my country, in cooperation
with the United Nations Development Programme,
took the initiative of establishing in Doha a regional
centre for the rule of law and combating corruption,
which was inaugurated in 2011 under the sponsorship
His Highness the Amir of Qatar. The centre plays an
important role in promoting the principle of the rule of
law in the region and in enabling relevant officials and
civil society organizations to promote the rule of law
and combat corruption.
Finally, the State of Qatar supports what is
underscored in the concept note regarding the
integration of the rule of law at the national and

S/PV.7113

international levels. Such integration should be given
particular importance. Relations among the topics must
be subject to the rule of law on the basis of equality,
mutual respect and international cooperation, and the
behaviour of States should be in line with the provisions
of international law.
The current crises and violations in the world
reflect the disregard and disrespect by some regimes
for international law and international humanitarian
law, and their feeling that they can escape their
responsibilities in the absence of robust implementation
of international accountability. The violations being
inflicted upon the brotherly Syrian people are clear
proof thereof. Consequently, we once again call on
the Security Council, by virtue of its responsibility to
apply the Charter of the United Nations, to implement
the mechanism adopted by the international community
in that connection, and not to allow any negligence
with regard to international law, regardless of baseless
pretexts. That will not be achieved without a scrupulous
commitment to the principle to the rule of law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Namibia.
Mr. Emvula (Namibia): Madam President, while
joining others in congratulating you on your country’s
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of February, I wish to thank you for convening
this meeting and for the choice of the theme “The
promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in the
maintenance of international peace and security”, which
is most appropriate. The importance of this topic will
go a long way towards helping expand the consensus of
States in strengthening the rule of law, especially at the
international level.
As a State founded on the principle of the rule
of law, Namibia reiterates its commitment to the
promotion and strengthening of the rule of law as a
necessary precondition to help maintain peace, promote
development and enhance cooperation that is aimed at
building a harmonious world.
As an important manifestation of human
civilization and progress, the consolidation of the
rule of law at the international level is of the utmost
importance. Namibia believes that the United Nations
remains the central point for the consolidation of the
rule of law internationally. The United Nations system
should therefore serve as a banner of transparency and
democracy that involves the participation of the entire

14-2389059/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

international community in finding lasting solutions to
contemporary global issues.
The primary role of the General Assembly, as the
sole organ with universal membership, is central to
the promotion and strengthening of the rule of law,
and its exclusive function to progressively develop and
codify international law cannot be overemphasized. We
welcome the Security Council’s continuous engagement
in considering this issue, as it is important for the
promotion and maintenance of peace and security.
At the 2005 World Summit, world leaders
unanimously recognized the need for universal
adherence to and the implementation of the rule of law
at both the national and international levels: a further
commitment to an international order based on the rule
of law and international law was reaffirmed.
Drawing from that general consensus on the
international rule of law, three basic elements should be
identified. First, public power should not be exercised
arbitrarily. This incorporates the rejection of the rule of
man and requires that laws be prospective, accessible
and clear to all. Secondly, the law should apply to the
public authority itself, which implies that the law should
reign supreme. And, thirdly, the law must apply to all
persons equally, which implies equality before the law.
While being mindful of those key principles of
our common understanding of the rule of law, it is
important to note that those principles cannot be
translated directly. At the national level, the rule
of law regulates subjects in a vertical relation to the
sovereign, while at the international level, the rule of
law is to regulate entities that are perceived to be equal
in a horizontal relationship. In that context, we need
to be cautious with regard to the legitimacy of certain
Council activities, especially when it passes resolutions
of a law-making character.
Namibia attaches great importance to universal
adherence to and the implementation of the rule of law.
The promotion of justice and the rule of law is essential
for peace, the prevention of armed conflicts and
cooperation among States. International law is therefore
important for fostering stability in international
relations. It also provides a framework for addressing
our common challenges, thereby contributing to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
As international peace and security are critical for
the promotion of the rule of law, the Security Council is
at the heart of this endeavour. The Charter of the United
60/85

19/02/2014

Nations assigns the Security Council the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. However, with the passage of time
it has become clear that the current composition and
structure of the Council have become unrepresentative
and undemocratic and do not truly reflect contemporary
geopolitical realities.
In that context, Namibia reiterates its call for
comprehensive reform of the Security Council to
make it more democratic and transparent, so that it
may better serve humankind. We note that in the face
of some of the current international conflicts, action
or inaction by the Security Council is based on selfserving political considerations, which may hinder
the effective implementation of its mandate. Calls for
Council reform, therefore, cannot be overstated.
The protection of humankind from the scourge of
war is the principle foundation of the United Nations.
We therefore believe that that noble goal can be
achieved only when all States Members of the United
Nations refrain from the use or threat of use of force
in any manner inconsistent with the purpose and
principles of justice and international law. The right to
self-determination, non-interference in the domestic
affairs of other States, respect for human rights and
respect for equal rights of all without distinction as to
race, language, religion, cultural or social character are
obligations under the Charter that should guide State
conduct at the international level.
The Council’s effectiveness as a political actor
and its legitimacy as a legal actor are connected. The
international community’s readiness to recognize
the Council’s authority significantly depends on how
responsible and accountable it is, and how it is seen
to be exercising its extraordinary power on behalf
of the international community. It is therefore in our
collective interest to ensure that the Council’s role in
promoting the rule of law ensures that its decisions are
both effective and legitimate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank you,
Madam President, for holding this open debate on the
rule of law and for circulating a very substantive and
comprehensive concept note (S/2014/75, annex) and for
asking very sharp questions to guide and structure our
debate.

14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

We need the rule of law and justice in non-conflict,
conflict and post-conflict situations. During peace
time, the rule of law acts as a bulwark against strife
within societies. The rule of law within nations,
supplemented by the international rule of law, prevents
inter-State conflicts and wars. Therefore, at all times,
the rule of law is an indispensable enabler and goal of
peace and security.
Pakistan is committed to the rule of law. Prime
Minister Nawaz Sharif has said that all roads to
national security, strong and unimpeachable defence
and institutional balance emerge from adherence to the
constitutional order and the rule of law. The rule of law
includes the fundamental principles of equality before
the law, equal treatment before the law and due process.
The normative and empirical value of the rule
of law in preventing conflict as well as in making
and building peace is proven. As pointed out in the
concept note, the existing United Nations rule-of-law
repertoire covers a broad spectrum, including policing,
legislation, transitional justice, security sector reform,
natural resources and laws to combat sexual violence,
corruption and money-laundering.
To attain clarity, credibility and achievability in
the design of mandates, greater resources and expertise
should be harnessed for data collection and conscious
and repeated efforts should be made to build synergy
among senior United Nations leadership in-country.
Moreover, the United Nations should work with host
countries to integrate the rule of law into their core
national priorities. Each conflict situation is unique
and has its own dynamics. Each country requires a
customized solution to meet its requirements. We
agree with you, Madam President, that reform in one
sector should not outpace progress in other sectors in
a manner whereby the overall investment in the rule of
law is undermined.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report on
measuring the effectiveness of the support provided
by the United Nations system for the promotion of
the rule of law in conflict and post-conflict situations
(S/2013/341). I shall make a few comments on the report.
The rule of law is a multidimensional social
and political reality that varies by context, and thus
changes in it cannot be taken up easily through a
single time-bound or specific effort to measure it. The
national perspectives of Member States are important
for working on the availability of data, monitoring

S/PV.7113

mechanisms, analytical frameworks and evaluation
systems. Member States must be consulted at the time
of making changes in activities related to the rule of
law in the United Nations system at the field level and
at Headquarters for our strategic reorganization or
operational support.
In planning for transitions and drawdowns, correct
assessments and precise timing are important, including
with regard to the degree of maturity in the rule-of-law
mandates. Some countries manage to have a semblance
of stability but are actually teetering on the brink of
relapse because the root causes and key drivers of the
conflict continue to influence the underlying dynamics.
In such situations, transitional criminal justice and
national reconciliation process must move in tandem
to enable closure. The rule of law will not take root
in fragile societies if it is not supported by strong
institutions. Extended, results-oriented investment in
civilian capacities is therefore a must.
In post-conflict situations, the Peacebuilding
Commission and its different configurations should
play a major role. The Commission should not be
treated as an accoutrement, but as an integral part of
the overall peacebuilding effort.
The rule of law should not be imposed top-down. It
should be people-driven and supported by grass-roots
communities. National ownership will guarantee the
success of the rule of law, if it is the product of the
national ethos.
Let me list a few additional points that we should
take away from this debate. Strong groundwork and
comprehensive assessment at the field level are crucial
for the better design and implementation of mandates,
including their prioritization and sequencing. The
timely and assured provision of adequate resources
and funding is critical for success, and since resources
are scarce, it is essential to direct them from the very
beginning to the right areas, including the root causes.
There is a need to better utilize the linkage between
rule of law interventions and political processes for
peace dividends. The global focal point, led by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and United
Nations Development Programme, should play its
important role in ensuring system-wide coherence and
synergy of efforts.
The United Nations must build its capacity to
uphold the rule of law, at both the national and the
international levels. International judicial institutions

14-2389061/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

19/02/2014

should be strengthened. Their frequent use and the
resort to other diplomatic means, such as negotiation,
mediation, conciliation, arbitration and the good offices
of the Secretary-General, as enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations, will promote the pacific settlement
of disputes and strengthen the rule of law.

conflict resolution and peacebuilding. In that vein,
justice, including transitional justice, is a fundamental
building block of sustainable peace in countries in
conflict and post-conflict situations. It is evident that
there is an urgent need for the international community
to assist and support such countries.

Efforts should be made to implement all resolutions
of the Security Council uniformly and non-selectively.
Selective implementation creates an unjust environment,
deepens conflicts and compounds the suffering of the
affected people. It also erodes confidence in the system
and undermines the credibility of the United Nations
over time. The United Nations should therefore play a
leading role in upholding and promoting the rule of law
by setting examples.

Member States, bound by the Charter of the United
Nations, reaffirm their duty to settle their international
disputes by peaceful means, and utilizing and promoting
tools for the pacific settlement of disputes is of the
utmost importance. We need to strengthen our response
at all stages of the conflict cycle — from prevention to
resolution and the implementation of peace agreements.
In that context, mediation is a cross-cutting tool to be
utilized at all stages of the conflict cycle.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.

Turkey therefore endeavours to strengthen the role
of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes and
in conflict prevention and resolution, along with the
other members of the Group of Friends of Mediation,
which it co-chairs with Finland.

Mr. Çevik (Turkey): At the outset, I would like to
congratulate Lithuania on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of February and
thank you, Madam President, for convening today’s
thematic open debate.
We would like to reaffirm our commitment to the
rule of law and we stress its fundamental importance
for political dialogue and cooperation among all
States. We are of the opinion that the rule of law has
a fundamental role in the further development of the
three main pillars upon which the United Nations is
built, namely, international peace and security, human
rights and development.
It is evident that a comprehensive approach to
sustainable peace requires an integrated approach based
on coherence among the various political, security,
development, human-rights and rule-of-law and justice
activities. While keeping in mind that the need for
universal adherence to the implementation of the rule
of law remains crucial, we need to promote justice and
the rule of law as indispensable elements for peaceful
coexistence and the prevention of armed conflicts.
The rule of law applies to all States equally, as well
as to international organizations, including the United
Nations and its principal organs. In that respect, the
promotion of the rule of law and justice should guide
all of their activities and provide predictability and
legitimacy to their actions.
Today, we all concur that the rule of law is one of
the key elements of conflict prevention, peacekeeping,

62/85

The success of efforts to promote the rule of
law at the international level depends on ensuring
States’ strict compliance with the accepted rules and
principles, particularly those embodied in the Charter
of the United Nations and those arising from obligations
under multilateral treaties and international law in
general. Adherence to international law and respect
for the rule of law are intertwined, and securing them
both constitutes one of the core missions of the United
Nations.
The rule of law is not an abstract concept. We
need to find better ways and means to apply it in
concrete terms. In that respect, national ownership of
the rule of law is crucial. We need to promote rule-oflaw assistance activities and strengthen justice and
security institutions that are accessible and responsive
to citizens’ needs and that promote social cohesion and
economic prosperity.
It is equally important to recognize the need for
enhanced efforts aimed at capacity-building in justice
and security institutions, especially in the police,
prosecutorial, judicial and corrections sectors.
There is an obvious demand for strengthened
international cooperation among Member States for the
promotion of the rule of law in all its aspects. With that
expectation, donors, regional, subregional and other
international organizations and civil society actors can
play an important role in promoting capacity-building,
14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

including through education and training on issues
related to the rule of law.
Terrorism continues to pose one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security. However,
all measures used in the fight against terrorism must
be in compliance with the obligations of States under
international law. In a similar manner, based on the
principles of shared responsibility and in accordance
with international law, we need to cooperate to
dismantle illicit networks and counter the drug problem
and transnational organized crime in order to strengthen
the rule of law.
The United Nations has an important role to play in
broadening the areas of international cooperation aimed
at enabling Member States to implement international
treaties more effectively. Concurrently, United Nations
assistance with the capacity-building needed to
implement international treaties is vital, particularly
for developing countries. The rule of law would not be
possible without effective jurisdictional mechanisms
at the national and international levels. Effective
implementation of multilateral treaties remains at the
heart of establishing the rule of law between States.
We attach the utmost importance to the Declaration
of the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly
on the Rule of Law at the National and International
Levels (General Assembly resolution 67/1), adopted
on 24 September 2012, and the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2012/1) of 19 January 2012. We also note
the important role played by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the United Nations
Development Programme as the joint global focal point
for the police, justice and corrections areas in the rule
of law in post-conflict and other crisis situations.
Lastly, promoting accountability is an important
tool at the disposal of the Security Council in discharging
its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Granting impunity
or immunity to the perpetrators of the most serious
crimes could cause serious harm to the delicate fabric
of societies and undermine international peace and
security.
The Security Council has the authority and
the moral responsibility to respond to the historic
challenges that we are facing today. The rule of law can
prevail in establishing international peace and security
only if the people believe in it.

S/PV.7113

Thank you.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): The Botswana delegation
joins in sincerely commending the presidency of your
country for hosting today’s debate and in thanking
you, Madam President, for the very insightful and
comprehensive concept paper (S/2014/75, annex) that
has been produced to guide our deliberations. My
delegation is therefore delighted to have the opportunity
to share perspectives and experiences on the subject
matter of today’s debate.
Throughout human history, societies have been
governed through a set of commonly held standards,
cultural values and rules. Those rules are still as
applicable and as relevant today as they were centuries
ago. Even as we define new development frameworks
as modern societies, we continue to cherish these basic
rules, as they not only maintain peace but also govern
relations between States and citizens.
The rule of law requires that a Government, its
officials and the representatives of the people should
be accountable to the people. Such accountability, in
turn, should be clearly set out in the law, which should
also provide remedies in cases of a breach thereof.
Respect for the rule of law is therefore an essential
condition for peace, security, the prevention of conflict,
conflict resolution and post-conflict reconstruction.
Most conflicts, especially in Africa, are attributable
to deficiencies in governance institutions and in the
justice system.
It can be said, therefore, that the rule of law places
obligations on both the State and its citizens, including
civil society, to observe, respect, and, most importantly,
take ownership or have a stake in the legal order of the
country.
These general observations on the rule of law are
equally applicable at the international level, where
relations among States should be based on a clearly
defined framework as set out in the United Nations
Charter. Alignment between national and international
law is therefore critical.
My delegation believes that the rule of law and
accountable governance are the core foundations of
societies, big or small, rich or poor, and that these must
be promoted by the international community in order to
bring about peace in the world.

14-2389063/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

My delegation is also of the view that social and
economic growth and sustainable development are
closely linked to, and interdependent with, the rule of
law and human rights. Economic development should
not be seen only as a goal for countries or Governments,
but also as a right to which citizens are entitled.
We in Botswana believe that our modest
achievements on the economic front have been
greatly facilitated by our investment in a functioning
democracy, a legal framework that is both clear and
predictable, and respect for the rule of law and human
rights.
My delegation remains gravely concerned at the fact
that the world continues to experience gross violations
of human rights as well as violations of international
law and international humanitarian law. We continue
to be concerned about the ongoing conflicts across
the globe, especially in the Central African Republic,
in Mali, in Syria, in South Sudan and, more recently,
Ukraine, where conflicts have displaced innocent
civilian populations, leaving them stranded without
food, shelter or medical care.
It is our view that States have a duty and an
obligation to protect their citizens. My delegation
therefore supports the notion that the United Nations
system should continue to foster accountability for
gross violations of human rights and serious violations
of international law, and we call on Member States
to fully cooperate with the established mechanisms
mandated by the United Nations or created with its
support to dispense justice.
The events of 21 August 2013, during which
hundreds of people were massacred through the use of
chemical weapons in Damascus, cannot go unaccounted
for. The ensuing conflict and the continued inability of
the Syrian regime to protect its population place a moral
obligation on the international community to come to
the rescue of the suffering masses in that country.
In that respect, we reiterate our long-held position,
which is shared by many Member States, that the
Council must refer the worsening situation in Syria to
the International Criminal Court. We remain steadfast
in our support for the work of the Court as well as that
of the Security Council in their continued efforts to
strengthen the international criminal justice system.
Botswana, as a member of the international
community, pledges to continue to play its part in
promoting the rule of law not only within its borders
64/85

19/02/2014

but throughout the world. It will continue to support the
efforts of the United Nations system, especially those
that are targeted towards peacekeeping, post-conflict
zones and transitional arrangements.
My delegation remains appreciative of the efforts
of the United Nations system to support national lawenforcement mechanisms through programmes that
continue to benefit our respective law-enforcement
officers and our judicial and correctional institutions.
That has made an immense contribution to the greater
appreciation of the rule of law at the national level.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): We commend
His Excellency Mr. Linas Antanas Linkevičius, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Lithuania, and the Lithuanian
presidency of the Security Council for having convened
this very important debate on ways to strengthen and
measure the effectiveness of the rule of law.
Kazakhstan considers its engagement in Iraq and
other interventions, as well as the future deployment in
coming months of its military observers to the missions
in Liberia, Côte d’Ivoire, Western Sahara and Haiti, as
part of the country’s ongoing contribution to peace and
security.
Kazakhstan’s commitment to the rule of law is
based on the following principles: respect for human
rights; compliance with international law; acting
within the framework of existing negotiating formats;
and refraining from actions that would result in greater
tensions and would worsen the humanitarian situation.
With regard to sanctions, we believe that they need
to be targeted; have time constraints, with specific
humanitarian exemptions, so as to minimize their
negative effects; and should be imposed as a last step, to
be taken only in cases where all political and diplomatic
means of reconciliation have been exhausted.
Peacekeeping operations must have adequate,
well-trained personnel and resources. We would
therefore focus on assessing the impact that the rule
of law has on the maintenance of national stability
by not only preventing the recurrence of conflict but
helping post-conflict societies to heal better and faster
by bringing perpetrators to justice, ending corruption,
and attracting investments for future recovery and
development. Other measures include the enforcement
of accountability and enlisting the cooperation of the

14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

States concerned, as well as reparation programmes
for the victims of conflicts and the efficient delivery
of justice.
The question is, how can peacekeeping work
effectively to strengthen police, justice and corrections
institutions, as well as the institutions that can hold
them accountable, if most of them have been destroyed
following a conflict, with key legal records missing and
conditions that include insufficient independence of the
judiciary, political interference and a lack of the rule
of law.
In addition, all rule-of-law initiatives must be
based on national ownership and priorities identified
by the national authorities and civil society, consistent
with the culture and legal traditions of the host country,
yet not in conflict with international norms. In the
light of recent Security Council debates, we must also
ensure that peacekeeping operations more effectively
implement resolutions on the protection of women,
children and civilians in armed conflict.
The Security Council needs overall support in
adhering to the basic principles of the rule of law in order
to ensure the legitimacy of its actions. To meet those
challenges, the United Nations system must employ
country-level, sector-wide and thematic assessments
of rule-of-law implementation. Therefore, we should
consider mandating support for capacity-building in
national data collection, monitoring and analysis in all
United Nations missions and operations. However, we
do not yet have baseline data on the rule of law and look
to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
United Nations Development Programme as the global
focal point on the rule of law to provide those critical
benchmarks.
Restoring and maintaining the rule of law is a
long-term process that requires the close cooperation
of all stakeholders, including the United Nations
system, national and regional partners, international
organizations, donors, the private sector, academia,
civil society and the media. We call for new inclusive
global platforms, such as that held by the General
Assembly in 2012, to help to consolidate the current
fragmented approach of rule of law assistance.
Kazakhstan is committed to joining the international
community in enhancing international rules not only
for security but as an integral part of international
development and the global well-being, manifested as

S/PV.7113

lasting stability, peace, security, economic development
and social progress.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I would like to begin by
extending my appreciation to you, Madam President, for
having convened this open debate and for the excellent
concept note (S/2014/75, annex). It is also a privilege
for me to welcome the participation of His Excellency
Mr. Linas Linkevičius, Foreign Minsiter of Lithuania.
My delegation would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive briefing.
Indonesia fully subscribes to the importance of
promoting and strengthening the rule of law in countries
emerging from conflict. Not only does the rule of law
help to restore order, but also, very importantly, it serves
as an undisputed sign of a functioning authority. With
that in mind, I would like to highlight two principal
ideas for the development of the rule of law.
First, the development of the rule of law must
support sustainable peace in post-conflict countries.
In that respect, I wish to reiterate the importance of
security sector reform taking place at the earliest
possible time so as to create an environment conducive
to a well developed rule of law. The development
of the rule of law must also take place within the
comprehensive framework of the national development
of the respective countries, along with other important
tasks, such as promoting reconciliation, revitalizing the
economy, building critical infrastructure, promoting
and protecting human rights, providing basic services
and strengthening the national capacity.
Secondly, national ownership must continue to be
the critical guide for the formulation and execution
of the mandates of United Nations peace missions.
Indonesia reiterates its strong conviction that the
development or the restoration of the rule of law is the
national Government’s responsibility and that a genuine
and inclusive partnership with the host Government
must be forged by the United Nations at all times.
Those two principal ideas underline why United
Nations peace missions must remain adaptive to local
cultures and practices. In that regard, my delegation
takes note of the Secretary-General’s 2004 report
on transitional justice (S/2004/616), which strongly
encourages Member States to avoid one-size-fits-

14-2389065/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

19/02/2014

all formulas and the unilateral imposition of foreign
models.

in applying their valuable experience of community
policing to their local duties.

My delegation is in full agreement with the concept
note that the meticulous planning of United Nations
peace mission rule-of-law mandates is essential in order
to achieve a high degree of clarity and achievability. I
wish therefore to reiterate Indonesia’s support for robust
yet realistic mandates on the rule of law, keeping in
mind the need for a solid knowledge of each country’s
unique situation.

Capacity-building must go hand in hand with
strengthening a culture of law and peaceful coexistence.
To that end, local history and customs can provide
relevant norms and values that support universally
recognized principles, such as the promotion and
protection of human rights, transparency and equality.
Such a culture-sensitive approach will better withstand
resistance and strengthen local confidence in the rule
of law development.

Accordingly, strengthening consultation with
the host Government, as well as the troop- or
police-contributing countries, will help to create a
comprehensive projection of what is expected of the
United Nations and how to fulfil such expectations.
Such an approach also provides the best opportunity
for an integrated approach to the rule of law, most
importantly in the timing or sequencing of the relevant
support.
On the issue of internal coordination, my
delegation appreciates the recent efforts towards
ensuring that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the United Nations Development
Programme work in a more coherent and efficient
manner on the rule of law through the establishment
of a global focal point. My delegation, however, would
like to underscore the importance of regular and
institutionalized intergovernmental consultation to
ensure the transparency and accountability of those two
institutions in the implementation of their respective
mandates.
Restoring the rule of law in a post-conflict
situation from the outset must be targeted both at
helping a society to cope with the legacy of conflict
and at enhancing the capacity of the host Government
to be more accountable to its people. In that regard,
building the human and institutional capacity for law
enforcement must be a core component of rule-of-law
mandates. With that in mind, Indonesia underscores the
very important role of the Peacebuilding Commission.
I also wish to reiterate Indonesia’s strong
commitment to the United Nations Civilian Capacities
Initiative. It remains our view that that Initiative
provides a valuable learning process for identifying
best practices in institution-building in a post-conflict
situation. That conviction has guided Indonesian police
officials in various United Nations peace missions

66/85

Furthermore, Indonesia is firmly convinced
that the inclusion of women and children in the rule
of law agenda, as part of community empowerment,
strengthens local resilience and forms a significant
platform for development. That conviction manifests
itself in our sending female peacekeepers and police
personnel to the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur. While modest in number, our
female officers have played an instrumental role in the
mainstreaming of gender perspectives in the activities
of those missions.
The latest report of the Secretary-General on
measuring the effectiveness of United Nations rule of
law assistance in conflict and post-conflict situations
(S/2013/341) provides a substantial and in-depth
analysis for our future work. While appreciative of the
work of the Secretary-General, Indonesia reiterates the
need for further deliberation on the subject as set out in
the report.
Indonesia concurs that national data collection
and measurement are necessary for the evaluation of
United Nations peace mission mandates. Nonetheless,
our initial view is that those activities should be carried
out under the umbrella of strengthening the national
capacity of the Governments concerned.
Against that background, such national data
collection and measurements are best carried out under
the authority of host Governments. That will encourage
them to fully understand standards and parameters
for fair, transparent and accountable rule of law. Such
capacity is indispensable in the formulation of the
country’s own national legal development.
To conclude, promoting and strengthening the
rule of law is indeed a complex and daunting task. It
calls for a high degree of understanding and empathy

14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

towards the local situation and a willingness to engage
in a sustainable manner. To that end, the United Nations
must prepare itself for missions of such character in
future. Among other things, funding, management,
human resources and expertise can and must be made
available in a timely and sustainable fashion.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Vencel (Slovakia): We would like to thank
the Lithuanian presidency for dedicating this thematic
debate to the issue of the rule of law, which is so
instrumental to ensuring effective peacebuilding.
Slovakia aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union.
We are pleased that the concept of the rule of law
is gaining ground among Member States and is seen as
a necessary instrument for sustaining peace, improving
stability and providing a legal basis for the protection
of civilians. Slovakia welcomed and supported the
adoption of the high-level Declaration on the subject
last September (General Assembly resolution 67/1).
We commend the personal engagement of Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson and the many dedicated
experts from the Secretariat and Member States,
especially Austria as the coordinator of the Group of
Friends of the Rule of Law.
The concept of the rule of law is embedded in the
Charter of the United Nations. Its third preambular
paragraph states that one aim of the United Nations is
“to establish conditions under which justice and
respect for the obligations arising from treaties
and other sources of international law can be
maintained”.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights of
1948, which was the historic international recognition
that all human beings had fundamental rights and
freedoms, recognizes in its preamble that
“it is essential, if man is not to be compelled to
have recourse, as a last resort, to rebellion against
tyranny and oppression, that human rights should
be protected by the rule of law”.
The rule of law determines the security of everyone
in every aspect of human life. Today one does not ask
whether the rule of law is needed; one asks how to apply
the system effectively in all societies, without regard to
the world’s cultural, historical and political diversity.

S/PV.7113

A justice system must be equal and all-inclusive,
protecting every individual on an equal footing without
regard for whether a person belongs to a minority or
a majority, or for his or her social or political status.
It must not be repressive or discriminate against any
marginalized group. Accountability and the fight
against impunity are the core principles of any society
that respects the rule of law as a principal concept.
National ownership is the first key to the successful
and sustainable development of the rule of law. Actors
that commit to making the peace process work in any
given country should be involved from the beginning.
The responsibility of national leaders is an essential
part of national ownership. The Security Council
should thoroughly review the actions of national
leaders, particularly in implementing the mandates of
Council-mandated missions in the areas of the rule of
law and security sector reform. The inclusion of all
stakeholders, including civil society, is a second key to
success. Mandates could then become more effective
by respecting national concerns and needs.
Implementation requires two components, capacity
and willingness. Capacity can be developed by helping
the host nation articulate its needs, engage in strategic
planning, manage reforms and build rule-of-law
knowledge. Willing participation can be strengthened
by demonstrating that those who violate the peace
process will be punished and those who take risks in
promoting peace will be supported.
Developing effective strategies to overcome deficits
in the willingness and ability of the host nation’s
legal system to confront systemic threats, including
the impunity of war criminals, is among the primary
determinants of achieving the rule of law.
More broadly, we would like to highlight the
important role of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
In situations where national jurisdictions are unable or
unwilling to address the issue of accountability, the
ICC should step in as an independent and impartial
judicial body, and thus contribute to reconciliation.
Reconciliation is crucial in building future rule-of-law
institutions in post-conflict States.
Slovakia offers development cooperation to
partner countries with the aim of contributing to
sustainable development, mainly by reducing poverty
and strengthening democracy and good governance.
Slovakia is building on its historical experience and the
specific story of the country, which has experienced

14-2389067/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

a difficult but successful transformation process. Our
main territorial focus is the Western Balkans and other
countries of the European neighbourhood, but we are
open to cooperation with other countries as well.
Security and justice are intrinsically intertwined
and interdependent but, above all, they are mutually
reinforcing. It is not possible to effectively deal with
one without paying proper attention to the other. Both
security sector reform and the rule of law are essential
concepts in peacebuilding. Slovakia — as a strong
supporter of security sector reform — endorses a
complex approach to the issue, while fully aware that
both processes need to be executed simultaneously.
As soon as the security conditions of the situation
allow, the Council might again become engaged in the
Central African Republic. That is a good example of
learning from the past in order to avoid the repetition
of a situation.
To achieve sustainable peace and development,
people must feel safe and secure. That applies to all
parts of the security sector, including defence, law
enforcement, corrections and justice. Therefore,
building effective and accountable security institutions
that the State and its people can trust and rely on and
that do not discriminate and are based on full respect
for human rights and the rule of law is of the utmost
importance.
Let me again stress that effective, comprehensive
and accountable security sector reform is indispensable
for securing lasting peace and sustainable development
and preventing a relapse into conflict. In that connection,
I welcome with deep appreciation the second report
of the Secretary-General on comprehensive support
to security sector reform (S/2013/480) and encourage
Member States to engage in and fully support the
implementation of the report.
But the reach of the rule of law goes beyond
security and the rights of individuals. The concept of
a sound legal environment is of crucial importance
to sustainable development. A dedicated, complex
approach to building legal systems has been of the
utmost importance for rebuilding, transforming
and developing the economy. It is crucial for foreign
investors to take important decisions leading to longterm engagement in those processes, thus contributing
to building the three fundamental pillars of stability,
that is, security, law and development.

68/85

19/02/2014

In conclusion, the rule of law should not be seen
as a by-product of the system; rather, it should be seen
as a process taht contributes to security, stability and
development, a process that builds on international and
human rights law, respects national traditions, culture
and history and effectively uses best practices based on
partnerships. Referring to that philosophy, the concept
of the rule of law should be an integral part of all major
international and global policies.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): Thank you, Madam
President, for convening this debate, which serves as
an opportunity to examine the issue of the rule of law,
a concept that is at the very heart of the stated mission
of the United Nations.
In recent years, the United Nations has increased
its efforts to address the rule of law in conflict and
post-conflict situations. A consensus has emerged
that the rule of law should be promoted at both the
national and the international levels. It should be based
on the Charter of the United Nations, on the norms
of international law and on the principles of good
governance. We also believe that increased efforts to
fight impunity at the national and international levels
are essential. It is commendable that the Council
continues to focus on the responsibility of States to end
impunity and prosecute persons responsible for grave
violations of international humanitarian law so as to
avoid their recurrence and seek justice and peace.
Armenia attaches the utmost importance to the
promotion of justice and the rule of law, as those values
are indispensable for the maintenance of international
and regional security and the protection of human
rights. Moreover, systematic breaches of the rule of
law contribute to violations of basic human rights
and fundamental freedoms, including the principle of
peoples’ right to self-determination, which are among
the major and immediate causes of regional conflicts.
As the Secretary-General rightly points out in his
latest report on the subject (S/2013/689), the prevalence
of impunity in many States that have experienced
conflict allows serious human rights violations to
thrive, damages the fabric of societies and prevents the
development of lasting resolution to conflict.
We remain extremely alarmed by the fact that,
since 2004, the heinous crime of Azerbaijani army
officer Ramil Safarov, who slaughtered with an axe

14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

an Armenian officer in his sleep during the NATOsponsored programme in Budapest, simply because he
was an Armenian, continues to receive public praise
at the official level and, these days, also at a societal
level, in a neighbouring country. Today, the murder by
Safarov is being cited as an example of patriotic action
for Azerbaijani youth by Government officials, which
proves that the Azerbaijani side continues its reckless
behaviour of spreading more hate propaganda against
Armenia and Armenians worldwide. Azerbaijan has
thereby opened the door for the recurrence of such
crimes. Future murderers will be well aware as a result
of the impunity that they can enjoy for murder driven
by ethnic or religious hatred.
That is yet another fact that reveals the absence
of and disrespect for the rule of law, the very concept
of which is the diametrical opposite of the culture of
the rule by force that is unfortunately being cultivated
in Azerbaijan these days. That alarming behaviour of
the authorities of Azerbaijan contradicts not only the
humanitarian purposes of international law, but also
the relevant international instruments, and it challenges
the whole system of human rights. In that context,
Armenia aligns itself with the statements made by
previous speakers recognizing the important role of
justice and the judiciary and the establishment of peace
and security in conflict and post-conflict situations.
Countries affected by conflict have to ensure
accountability for the most serious crimes of concern
to the international community. Implementing binding
resolutions that call upon all States to adopt national
legislation for the prosecution of individuals responsible
for genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes
is of the utmost importance. Therefore, enhancing
compliance with international legal obligations by
parties in a conflict should be viewed as a key element
of the Council’s responsibility to maintain international
peace and security, which will require a deeper
commitment and a broader vision of the future.
Let me reiterate Armenia’s commitment to human
rights, the rule of law and democracy, as those values
are interlinked and interdependent. We must recommit
to that approach and actively stay engaged, including
at the domestic level, by promoting inclusive and
accountable political processes. Armenia remains
committed to post-conflict peace initiatives and believes
that the Council should seek to further advance the
development of initiatives by supporting the rule of law
in institutions and peacebuilding mechanisms that help

S/PV.7113

countries emerging from conflicts in their recovery,
reintegration and reconstruction efforts and in creating
foundations for sustainable peace and development.
The successful implementation of that agenda requires
a basic level of political will and determination on the
part of all players as preconditions for peacebuilding.
With those political conditions in place, the ability of
the United Nations, or any other intergovernmental and
bilateral actor, will be enhanced and supported.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Khiari (Tunisia): At the outset, I would like
to express my sincere appreciation to the Lithuanian
delegation for organizing this open debate and to thank
it as well for the excellent concept note (S/2014/75,
annex), setting out the terms of the discussion. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
presentation and comprehensive report on the subject
(S/2013/341).
Building on the momentum generated by the
General Assembly High-level Meeting on the Rule of
Law at the Mational and International Levels held in
September 2012, which emphasized the importance of
the rule of law as one of the key elements in conflict
prevention, peacekeeping, conflict resolution and
peacebuilding, today’s debate offers us a renewed
opportunity to delve deeper into the topic, review the
progress that has been made so far and contemplate
future actions, so as to respond to the aspirations of
people striving to strengthen the rule of law and justice.
Tunisia firmly believes that promoting the rule of
law is fundamental for the stability and prosperity of
any society. Our own experience demonstrates that
inclusive dialogue and adherence by all to the principle
of the primacy of law, as well as their common
commitment to preserve, strengthen and build solid
institutions, are crucial for the promotion of civil peace,
stability and development. We came to the conclusion,
during the recent positive developments in Tunisia
with the consensual adoption of the Constitution, on
27 January 2014, that the rule of law is better respected
when people are empowered to voice their rights. The
new Constitution enshrines pluralism, the separation
of powers, good governance and the independence of
the judiciary, which is a real breakthrough for Tunisia’s
democratic transition process after three years of
revolution.

14-2389069/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

Tunisia believes that the rule of law is particularly
essential for the resolution of conflicts and the
achievement of lasting peace. Its establishment helps
to ensure sustainable and responsive governance in the
countries concerned, thus reinforcing their institutional
legitimacy and enabling them to gain the trust of the
local population. In addition, the rule of law is critical
for building confidence in the ability of courts to
deliver justice for all, including vulnerable groups.
Therefore, it has to be regarded as being at the core of
the engagement of the international community in the
context of conflict and post-conflict situations.
Tunisia, which recently adopted an organic law on
the organization of transitional justice that sets up a
comprehensive approach to dealing with past violations
of human rights also recognizes the value of measures
of transitional justice that take into account the
specific concerns of vulnerable groups in post-conflict
situations.
We welcome the crucial role of the United Nations
in the promotion of the rule of law, at both the national
and the international levels, and the assistance it
extends to Governments to reinforce norms, build
confidence in justice and security institutions, promote
gender equality and strengthen accountability, so that
impunity for those who commit genocide, war crimes,
crimes against humanity, violations of international
humanitarian law or gross violations of human rights
will not be tolerated.
We believe that a coordinated, coherent and
comprehensive approach to rule-of-law assistance
within the overall United Nations system is the key to
further improving results. In that regard, we express
our sincere appreciation for the work carried out by the
Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group, chaired
by the Deputy Secretary-General and supported by the
Rule of Law Unit, as well as the establishment of a joint
global focal point for the police, justice and corrections
areas in the rule of law in post-conflict and other
crisis situations, with the aim of providing coordinated
support to the field.
We also note with appreciation that the Security
Council has been playing an important role in
strengthening the rule of law in conflict and postconflict situations, as illustrated by the increasing
integration of the issue into its resolutions. In the
same vein, it is our view that the dialogue of the
Council with the country-specific configurations of
the Peacebuilding Commission is important for further
70/85

19/02/2014

promoting the coherence of the rule-of-law activities
on the ground.
Moreover, each conflict situation is unique and
has its own dynamics. Rule-of-law assistance should,
from the outset, be based on a thorough assessment
of national and regional contexts and be tailored
to the specific and evolving needs of the countries
concerned. It should comprise carefully prioritized,
sequenced and achievable interventions aimed at
backing the elaboration as well as the implementation
of national strategies in that regard. That would enable
garnering sufficient political and popular support for
the envisaged reform, accountability for results and
sustainability, and would endow such interventions
with greater legitimacy.
My delegation would also like to highlight the
need to exert further effort towards the development
of national capacities in all areas of rule-of-law reform
to enable national authorities to govern effectively
and ensure the sustainability of gains. The promotion
of the rule of law must also be a journey of continual
renewal and effort. It goes without saying that adequate
and predictable resources need to be allocated to both
ongoing preparedness for and the implementation of
rule-of-law activities.
Last but not least, there must be much more focus
on the inclusiviness of the rule of law and transitional
justice initiatives. All national actors, including civil
society, should be in a position to contribute effectively
in their design, implementation and evaluation to ensure
the legitimacy required for rule-of-law reforms and to
achieve results. Indeed, we consider it a fact that civil
society not only acts as one of the checks and balances,
it is also a vital partner in the quest for a positive
relationship between the Government and its citizens.
My delegation would like finally to stress that
Tunisia, with its vast experience in peacekeeping,
spanning more than 50 years, remains fully committed
to contributing to United Nations efforts to further
promote the rule of law and stands ready to put further
troops and expertise, particularly in the field of justice
and corrections, at the disposal of the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Sarkowicz (Poland): Madam President, at the
outset, let me join other delegations in congratulating
our neighbour Lithuania on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council in February. We are grateful to
14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

you for organizing this timely debate and for providing
the concept note on the promotion and strengthening
of the rule of law in the maintenance of international
peace and security (S/2014/75, annex). It contains many
interesting and thought-provoking questions.
My delegation fully aligns itself with the statement
of the European Union (EU). Over the past few years,
the European Union has assumed greater responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security, as
pointed out by EU High Representative Baroness
Ashton in this very room only a couple of days ago (see
S/PV.7112).
Poland fully supports the strengthening of the
rule of law as a foundation of sustainable peace in
conflict and post-conflict situations, as underlined
in the Declaration of the High-level Meeting of the
General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the National
and International Levels (General Assembly resolution
67/1), of 24 September 2012.
We are convinced that strengthening the rule
of law must involve respect for the Charter of the
United Nations and international law, respect for the
sovereign equality of States, solidarity with the concept
of assistance to other countries and recognition of the
responsibility of States to protect their populations from
genocide, crimes against humanity, ethnic cleansing
and war crimes.
We need more reflection at the stage of creating
mission mandates. That is the time when we must
consider carefully — with broad participation by regional
organizations, non-governmental organizations and
local partners — the needs and requirements for the rule
of law in the specific social, legal and historical context
of a given country, taking into account international
legal obligations applicable to the country. In providing
assistance, we must not overlook the rights established
by international law for women, children, minorities,
refugees, displaced persons and other groups that may
be subjected to marginalization and discrimination.
Rule-of-law assistance in post-conflict situations
is most effective when it draws on a wide range of
expertise and perspectives, including in the political,
legal, human rights, development and social areas. We
must develop a holistic and strategic approach. Rule-oflaw programmes must be guided by comprehensive
strategies that promote the integrity, transparency,
predictability and accountability of governance.

S/PV.7113

Timing, sequencing and proper adjustment are
of the utmost importance, as rightly pointed out in
the concept note for today’s meeting. Rule-of-law
programmes must be implemented from the very
start of a peacekeeping operation. Waiting too long
can make the job much harder. A comprehensive
transition-management strategy is equally important,
as the rule of law is a part of both exit strategy
and entry policy. Peacekeepers often act as early
peacebuilders — that is, they implement certain early
peacebuilding tasks themselves.
Adopting a one-size-fits-all approach to rule-of-law
issues is counterproductive. That is why we must not
consider rule-of-law activities as just reforming courts,
criminal justice systems or penal law. In many countries,
the priorities may be to assist with constitution-making,
legislative reform, public administration reform and
local democratic governance; to support a fair and
transparent electoral system; to establish civil control
over the armed forces and police; to fight corruption; to
promote extra-judicial bodies acting for the protection
of human rights; to promote the peaceful resolution of
civil disputes; and to combat transnational organized
crime.
Strengthening the rule of law also means learning
from practice. We support the development of a
coordinated approach for measuring the effectiveness of
United Nations support for the rule-of-law component
in peacekeeping operations, as specified in the report
of the Secretary-General of 11 June 2013 (S/2013/341).
Such an approach could strengthen the United Nations
capability to collect, analyse and utilize data in
order to adjust our support in a professional manner.
Furthermore, we need a better linkage between the
evaluation and adjustment of United Nations activities
on the ground. This must involve joint and thorough
assessments with the full and genuine participation of
national stakeholders.
Poland is ready to share its experience, acquired
during our long participation in peacekeeping
operations and two decades of peaceful democratic
transition, to assist and support interested countries by
offering lessons learned and expertise in building and
developing effective institutional capacity.
Establishing the rule of law in post-conflict societies
is an essential prerequisite for a successful transition
from war to peace. We reinforce our commitment to
contribute to further work on strengthening the rule

14-2389071/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

of law in the maintenance of international peace and
security.
Finally, as we discuss today’s important topic,
we would like to stress Poland’s deep concern over
the recent dramatic developments in our eastern
neighbour, Ukraine. We strongly condemn the
escalation of violence, and we consider the use of
force as unacceptable. That may produce serious and
difficult-to-predict consequences, both internal and
external, for Ukraine. We call for dialogue and hope
that the sides will return to the negotiating table.
Ukraine’s authorities should demonstrate their will
to resolve the current political crisis, as they bear a
special responsibility for further developments, given
the means at their disposal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me to begin by congratulating you, Madam President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the current month and thanking you for
holding this meeting on the very important subject of
the rule of law.
Our meeting is being held in the wake of another
heinous terrorist attack in Lebanon and on the heels
of a series of similar horrifying terrorist acts against
innocent civilians and targets in a few other Middle
Eastern countries. Those acts were aimed at sowing
discord among peoples and damaging the social fabric
of societies and countries in the region.
The most recent terrorist attack occurred in the
positive environment created by the birth of an allinclusive Government and the positive impact that
that had on the Lebanese people. In committing that
attack, the terrorists meant to send a message about the
insistence of the forces of evil on inflicting harm on
Lebanon and its people. The countries in the region and
the international community at large, led by the United
Nations, should respond to that new wave of terrorism
by closing ranks and taking concrete actions.
While my Government condemns the terrorist attack
in Lebanon and offers condolences to the victims and
their families, we call on the Lebanese people to remain
united in the face of such appalling and indiscriminate
terrorist acts and to build on the positive steps taken
in the recent past. We also reiterate the commitment of
the international community, especially the Council, to
supporting Lebanon in those efforts.
72/85

19/02/2014

Peacekeeping has played an important part in the
United Nations achievements in managing conflicts,
maintaining peace and stability and helping to create
the conditions for building durable social and economic
development in countries emerging from conflict.
Those conditions have links with the strengthening of
rule-of-law institutions, supported by the entire United
Nations system, upon the request and with the full
participation of the countries concerned.
That comprehensive perspective was reflected
in the Declaration of the High-level Meeting of the
General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the National
and International Levels (General Assembly resolution
67/1), adopted on 24 September 2012. Paragraph
19 of the Declaration stresses the importance of
supporting national civilian capacity development
and institution-building in the aftermath of conflict,
including through peacekeeping operations, with a
view to delivering more effective civilian capacities
and enhanced, international and regional cooperation,
including in the field of the rule of law.
My delegation emphasizes the critical importance
of strengthening the rule of law in countries emerging
from conflict in order to help stabilize the situation,
put an end to impunity, tackle the underlying causes
of conflict and build lasting peace. Peacekeeping
operations, within the scope of their respective
mandates, play their part in post-conflict situations
by helping national authorities develop strategies and
support the strengthening of justice and correctional
structures in conjunction with the development of police
services in order to build a coherent and comprehensive
justice system that supports the host country’s ability to
provide critical services in those fields.
Currently, there are 19 United Nations field missions
with components related to rule-of-law activities in
different parts of the world. We firmly believe that
the establishment of mandates related to rule-of-law
activities in post-conflict societies should be in line
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and the provisions of international law,
including full respect for the territorial integrity and
sovereign equality of States and non-interference in the
internal affairs of other States. It is also important to
ensure the transparency of all decisions leading to the
establishment, renewal or modification of mandates
through meaningful, multi-stage consultations at an
early stage.

14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

States emerging from conflicts need to take
ownership as they embark upon the difficult process
of rebuilding their countries and making effective
improvements to their socioeconomic well-being.
Furthermore, investing in national capacity-building
and strengthening national expertise in the area of the
rule of law are essential to realizing the objective of
national ownership, which must become a reality and
not remain just an abstract concept.
Meanwhile, the promotion of the rule of law should
at all times reflect respect for legal, political and
cultural diversity, and therefore encourage a culture of
dialogue, tolerance and understanding that is opposed
to the imposition of any legal, political, cultural or
economic model. The configuration of the political and
legal system is a matter for the domestic jurisdiction of
States, and there are no one-size-fits-all solutions.
Promoting the rule of law also requires adequate
measures for ensuring the accountability of United
Nations staff and experts on mission with respect
to criminal acts they may commit while deployed
in peacekeeping operations. There have been good
improvements to ending impunity for perpetrators of
such crimes, and we think that the strict measures in
effect will promote the credibility of United Nations
peacekeeping missions.
Rebuilding societies emerging from conflict is a
shared responsibility. It is only through a coordinated
and comprehensive approach that the international
community can yield lasting results. We hope that
today’s deliberations will contribute to the achievement
of that noble goal.
Finally, although I did not intend to respond to the
noises coming from the mouth of the Ambassador of
Israel, I must do so.
Today, to the astonishment of many, the
representative of the Israeli regime accused the Iranian
Government and many other countries in the region of
violating human rights. It is astonishing that we have
heard such baseless accusations from somebody who
represents a regime that was founded, and continues
to exist, on the basis of gross violations of the rights
of the entire native population of the land concerned.
The host of policies adopted by the Israelis against the
Palestinians are so grotesque that nothing other than
the term “apartheid State” can describe it. They are
committing the crime of apartheid against the Arabs
living in the occupied territory and within Israel.

S/PV.7113

The Palestinians are subject to a system of control
that includes Jewish-only settlements, the identification
system, military checkpoints, separate roads for Israelis
and Palestinians and the separation wall — denying
Arabs access to their land and resources and delaying
their access to health care. For many years, the nearly
2 million inhabitants of the Gaza Strip have lived under
one of the most harsh blockades ever, which has denied
them access to basic necessities. To a lesser extent, a
similar policy targeting the West Bank has been on the
agenda.
All of that stems from the denial of the Palestinians’
most basic right: their right to self-determination.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): Thank you, Madam
President, for having convened this open debate on the
promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
More than six decades after the founding of our
United Nations, the task before us still looms large:
the pursuit of a just and lasting peace remains. Indeed,
despite the advancements we have achieved, we
continue to be beset by war, conflict and violence.
An Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs report paints a sobering picture: in most regions
of the world, between 1990 and 2012 and especially
over the last decade, the number of people displaced by
conflict — excluding fatalities — has been increasing,
reaching an 18-year global high of 45.2 million people
in 2012. We should redouble our collective efforts.
The Security Council should be focused on the critical
issues of international peace and security.
To be sure, the situations relating to the lands and
waters that give rise to tensions, instability or conflict
have become increasingly complex and complicated.
But in all these scenarios and circumstances, the
fundamental importance of the rule of law as the
solid bedrock of nation- and world-building cannot be
questioned. The rule of law is a vital object and policy
instrument that can lead to lasting peace and stability.
Necessarily, for this building-block to remain
strong, we should do everything within our capabilities
to ensure that all stakeholders adhere to the rule of
law. The rule of law by itself does not ipso facto bring
peace and stability. It is adherence to the rule of law

14-2389073/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

that brings those ideals and principles to life and makes
positive changes real.
That has been the position of the Philippines, as
amply articulated in the principles and purposes of the
United Nations. In the pursuit of enduring international
peace and security, all stakeholders, especially
Governments, should match their pronouncements on
the rule of law with action. When we adhere to the
rule of law, we ensure that we prevent disputes, resolve
conflicts and maintain peace and security, not through
sheer, raw power, but through the moral weight of
pacific processes.
When we adhere to the rule of law, we make full
use of the entire international legal infrastructure
available to us to resolve disputes: the International
Court of Justice, the Permanent Court of Arbitration,
the International Tribunal on the Law of the Sea and
other specialized tribunals. When we adhere to the rule
of law, we combat impunity in all its forms, reaffirm
the importance of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court and support efforts to hold accountable
the perpetrators of the most serious international
crimes.
The international legal system provides ample
and extensive adjudicative mechanisms through
international courts and specialized tribunals. The
motivation to resort to those mechanisms to resolve
disputes is there. It is intriguing to note that those
professing the existence of the strongest basis for its
claims — legal, historical or otherwise — do not have
the proclivity to submit to adjudication.
The Philippines acknowledges the importance of
the rule of law as a key element of conflict prevention,
peacekeeping, conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
As such, the Philippines recognizes the inclusion of the
strengthening of the rule of law in the mandates of 18 of
the 28 Security Council missions’ mandates.
The Philippines, as a police- and troop-contributing
country, continues to do its part in strengthening the rule
of law. The Philippines is present in seven peacekeeping
missions. Together with other stakeholders, we work
on strengthening the rule of law, including through,
among other things, the rebuilding of police and lawenforcement services, ensuring humane and secure
prison facilities, strengthening legal frameworks and
developing the national civilian capacity.
But more needs to be done. The Philippines calls
for the establishment of clear, credible and achieveable
74/85

19/02/2014

mandates for peacekeeping missions. We likewise
call on stakeholders to provide the necessary policy,
logistical and political support for peacekeeping
missions.
The Special Committee on Peacekeeping should
provide timely and substantive policy directions
that ensure a robust peacekeeping architecture
and strengthen cooperation between troop- and
police-contributing countries, the Security Council and
the Secretariat. Key to such support is the provision
of adequate resources and training, for the safety and
security of all our peacekeepers. The Security Council
must likewise make the utmost efforts to ensure
that the freedom of movement of all peacekeepers is
respected. Any act curtailing the freedom of movement
of peacekeepers or impacting their safety and security
must be condemned in the strongest terms.
Last December, peacekeepers deployed to the
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali were wounded
and killed in an explosion. We know all too well that
pain and suffering. Throughout our five decades’
engagement, Filipino peacekeepers have made the
ultimate sacrifice in the name of peacekeeping. Our
peacekeepers in the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force were kidnapped on two occasions. We
must do everything we can to prevent such incidents.
On the other hand, we must also recognize that
the success of rule-of-law efforts relies not only on
peacekeeping missions. There should be national
ownership, political engagement, and coordination
and alignment of efforts and resources. In that regard,
we should also look into how other relevant actors can
contribute to strengthening rule-of-law efforts. The
role and inputs of host countries will therefore be vital.
The Philippines has had to grapple with its own
challenges. Throughout the years, my Government
has resolutely pursued the path of peace through
negotiations and meaningful dialogue within the
framework of the rule of law and the 1987 Constitution
of the Republic of the Philippines.
In the southern Philippines, we have made
significant headway in bringing about a just and lasting
peace under President Benigno S. Aquino. Panels
from the Philippine Government and the Moro Islamic
Liberation Front formally signed the fourth and final
annex to the Framework Agreement on the Bangsamoro
on 25 January, in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

These tangible fruits of years of committed work
deserve the support of all those who have pledged to
uphold peace and security through the rule of law.
There may be lessons to be learned and best practices
based on our experience that the Philippines can share.
Our world knows all too well and has seen too much
of the terrible suffering of peoples caught up in conflict
and strife. We believe that the biggest takeaway that our
collective history — blighted as it is with pernicious
violence — has taught us is that the biggest investment
we can make is in preventing conflicts from arising.
In the context of internal conflicts, there is much to
develop and support so that all stakeholders can come
to a peaceful resolution. In the context of preventing
international conflicts, we can, and should, rely on the
rule of law to ensure not only that the rights of States
are observed, but, more importantly, that States comply
with their obligations. This is a situation where “right
is might”.
In this regard, the continuing discussions held
over 40 years on the responsibility of States for
internationally wrongful acts deserve our careful
consideration. Virtually all delegations agreed, during
the sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly,
that the draft articles were a key contribution to the
development of international law, being broadly used
as reference by international and national tribunals and
Governments. Yet consensus has not been achieved on
the next steps forward. There should be a way forward
through meaningful dialogue.
Clearly, the road ahead of us remains very long.
The advancement and maintenance of international
peace and security must continue to be pursued. Let
us take this opportunity to renew our pledge to uphold
the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations. We must match that pledge with action and
vigilance.
We must never fear to call out those who flout the
rule of law. We must continue to remind ourselves of
the importance of the rule of law and strive for world
peace. As responsible members of the international
community, we adhere to the rule of law and comply
with our international obligations and commitments.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Silva (Sri Lanka): The United Nations has the
fundamental responsibility to maintain and strengthen

S/PV.7113

international peace and security in conformity with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. It is
fitting that the Council should highlight the centrality
of the rule of law at a time when the world is facing ever
increasing threats to international peace in the form of
transnational organized crime, terrorism, piracy and
climate degradation. The many organs and agencies of
the United Nations must play a role in contributing to
the promotion and strengthening of the rule of law at
the international level.
Strengthening the rule of law is essential in order
not only to maintain peace but also to enable sustained
economic progress. The flashpoints of future conflicts
may well lie in access to critical resources, such as
water and energy. Grievances based on violations of
economic and social rights have the capacity to spark
violent conflict that could spill over borders. The
United Nations has a vital role in promoting dialogue
on the realization of economic and social rights for all
peoples.
The Charter of the United Nations sets out the
framework for the development of a rules-based
international order. It enshrines the principle of
sovereign equality, which continues to be intrinsic to
the international legal order and must be respected as
international rules are made and implemented. It is a
principle that protects all States, especially the small
and the weak.
Upholding the principle of non-interference in
the internal affairs of Member States, especially in
situations that do not pose a threat to international
peace and security, is also fundamental. Specific
circumstances may call for involvement, which should
be based on the agreement of all States. Unilateral and
selective applications of the principles of international
law must be avoided. In particular, Sri Lanka urges
an end to unilateral and selective coercive measures,
including economic embargoes against sovereign States
that hinder the freedom of trade.
Disputes in the international arena that continue to
occur must be settled in accordance with the principles
developed to settle disputes peacefully. Justice should
not always be reduced to retribution or to resorting to
force. Negotiations, arbitration, mediation and other
peaceful means must be the first essential recourse.
Close cooperation in the application of laws at
the national, regional and international levels is vital
in addressing the growing problems of transnational

14-2389075/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

organized crime and terrorism, which threaten
international peace and good order. States have
concluded a wide range of treaties on mutual assistance
that facilitate such cooperation.
The rule of law must also be understood in
the context of ensuring the economic progress of
individuals and societies, particularly with regard to
the right to development. An equitable and democratic
international financial structure is necessary in order
to fully protect the rule of law at the international
level. In maintaining a balance among economic
progress, development, environmental sustainability
and the utilization of natural resources, the scope of
the rule of law can be broadened at both the national
and the international levels. As the rule of law at the
international level evolves, the responsibility to make
a contribution should not rest with a handful of States
nor should its implementation be selective. Selective
implementation would cause doubts to arise with regard
to credibility.
A key aspect of the rule of law at the international
level is the codification of international law. The
United Nations has been undertaking such work
since its inception. In addition, the multilateral treaty
framework, developed mainly under the auspices of the
United Nations, has played a seminal role in advancing
the international rule of law. The Secretary-General is
the depositary of more than 530 multilateral treaties,
which cover almost all aspects of human interaction.
Domestic compliance with treaty obligations, which is
an obligation under the Vienna Convention on the Law
of the Treaties, is an area where the United Nations can
play a crucial and helpful role, particularly in assisting
States with capacity-building.
Conflict and post-conflict settings are complex
environments with many competing priorities.
Therefore, we must recognize the tensions and
difficulties that emerge, while trying to balance
national security interests and the maintenance of civil
rights under such trying local circumstances. Countries
with strong legal foundations have the resilience and
the capacity to restore democratic institutions. There is
a need to give countries such as those the much needed
space to begin that restorative process so as to reach an
even keel. The United Nations must provide leadership
in capacity-building efforts to address the gaps by also
factoring in local sensitivities.
Sri Lanka reiterates its willingness to engage with
the United Nations in order to promote the rule of law
76/85

19/02/2014

on the basis of constructive, fair, non-selective and
objective assessments.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uganda.
Mr. Nduhuura (Uganda): I thank you, Madam
President, and the delegation of Lithuania for
organizing this open debate on the important topic of
the promotion of and strengthening of the rule of law
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
Our forebears recognized in the Charter of the
United Nations the need to live in peace and harmony
and expressed their determination to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. They reaffirmed
the rule of law as one of the fundamental components
that contributes to the maintenance of international
peace and security.
Uganda underscores the importance of putting in
place an enabling environment in which the rule of law,
in all its dimensions, is promoted and strengthened at
the national and international levels. I would like to
underscore four points.
First, it is essential to ensure that efforts to strengthen
the rule of law at the national level are nationally
owned and primarily aimed at responding to the needs
and aspirations of the people, taking into account
national traditions and cultures. The involvement and
participation of all citizens, in particular women and
young people, are central.
We need to foster adherence to constitutionalism
and democratic governance, underpinned by strong
institutions, including the executive, the civil service,
the judiciary, the legislature and the security and
law and order sectors, with the necessary checks and
balances. The principle of the equality of all before the
law is fundamental.
Secondly, we concur with the observation set out in
the concept note (S/2014/75, annex) that many countries
that have experienced conflicts in the past are prone
to repeated cycles of violence, displacement, pervasive
humanitarian crises and instability. One of the ways
to avoid such recurrence is to support post-conflict
countries to build strong national institutions that
promote peace and security and to provide economic
opportunities so that populations benefit from peace
dividends.

14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

We have seen many examples in Africa of postconflict countries following a steady path to durable
peace, stability and development through national
efforts to build institutions, supported by the African
Union, subregional organizations, the United Nations
and the broader international community. It is important
to ensure early action to address gaps or weaknesses
in the rule of law, and a long-term commitment to
implement the necessary reforms.
In the pursuit of rule of law, there is no case
where one size fits all. That is why transitional justice
mechanisms tailored to individual situations can be
useful tools. In Uganda, we have seen the benefits of
utilizing traditional methods, such as the so-called
mato put system, which emphasize reconciliation rather
than retributive justice and have strong support from
elders and traditional and religious leaders.
Thirdly, the importance of the rule of law as one
of the elements of conflict prevention, peacekeeping,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding cannot be
overemphasized. Yet we need to recognize that such a
situation does not occur in a vacuum. It may therefore be
necessary, in some post-conflict situations, to support
a legitimate Government in exercising more effective
control in order to ensure the sustainability of the gains
attained through regional or United Nations efforts.
Fourthly, at the international level, we need to
ensure that all Member States adhere to and respect
international law. No country should have the
prerogative to position itself above international law,
apply it selectively or with double standards. We are
concerned about instances of the application of unilateral
measures in the context of international relations in
order to pursue individual national interests. Moreover,
the marginalization of many developing countries in
the context of global political and economic governance
institutions should not be allowed to continue.
In conclusion, we call for greater efforts to promote
and strengthen the rule of law in all its dimensions, at
the national and international levels, in the maintenance
of international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic
of the Congo) (spoke in French): Madam President,
as this is the first time my delegation takes the floor
during your presidency of the Security Council in
the month of February 2014, allow me the pleasure of

S/PV.7113

commending your work and to say how pleased my
country, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, is
to see the friendly country of Lithuania leading the
Council’s deliberations this month. I also thank you for
giving me this opportunity to take the floor before the
Council at this meeting focused on the promotion and
strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security.
My country aspires to peace and stability. We
make a valuable contribution to promoting the rule of
law through our active participation in the major legal
instruments of the United Nations system. We are
therefore among those courageous States Members of
the United Nations that have formally made declarations
of acceptance of the compulsory jurisdiction of the
International Court of Justice. For more than a decade
now, having positively added to its docket a number
of matters, we have been one of the main appellants
before the Court. Along those lines, we also remain a
model of cooperation with the International Criminal
Court, which was established to combat impunity for
crimes whose gravity has long outraged humankind’s
collective consciousness.
With respect to the Great Lakes region, to which
my country belongs, it must be emphasized that respect
for the rule of law is a democratic value that plays no
part in the ambitions of those who seek, through actions
or deeds, to reignite hotbeds of tension. The remnants
of the negative forces that have long appeared on the
updated lists of persons under sanctions by the United
Nations, the European Union and the Government of
the United States of America who still remain in the
region should understand that they will not enjoy
impunity. Sooner or later, they will have to answer
to justice for their actions. We urge those countries
harbouring them to assist in arresting and transferring
them before the competent judicial bodies, including
before the International Criminal Court.
Moreover, as noted by one African Head of
State, we will not achieve peace simply by avoiding
confrontation. Peace represents humankind’s mental
health, the satisfaction of seeing justice overcome
injustice.
Experience has shown that peace accords will
succeed only in the light of respect for the rule of law.
That requires strengthened confidence in police, justice
and corrections sectors. Nevertheless, it is universally
acknowledged that upholding the rule of law is
fundamental in ensuring lasting peace after conflict.

14-2389077/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

In other words, peacekeeping efforts must lead to
improved police, justice and corrections services, as
well as the institutions to which they are accountable.
In a welcome development, all major peacekeeping
operations and many special political missions have
for some time now been called upon to work with
host countries in strengthening the rule of law. In that
respect, most United Nations peacekeeping operations
now include a specialized human rights team.
Although, in principle, United Nations peacekeeping
operations are deployed to support the implementation
of a ceasefire or peace agreement, they are often called
upon to play an active role in peacekeeping efforts
and to participate in the early stages of peacebuilding.
Today, the Organization’s multifaceted peacekeeping
operations facilitate political processes, protect
civilians, assist in the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of former combatants, support
preparations for elections, defend and protect human
rights and help to re-establish the rule of law. They may
use force if necessary in order to fulfil their mandates
or protect civilians.
The establishment of the Intervention Brigade
within the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is part of that effort. The Intervention Brigade is
responsible for neutralizing armed groups in order to
help reduce the threat they pose to the State’s authority
and the security of civilians residing in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as for
preparing the ground for stabilization activities.
To ensure the establishment of the rule of law
in a country emerging from conflict, national and
local capacities must be enhanced at the start of a
peacekeeping operation. Respect for the primacy of the
law is essential to stregthening peace and justice and
ending impunity.
As part of the process of reaching peace agreements,
political negotiations should lay the foundations for a
justice system that is able to address the burdensome
legacy of the serious violations of human rights that
took place during years of war and to prevent their
recurrence in future.
In practice, that approach involves genuine
synergies between the democratic requirements of
re-establishing the rule of law and the need to restore
and to build peace.

78/85

19/02/2014

In a context profoundly marked by the needs
associated with re-establishing the rule of law and
peacebuilding, the importance of a spirit of dialogue
and reconciliation often become imperatives that
cannot be avoided. However, we must avoid creating a
situation wherein meeting the demands of dialogue and
reconciliation becomes a boon for the insurgents.
We must ensure that the spread of armed violence
does not become a way to settle political conflicts and
social grievances. Such violence, prompted by a reward
for insurrection, has often led to failure in the process of
re-establishing the rule of law and peacebuilding in areas
of conflict. In practice, the mandates of peacekeeping
operations need to be more clear and precise when
it comes to issues related to the rule of law. It up to
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to see to
it that the rule of law, human rights and transitional
justice mechanisms are integrated in the strategic and
operational planning of peacekeeping operations. In
that context, we must ensure that host countries enjoy
comprehensive and integrated assistance in the field of
the rule of law from the establishment of a peacekeeping
operation.
In conclusion, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo remains convinced that peace and justice
complement each other. Our experience has shown
the irreplaceable role of justice as a factor for social
harmony, national reconciliation, peace, security and
stability. We have understood that respect for the rule
of law and for human rights cannot prevail in a society
when the perpetrators of crimes are not brought to
justice. Similarly, peace cannot be consolidated in a
society beset by impunity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Zimbabwe.
Mrs. Chikava (Zimbabwe): As this is the first time
that my delegation takes the floor in the Council this
year, allow me to congratulate you, Madam President,
on your country’s election to the Security Council and
on your assumption of the presidency so early in your
term. You have indeed hit the ground running. Let me
also take this opportunity to congratulate the other
new members of the Council — Chad, Chile, Jordan
and Nigeria — on their election and assumption of
membership in this important organ. I am confident
that, under your stewardship, the Council will continue
to execute its mandate efficiently and diligently, as has
been the case already.

14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

The topic under discussion addresses issues that are
at the core of the founding principles of the Organization
as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. We
thank the Lithuanian delegation for the concept note
(S/2014/75, annex), which focuses on incorporating the
rule of law as an integral component of peacekeeping
and peacebuilding mandates. However, we wish to
highlight the international dimensions of the rule of
law, which are fundamental for peaceful relations
between States and the maintenance of international
peace and security.
The three pillars of the United Nations
agenda — development, peace and security and human
rights — are inextricably linked with the rule of law.
The settlement of disputes by peaceful means is an
integral element of that nexus. The Charter provides a
sound framework for the peaceful conduct of relations
between States. The United Nations should continue to
be guided by the principles of the sovereign equality
of States, non-interference in the internal affairs of
States, support for self-determination, non-aggression,
the peaceful coexistence of States and respect for the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States. Guided by our commitment for nations to
live in harmony, the United Nations should continue
to champion the resolution of conflicts by peaceful
means within the confines of international law. Small
States like my country depend upon the rule of law
for protection against arbitrary actions by the rich and
powerful.
As agreed in the Declaration of the High-level
Meeting of the General Assembly on the Rule of Law
at National and International Levels (General Assembly
resolution 67/1), adopted by Heads of State and
Government on 24 September 2012, States must refrain
from the threat of or the use of force to solve disputes.
The tendency to resort to force at every instance only
undermines peace, security and the rule of law. Recent
experiences amply demonstrate that heavy-handed
interventions do not bring about sustainable solutions,
but only cost more lives, destroy and degrade economic
and social infrastructure and often leave behind more
unstable situations than those they intended to solve.
More often than not, local people are left to pick up the
pieces from a trail of destruction.
The Declaration on the rule of law also cautions
States to avoid the use of unilateral measures against
other States. Regrettably, such measures, which are
employed by powerful States against weaker ones

S/PV.7113

to achieve narrow political objectives, undermine
socioeconomic development efforts. As we frame
the post-2015 development agenda with a focus on
eradicating poverty and transforming our economies,
we hope that developing country efforts will not
continue to be hindered by such unilateral coercive
measures. Poverty in all its dimensions is a threat to
peace and security.
Zimbabwe supports international efforts to end
impunity and to hold accountable those responsible
for atrocities. We are, however, concerned that the
international criminal justice system is operated in
a selective manner. The impression it has created is
that it is focused only on soft targets in the developing
world, mainly in Africa. That perception undermines
confidence in the system. Testimonies from those
in countries where it has been applied suggest that it
has neither facilitated peace nor reconciliation. For
the system to be credible, it has to be seen to apply
universally and equally to all.
At the national level, we are committed to
enhancing the rule of law by strengthening law
and justice institutions. Our new Constitution has
strengthened the separation of powers and enhanced
the independence of the judiciary. Independent watchdog bodies and commissions, such as the Zimbabwe
human rights, anti-corruption and media commissions,
have been established to protect the rights and interests
of citizens. We believe that the United Nations is an
appropriate forum for the sharing of best practices, and
capacity-building can be of assistance in facilitating
cooperation in those areas. Peace and security can be
guaranteed only through multilateralism, dialogue and
cooperation in addressing the root causes of conflict,
and not through force and coercion.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Madam President, for convening
this important open debate on the promotion and
strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security and for submitting a
concept note on the topic (S/2014/75, annex).
In recent years, international attention to the
importance of the rule of law has increased significantly.
The practice of the Security Council has greatly
contributed to that end. In its presidential statement of
19 January 2012 (S/PRST/2012/1), the Council, inter

14-2389079/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

alia, emphasizes the importance of the rule of law as
a key element of conflict prevention, peacekeeping,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
Azerbaijan’s consistent position with regard to the
issue under consideration is well known and stems from
its keen interest in contributing to the achievement
of sustainable peace and development in our region
and worldwide and from our practical experience in
addressing the consequences of aggression, violent
separatism, foreign military occupation and ethnic
cleansing.
At the end of 1987, neighbouring Armenia openly
laid claim to the territory of the Nagorno-Karabakh
region of Azerbaijan. That claim culminated in the
occupation of the territories of my country, the killing of
thousands of Azerbaijani civilians and in the expulsion
of about 1 million Azerbaijanis from their homes in
both Armenia and the occupied territories. Those
who perpetrated the crimes committed during the
conflict, among whom are those holding high political
and military posts in Armenia, still enjoy impunity.
That continues to impede progress in achieving longawaited peace and reconciliation between the two
countries. Moreover, the glorification of terrorists
and war criminals in Armenia, including raising
them to the status of national heroes and bestowing
State decorations on them, demonstrates how far the
leadership of that Member State is from adhering to the
rule of law and universal values of civilized relations.
In that context, greater efforts are needed to ensure
a unified approach to the rule of law and to address
the major threats and challenges that continue to
affect basic elements of the international legal order,
to undermine the national unity, territorial integrity
and stability of States, and to regenerate disregard and
contempt for human rights.
More resolute and targeted measures are required
to end impunity for serious violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. Unfortunately,
as I have just noted, not all such violations in some
situations of armed conflict, including those of a
protracted nature, have received due attention and a
response at the international and regional levels. As a
result, past wrongs left unpunished and unrecognized
continue to impede progress in achieving long-awaited
peace in some parts of the world.
Combating impunity is therefore important not
only for the purpose of prosecuting crimes and bringing

80/85

19/02/2014

those responsible to justice — the achievement of
which is undoubtedly imperative per se — but also
to ensure sustainable peace, truth and reconciliation.
Such an approach to ending impunity falls in the
context of the settlement of conflicts and provides that
no peace settlement can be reached that is inconsistent
with international law. It is clear that, in situations
of protracted armed conflict, a lack of agreement on
political issues cannot be used as a pretext for not
establishing the truth concerning gross violations of
human rights and of international humanitarian law.
It is essential that peace efforts and peace
agreements never encourage, accept or tolerate
situations achieved by the unlawful use of force and
other egregious violations of international law, such
as war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and
ethnic cleansing. Such efforts should never promise
amnesties or encourage any other form of immunity for
the most serious crimes of concern to the international
community. In any event, the conflict-resolution
initiatives considered by the Security Council and
regional arrangements must ensure that peace and
justice work together effectively.
In conclusion, I would like to again commend the
initiative of Lithuania to convene this open debate.
We believe it is important that the Security Council
consistently keep its focus on specific developments
in the rule of law, in particular on the issue of
accountability.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): Let me start by thanking
you, Madam President, for convening this open debate.
I also thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
rule of law (S/2013/341).
We believe that the establishment of the rule
of law at the national and international levels alike
constitutes one of the core values and principles of the
United Nations. Through the universal standard-setting
power of the General Assembly, the enforcement power
of the Security Council and the judicial power of the
International Court of Justice, the United Nations plays
a vital role in promoting and enhancing the rule of law.
For a world order based on fairness and the rule of
law, all nations — rich and poor, weak and powerful,
small and large — must respect international legal
systems and multilateral treaties and support the

14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

fair and just application of customary international
law in the multilateral decision-making process. A
greater voice and representation for developing and, in
particular, least developed countries in the multilateral
system across the board remain absolutely crucial to
ensuring the principles of equity, fairness, transparency
and democracy at the international level. That will be
even more critical as we embark upon the post-2015
development agenda for equitable, pro-people and proplanet sustainable development, peace and stability.
We must demonstrate unwavering faith in the rule
of law to achieve some of our pressing outstanding
tasks concerning meaningful reform of the global
financial structures, a rules-based developmentcentric multilateral trading system, an equitable and
responsible legal regime to address climate change and
a balanced and rights-based approach to address the
emerging challenges of population dynamics as a key
driver of sustainable development.
Bangladesh believes in peace and justice within the
State and in inter-State relations. As the world’s eighth
largest democracy, Bangladesh firmly believes that the
rule of law is a necessary precondition for sustainable
peace, stability and development in any society.
At the national level, we are committed to, and
steadfastly working towards, the promotion of the rule
of law and justice in all spheres of our lives.
It is noteworthy to mention that, to uphold the
constitutional obligations and the rule of law in our
multiparty democracy, the Bangladesh Election
Commission, which is an independent entity, has
recently conducted our national elections in a fair, free,
transparent and credible way that is overwhelmingly
supported by the public.
In the last tenure of the present Government,
it undertook much-needed reform in the fields of
the administration, the judiciary and the electoral
systems in Bangladesh. One important reform is
the effective separation of the judiciary from the
executive organ of the Government. The Government
has also strengthened the anti-corruption commission,
enabling that independent constitutional body to act
as the watchdog against all types of institutional and
personal corruption and misuse of powers. The present
Government has also established an independent
human rights commission to safeguard the rights of all
citizens and to ensure that the international standards

S/PV.7113

of human rights and personal freedoms are protected in
the country.
Measures have also been taken to ensure that
law-enforcing institutions operate with accountability
and work within the framework of international legal
norms and principles. To strengthen the rule of law and
democracy, end the culture of impunity and prevent the
perpetration of genocide and crimes against humanity,
Bangladesh, following international standards, formed
its international crime tribunal and ratified and joined
the International Criminal Court the year before last.
We also strengthened the commissions on information
and other regulatory agencies.
A citizens’ charter of rights has been instituted in
all public institutions to ensure that the Government
delivers the rule of law and public services to every
citizen. I am particularly pleased to report that we
could deliver justice and rights to our women. Our
membership in all 14 international treaties on counterterrorism, our amendments to existing national laws on
counter-terrorism and anti-money-laundering between
2009 and 2012 to bring them into line with international
treaties following the Palermo Convention of 2011, and
our adoption of the human-trafficking act, the mutual
Legal assistance in crimes act, the anti-terrorism act
and the anti-money-laundering act all reflect our
commitment to counter-terrorism and the rule of law.
Bangladesh is a staunch supporter of resolving
conflict through peaceful and non-military means.
Peace in our world today is threatened — by, among
other things, civil and ethnic wars, hate crimes,
misunderstandings, injustice, religious intolerance,
double standards, transnational crime, depravation,
poverty, terrorism, piracy, climate change impacts and
the financial and energy crises. That has enhanced
more than ever the need to reaffirm our faith in the
just, equitable and fair application of international law,
the Charter of the United Nations, principles of justice,
legal statutes, the culture of peace and the peaceful
settlement of disputes.
We fully support efforts to uphold the sovereign
equality of all States, to respect their territorial integrity
and political independence, to refrain from the use or
threat of use of force in a manner inconsistent with
the Charter of the United Nations and to uphold the
peaceful resolution of disputes in conformity with the
principles of justice and international law. The rule of
law, which is a necessary condition for good governance

14-2389081/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

and guarantees the transparency and accountability
of Governments and their responsible conduct, is
an important enabler of sustainable development.
Institutions for the rule of law and good governance
need to be effective, credible, efficient, accountable
and democratic in order to achieve a just, equitable,
peaceful, prosperous and sustainable society for all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, it gives me pleasure to warmly
congratulate you, Madam President, and your friendly
country, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I wish you every
success. I would also like to commend you on your
selection of the theme for this open debate.
I would like to stress the commitment of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to the rule of law in line with
the Charter of the United Nations. We would like to
stress that the Charter, which enshrines the importance
of freedom, sovereignty and justice for all, should
always be present in our minds and in the context of
our efforts to build a bright future for our children,
who will inherit this world with all its potential and
challenges.
The diversity of the world’s systems and the
traditions of its peoples confirms that there is not
a single model for the rule of law, as well as the
importance of pursuing the dialogue with regard to the
various successful national applications in this area.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia was established on
the basis of the teachings of the Islamic faith, which
is anchored in justice and equality. Those principles
include different forms of human cooperation and
harmony. God the Almighty has taught us that we
cannot be faithful unless we desire for others what we
desire for ourselves, and that whoever unduly kills a
human being has in effect killed all people. It is on those
principles that the law and governance were established
in my country.
In this international Organization, we start from
different cultures and concepts, but all of us are seeking
a common goal, namely, the development of a world in
which we renounce our intolerance and differences in
order to live in enduring peace and security.
The system of Islamic jurisprudence concurs, in its
fundamentals, with the principles of the rule of law. It

82/85

19/02/2014

concurs with the formal interpretation of the concept
related to the need to establish a law that regulates all
the affairs of the community. It also concurs with the
substantive interpretation of the rule of law’s concept,
that is to say, the commitment of State authorities to the
law. The principles of Islamic sharia, which govern my
country, are an example of a full-fledged legal system
based on the principles of shura, justice, equality
and dignity. As to the lies that some are trying to
promote asserting that the Islam suppresses freedoms
and oppresses women, they are nothing but desperate
attempts to cover the truth and promote hatred. Islamic
sharia has provided for respect for human rights,
including safeguarding one’s faith, soul, mind, honour
and wealth. Therefore, human rights in Islam include
political, civil, economic, cultural and social rights.
Human rights in Islamic sharia are more important
than mere laws. They are an integral and holy part of our
faith; our belief in them leaves no room for bargaining
or mischaracterization.
My country recognizes that we live in an
interactive and changing world, but we see in that
constant development a chance for rapprochement and
consensus. We would like to stress that no State should
unilaterally adopt legislation that unduly undermines
the economic and financial balance in its region or the
world.
It is strange that the Israeli representative talks in
this forum about the alleged violations of the rule of law
in my country and other Arab countries. For we know
that the most serious violations of international law are
committed by the occupying Israeli authorities, which
practice the worst forms of State terrorism against the
Palestinian people, in total disregard of international
law and international legitimacy, and invent baseless
pretexts to continue their policies of blockade and
aggression against a powerless people.
Where does Israel stand in terms of the rule of law
when it carries out political assassinations and summary
killings? Where does Israel stand in terms of the rule
of law when its settlers invade territory and displace
its legitimate population? Where does is Israel stand
in terms of the rule of law when it allows its soldiers
to desecrate holy places and places of worship for both
Muslims and Christians? Where does is Israel stand in
terms of the rule of law when it expels the Palestinians
from their homes in Jerusalem, in a despicable practice
of ethnic cleansing?

14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

Here in this Chamber, the Israeli representative
has claimed that the countries of the region do not
respect the rule of law, as if he had not heard of the
multitude of United Nations resolutions that call for
the implementation of international law, which Israel
continues to violate around the clock — including the
continuing Israeli occupation itself, which represents
the worst violation of international law and international
legitimacy?
What is being inflicted upon the Syrian
people
—
including
killings,
torture
and
displacement — at the hands of the regime, which is
responsible for their protection, is truly regrettable. I
would like to stress that, from the start of the crisis in
Syria, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has sought to find
a peaceful solution that ensures that all those who have
blood on their hands are held accountable and that the
Syrian people play a leading role in that regard.
However, after three years of conflict in Syria,
during which the reins of power have been brought down
upon children’s skulls, amid the screams of innocent
people, the international community is still unable to
shoulder its responsibility to protect a people facing
oppression and extermination or to hold accountable
the linchpins of the regime responsible for killing more
than 140,000 citizens and for displacing millions more,
thereby destabilizing the entire region and jeopardizing
international peace and security.
As to the Syrian representative’s claims that his
country is fighting terrorism and other States are
supporting terrorists, they are nothing but a desperate
attempt to divert attention from the reality in that
country, which faces the greatest tragedy seen in this
century — or throughout the ages.
We would like to stress the need for international
cooperation based on collective responsibility, in line
with the principles of international law, including
when it comes to combating and dismantling illegal
networks and organized crime, money laundering and
illicit trafficking in weapons and human beings. We
believe that all such violations pose a serious threat to
international peace and security.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia makes every possible
effort, on the basis of its commitment to the Charter
of the United Nations, to be an effective Member of
the Organization. Our commitment is not limited to
enacting relevant national legislation and commitment
to the resolutions of the Security Council and General

S/PV.7113

Assembly. It also extends to making out utmost our
effort to promote justice and law.
The initiative of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to set
up the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre in New
York and the King Abdullah bin Abdulaziz International
Centre for Interreligious and Intercultural Dialogue in
Vienna are but two examples of our commitment to
collective action to maintain international peace and
security, two of the most important objectives of the
rule of law.
In conclusion, my country stresses the importance
of the principle of sovereignty and of the right of every
State to exercise its political freedom independently on
its territory without foreign threats of the use of force.
However, at the same time, we do not underrate
the right of every people to live free of oppression on
their own land and to benefit from its natural wealth
and resources in order to enjoy the social and economic
development needed for stability.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on my list of speakers. I would like to commend
delegations for working throughout the lunch hour and
finishing at the perfect time of 6 p.m.
However, several delegations have requested the
floor to make further statements. It is my intention to
accept those requests. I would ask delegations to be brief
and to limit themselves to one additional statement.
I now give the floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Heumann (Israel): Today some representatives
have exploited this forum to launch a range of baseless
accusations against my country. It is truly absurd to
hear some of the world’s most oppressive tyrannies
lecture the Middle East’s only true democracy about
the rule of law. In fact, while the State of Israel defends
the rule of law, our detractors defy the rules of law and
logic.
I am pleased to see that the Iranian representative is
taking full advantage of freedom of expression in this
Chamber. I suppose it is fitting, given that the Iranian
people do not enjoy this right at home. It seems to me
that he got a little carried away with the novelty and has
used this forum to spread tall tales at Israel’s expense;
after all, why spoil a good story with the truth?
The truth is that in Iran women are oppressed and
minorities are prosecuted, free speech is censored and
elections are a sham. Nonetheless, Iran is as quick to

14-2389083/85

S/PV.7113

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

indict Israel as it is to indict its own citizens, without
just cause, due diligence or reasonable doubt.
I should also like to respond to the comments
made by the Palestinian observer. It seems as though
the Palestinian delegation is heavy on the criticism of
Israel but very light on the facts. It is quite convenient
that in his remarks, the Palestinian observer neglected
to mention the many human rights abuses by the
Palestinian Authority security apparatus operating in
the West Bank. This is to say nothing of the widespread
and appalling human rights abuses committed by the
Hamas terrorist organization in Gaza.
Out of respect for the valuable time of the Council,
I will not respond further to those baseless accusations
except to say that it is unfortunate that the Palestinian
observer insists on using this forum to incite hostilities
against Israel, while peace negotiations are currently
under way.
Finally, allow me to refer to the Saudi Arabian
delegation. I want to take this opportunity to invite the
representative of Saudi Arabia and his colleagues to
Israel to see and learn how human rights are protected
and the rule of law is observed, and take this lesson back
home to his own country. I am sure that he has a lot to
learn. Let me also make this offer to the representative
of Saudi Arabia: if he cannot cover his trip to Israel
with petrodollars, I am sure that the Government of
Israel will cover it.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Samvelian (Armenia): I wish to thank you,
Madam President, for the opportunity to make a further
statement concerning the unfounded allegation made
against my country by the representative of Azerbaijan.
I would like to inform the Council that Azerbaijan
has turned Armenia-phobia into State propaganda at
a level that is beyond dangerous. That is not only our
assessment; the alarm has also been sounded by the
United Nations, other intergovernmental institutions
and Member States.
By denying and destroying all that is Armenia,
Azerbaijani representatives persistently continue to
disseminate propaganda and false accusations, even in
this very Council Chamber.
Let me draw the kind attention of the Council to just
one appalling example of how Azerbaijan understands

84/85

19/02/2014

and implements the concept of the rule of law, the very
subject of today’s discussion. On 19 February 2004,
exactly 10 years ago today, an Armenian participant
in a NATO-sponsored Partnership for Peace training
programme in Hungary, Lieutenant Gurgen Margaryan,
was axed to death by his fellow Azerbaijani participant,
Lieutenant Ramil Safarov. The 26-year-old Armenian
army lieutenant was hacked to death while asleep in
his dormitory room. Safarov stabbed Margaryan 16
times with an axe, almost decapitating him. Following
the murder, he walked over to another Armenian
officer’s room, hoping to commit a second murder, but,
fortunately, found the door locked. Safarov expressed
not even a hint of remorse after being sentenced in
Hungary to life in prison.
Eight years later, in September 2012, the whole
civilized world was appalled to learn that Safarov
had been transferred to Azerbaijan and freed upon
his arrival in Baku, Azerbaijan’s capital. Moreover, in
Baku he received a full pardon and eight years’ salary
compensation. He was granted an apartment, promoted
to the rank of major, glorified and received a hero’s
welcome from President Aliyev of Azerbaijan.
That treatment of a cold-blooded killer and his
pardoning contradicts not only international human
rights instruments but also the Azerbaijan criminal
code, which stipulates that a prisoner serving a life
sentence cannot be freed before serving at least 15 years.
This is a manifestation of how Azerbaijan treats a
convicted murder who carried out a brutal hate crime,
a crime committed against an unarmed Armenian.
It is an appalling demonstration of the Azerbaijani
Government’s failure to uphold the rule of law.
We expect that the United Nations and its Member
States will continue to voice their concern and react
to this atrocious development in our part of the world,
which has already undermined respect for justice,
human rights and human dignity and endangers regional
peace and security.
In conclusion, we call upon Azerbaijani
representatives to simply try to establish a tone in this
Chamber that is based a little bit more on reciprocity and
mutual understanding. Armenia pursues an approach
of dialogue, negotiation and mutual compromise. We
strongly reject the language of force, threats and hatred.
The President: I now five the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.

14-23890

19/02/2014

The rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): My delegation is taking
the floor once again to react to the totally groundless
remarks just made by the representative of Armenia.
It has become the distinctive nature of the policy
of Armenia to level accusations against a country
whose territories it keeps under occupation and whose
civilians it has brutally massacred and still continues
to kill on a daily basis. It is unfortunate that the forum
provided by the Security Council has once again been
abused to disseminate lies.
There is only one question that needs to be asked:
what can be the weight of statements by a country whose
President and other high-level officials are responsible
for war crimes and crimes against humanity? It is
curious that Armenia has the cheek to criticize and
lecture others on such a notion as justice, which is a
priori alien to that country’s policy and practice.
The best way to address the existing challenges
and concerns is to ensure that the occupation of the
territories of Azerbaijan is ended, that the rights of the
forcibly displaced population to return to their homes
is exercised without further delay, and that all those
responsible for the serious crimes committed against
Azerbaijani civilians in the course of the conflict are
brought to justice.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Syria.
Mr. Aldahhak (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation would like to reply to the claims
made by the representative of Saudi Arabia.
When we talk about the role of the Government
of Saudi Arabia in supporting terrorism, we do not
speak in a vacuum and level random accusations. Saudi
support for terrorism through money and weapons and
the extremist Takfiri interpretations that have nothing
to do with Islam are well known issues, underscored
by historical events in Afghanistan to Syria, Iraq and

S/PV.7113

Lebanon, as well as other countries, including the State
that hosts the Organization.
Who can think that caring for the Syrian people
means sending mercenaries and terrorists to Syria from
all over the world, with Saudi funds and weapons, to
run amok there and to try and impose their inhuman
thinking on Syrians? That is what has happened at
the hands of the Saudi Arabia Government and its
intelligence and cooperation with other countries so as
to settle their accounts with us and serve the agendas
of other States.
We call on the Government of Saudi Arabia to
review its policies and to put an end to its practice of
supporting terrorism to the detriment of the interests
of the sisterly Saudi people. The Government of Saudi
Arabia must realize that financing the United Nations
anti-terrorism centre will not deceive anyone. It will not
blind anyone to Saudi Arabia’s support for terrorism.
The President: The representative of the Observer
State of Palestine has asked for the floor to make a
further statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Zeidan (Palestine): My delegation will
not continue the circus started by Israel and its
representatives, but we would just like to add for the
record that Israel’s so-called democracy is a democracy
only for Jews, where non-Jews are inferior, whether
they be Muslim, Christian or others, whether it be with
regard to their civil or land rights, or even the right to
life. Israel touts itself as a democracy in the Middle
East but it forgot to also tell us that it is the greatest
violator of human rights and humanitarian law in the
whole world. Israel also forgot to tell us that it is the
only occupying Power in the Middle East.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speaker. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.

14-2389085/85
