General Assembly-Sixteenth Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SIXTH COMMITTEE

CONTE,NTS

1647 (XVI). Enlargement of the International Law Commission: amendments
to articles 2 and 9 of the Statute of the Commission (6 November 1961)
(item 77) ...... , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • .
1685 (XVI). International conference of plenipotentiaries on ~onsular relations
(18 December 1961) (item 69).......................................
1686 (XVI). Future work in the field of the codification and progressive development of international law (18 December 1961) (item 70).................
1687 (XVI). Question of special missions (18 December 1961) (item 71)......

1647 (XVI). Enlargement of the lnternational
Law CommiHion: amendments to articles 2
and 9 of the Statute of the Commission

Pag,

61
61
62
62

its thirteenth session,1 which contains draft articles and
commentaries on consular relations,

Recalling that, according to paragraph 27 of that
report, the International Law Commission decided to
recommend that the General Assembly should convene
an international conference of plenipotentiaries to study
the Commission's draft on consular relations and conelude one or more conventions on the subject,

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1103 (XI) of 18 December
1956, by which the membership of the International
Law Commission was established at twenty-one
members,
Noting that the membership of the United Nations
has increased substantially since the adoption of that
resolution,
l. Decides to amend as follows article 2, paragraph 1, of the Statute of the International Law Commission:
"The Commission shall consist of twcnty-five members who shall be persons of recognized competence
in international law";
2. Decides, as a consequence, to amend as follows
article 9, paragraph 1, of the said Statute:
"The twenty-five candidates who obtain the greatest number of votes and not less than a majority of
the votes of the Members present and voting shall be
elected";
3. Decides, by way of exception and in consequence
of the enlargement of the Commission, to request the
Secretariat to include in the list of candidates in the
election to be held at the current session, in addition
to the nominations already received, such names as shall
have been communicated to it in writing before 15
November 1961.
1047th plenary meeting,
6 November 1961.

E.x-pressing its firm belief that the successful codification and progressive development of the rules governing consular relations would contribute to the development of friendly relations among nations, irrespective
of their differing constitutional and social systems,
N oting with satisfaction that the draft articles on
consular relations prepared by the lnternational Law
Commission constitute a good basis for the preparation
of a convention on that subject,
Desiring to provide an opportunity for completing
the preparatory work by further expressions and exchanges of views concerning the draft articles at the
seventeenth session of the General Assembly,
l. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Law Commission for its work on consular relations;
2. Requests Member States to submit to the Secretary-General written comments concerning the draft
articles by 1 July 1962, in order that they may be
circulated to Governments prior to the beginning of the
seventeenth session of the General Assembly;
3. Decides that an international conference of plenipotentiaries be convened to consider the question of
consular relations and to embody the results of its work
in an international convention and such other instruments as it may deem appropriate;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to convoke the
conference at Vienna at the beginning of March 1963;
5. Invites States Members of the United Nations,
States members of the specialized agencies and States
parties to the Statute cf the International Court of
Justice to participa te in the conference and to include
among their representatives experts competent in the
field to be considered;

1685 (XVI). lnternational conference of plenipotentiaries on consular relations
The General Assembly,
H aving consiáered chapter II of the report of the
International Law Commission covering the work of
1
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixteenth Session,
Supplement No. 9 (A/4843).

61
