VI. Resolutlom ,adopted oa tile repor11 of the Third Committee

34/176.

United Nadons Trust Fund for Chile

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/174 of 20 December
1978, by which it established the United Nations Trust
Fund for Chile as a voluntary fund to receive contributions and distribute, through established channels of
assistance, humanitarian, legal and financial aid to persons whose human rights have been violated by detention or imprisonment in Chile, to those forced to leave
the country and to relatives of persons in the abovementioned categories,
Recalling also the appeal to Member States for
pledges and contributions to the United Nations Trust
Fund for Chile made by the Secretary-General in his
letter dated 28 September 1979,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
of 8 November 1979 126 on the implementation of resolution 33/174, in which he informed the General Assembly that, as at 31 October 1979, no contributions
or pledges of contributions had been received,
1. Notes that some Governments have since 31
October 1979 decided to contribute or make pledges
of contributions to the United Nations Trust Fund for
Chile;121
2. Appeals to Member States to respond favourably
to the request for contributions to the United Nations
Trust Fund for Chile made in the letter of the SecretaryGeneral dated 28 September 1979.
106th plenary meeting
17 December 1979
34 / 177.

International co-operation in drug abuse
control

The General Assembly,
Noting the continuing spread of drug abuse in many
parts of the world and its harmful impact on developing
and industrialized countries,
Viewing with concern the detrimental effects drug
abuse can have on all societies and individuals, particularly young people,
Recognizing that illicit traffic in drugs and the profits
accruing therefrom to traffickers and criminal organizations pose a threat to the socio-economic well-being of
many countries and should be addressed through development assistance programmes together with intensified law enforcement, education and demand reduction
efforts,
Noting with satisfaction the positive results that have
been achieved in a number of countries, but at the same
time expressing concern for the lack of realization of
many of the objectives for drug abuse control set forth
in the drug control treaties as well as in the resolutions
and documents of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs,
the International Narcotics Control Board, the International Labour Organisation, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the
World Health Organization,
Recalling its resolution 33/168 of 20 December
1978, in which it requested more extensive and coordinated co-operation between Governments and relevant bodies of the United Nations and the specialized
126 A/34/658.

121 See A/34/658/Add.1.

1'1

agencies in the designing and implementation of programmes aimed at the eradication of illicit demand for
and illicit traffic in drugs,
Bearing in mind the necessity for international drug
abuse control strategy and policies, as requested in General Assembly resolution 32/124 of 16 December 1977
and reiterated in Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolution 8 (XXVIII) of 23 February 1979,128
Having received the report of the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs, 129 noted in Economic and Social Council decision 1979 / 18 of 9 May 1979, in which are proposed, in the annex to resolution 8 (XXVIII), principles
to guide future international drug abuse control
activities,
1. Takes note of the report of the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs and requests all agencies and organizations concerned to implement paragraphs 2 and 3
of Commission resolution 8 (XXVIII), to elaborate a
practical and dynamic drug abuse control programme,
noting the principles annexed to that resolution, and to
provide, within the existing regular budget, for the monitoring of the implementation of the programme by the
Commission;
2. Requests the Commission to finalize at its next
special session, to be held in 1980, a meaningful programme of international drug abuse control strategy and
policies aimed at eradicating illicit demand for, production of and traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances, and to report to the Economic and Social
Council at its first regular session of 1980 on the progress achieved in this respect;
3. Invites Member States to take into account the
principles set forth by the Commission in allocating,
within their capabilities, national resources to drug
abuse control programmes-including programmes to
combat the illicit production of and trafficking in .narcotic and psychotropic substances and to reduce the
demand for those drugs-and calls for greater technical and financial contributions to those developing
countries which are constrained by limited national resources in their efforts to implement drug abuse control
programmes;
4. Further invites Member States to take appropriate
measures for the prevention of uncontrolled or illicit
manufacture and export of psychotropic substances and
the chemical precursors of drugs of abuse such as acetic
anhydride;
5. Urges States which have not yet become parties
to the international drug control treaties to adhere to
them and to make maximum efforts to implement them;
6. Further urges greater action by the specialized
agencies and programmes of the United Nations, especially the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Labour
Organisation, the World Health Organization and the
United Nations Development Programme, in developing
and implementing, within their mandates, programmes
aimed at the reduction of illicit production of and demand for drugs, and specifically requests those agencies
to make this activity a regular item on the agendas of
their governing bodies;
7. Requests the agencies and program.mes of the
United Nations, the international financial institutions
128 Offecial Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1979,
Supplement No. 5 (E/1979/35), chap. XIV.
129 Ibid., Supplement No. 5 (E/1979/35).
