S/2006/974

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 December 2006
Original: English

Letter dated 8 December 2006 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to my report of 29 September 2006 (S/2006/783) on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the activities of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS), in which I indicated
my intention to propose a revision of the mandate of UNOGBIS and request its
extension until 31 December 2007.
During 2006, UNOGBIS continued to contribute to Guinea-Bissau’s
stabilization and reconciliation efforts. While encouraging progress has been
achieved, especially in the establishment of a framework for security sector reform,
much more remains to be done to consolidate and sustain the momentum for
democratic governance in order to prevent a relapse into conflict. Recent
developments have highlighted the continued volatility of the situation, as the major
opposition parties have intensified pressure on President Vieira to dismiss the
Government appointed just over a year ago, in October 2005.
The convening of the Donor Round Table on Guinea-Bissau, held in Geneva
from 7 to 8 November 2006, confirmed the international community’s continued
readiness to be supportive of the country’s reconstruction efforts in a climate of
peace and stability. A Secretariat assessment mission to Guinea-Bissau in May 2006
concluded that a United Nations political presence in that country remained vital in
order to contribute to stabilization, without which the full resumption of
development cooperation and economic investment, essential for sustainable peace
and progress, cannot be guaranteed.
On 8 November 2006, Prime Minister Aristides Gomes wrote to inform me
that the situation in his country remains extremely fragile, especially given that the
Government’s enormous resource constraints hampered its ability to meet its
statutory responsibilities in a timely fashion. The Prime Minister, therefore,
requested emergency financial assistance from the United Nations Peacebuilding
and Democracy Funds to fill the budget gaps for 2006 and 2007. His request further
demonstrates the continuing necessity for international engagement with GuineaBissau as it strives to consolidate peace and enhance prospects for development.
President Vieira and other senior members of his Government have, in recent
meetings with my new Representative in Guinea-Bissau, Shola Omoregie, expressed
the same concerns conveyed to me by the Prime Minister and reiterated the
country’s desire for enhanced international cooperation, in particular with
UNOGBIS, to promote peace and progress in the country.
06-65977 (E) 141206

*0665977*

S/2006/974

In the light of the above, I recommend that the mandate of UNOGBIS be
extended for one year, until 31 December 2007, to allow the Office to continue
assisting Guinea-Bissau as it pursues its difficult peacebuilding process. The
proposed extension would allow UNOGBIS to operate under a streamlined mandate
highlighting mediation and good offices functions aimed at promoting dialogue and
reconciliation in order to reduce current divisive and polarizing pressures hampering
the restoration of normalcy.
Accordingly, the activities of UNOGBIS would focus on: (a) supporting
national reconciliation and dialogue; (b) assisting with security sector reforms;
(c) promoting respect for the rule of law and human rights; (d) mainstreaming a
gender perspective into peacebuilding, in line with Security Council resolution 1325
(2000); (e) promoting the peaceful settlement of disputes; (f) helping mobilize
international assistance reconstruction efforts; (g) facilitating efforts to curb
proliferation of small arms and light weapons; and (h) enhancing cooperation with
the African Union, the Economic Community of West African States, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, the European Union and other
international partners.
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

2

06-65977
