V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

of children, as an integral part of the development process set forth in the International Development Strategy
for the Third United Nations Development Decade, 1 "
Aware that the expanded activities of the United
Nations Children's Fund will require increased funds. as
established by the Executive Board,
l. Commends the policies and activities of the
United Nations Children's Fund;
2. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution 1980 /62;
3. Fully appreciates the responsibilities of the United
Nations Children's Fund and the broad range of activities on behalf of children to be undertaken by it in
light of the still enormous unmet needs of children in the
developing countries;
4. Urges the United Nations Children's Fund, with
the support of its national committees. to respond
imaginatively and vigorously to its important responsibilities in the follow-up activities of the International Year
of the Child, in close co-operation with the relevant organizations of the United Nations system and with the
international community generally:
5. Appeals to Governments and the relevant organizations of the international community to re-examine
their own activities on behalf of children with a view to
accelerating progress towards the achievement of the
goals and objectives of the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade and to co-operate fully with the United Nations
Children's Fund;
6. Expresses its appreciation to all Governments that
are contributing to the United Nations Children's Fund
and appeals, with a sense of urgency. to all Governments, especially those that are not contributing at a
level commensurate with their capacity, to increase their
contributions, if possible on a multiyear basis, so that
the Fund may reach its income target of $350 million for
1982, as presented in the medium-term work plan approved by the Executive Board of the United Nations
Children's Fund at its session held from 19 to 30 May
1980. 1 ; 6

84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980

35/80.

Role of qualified national personnel in the social
and economic development of developing
countries

The General Assembly,
Referring to its resolution 33 / 135 of 19 December
1978 on the role of qualified national personnel in the
social and economic development of developing countries,
Taking into account Economic and Social Council
resolutions 1979/52 of 2 August 1979 and 1980/63 of
25 July 1980 on the same subject, in which the Council,
inter alia, requested the General Assembly to consider
possible comprehensive action within the United Nations
system in order to assist the developing countries in their
endeavour to strengthen the role of qualified national
personnel in the over-all social and economic development of those countries,
''' Ibid., para. 42.
'" Official Records of the Econo11Jic and Social Council. I 9RO, Supplement No. 11 (E/1980/41). paras. 75-77.

139

Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of I May I 974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, as well as its resolution
3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the
Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
Referring to the International Development Strategy
for the Third United Nations Development Decade, 157
Bearing in mind that the United Nations Development
Programme has been acting as lead organization within
the United Nations system for the preparation of a
study on the role of qualified national personnel in the
social and economic development of developing countries,
I. Takes note of the report of the Administrator of
the United Nations Development Programme on the
role of qualified national personnel in the social and
economic development of developing countries; 1;x
2. Commends to the attention of the developing
countries the above-mentioned report and the recommendations contained in chapters IV and V thereof;
3. Invites the competent organizations of the United
Nations system to give due attention to the recommendations contained in chapters IV and V of the
report with a view to contributing, within their established procedures and possibilities, to the implementation of the recommendations;
4. Calls upon the developed countries effectively to
assist the developing countries, in particular the least
developed among them, in their efforts to increase national capacities and facilities for training qualified
national personnel and strengthening their role in socioeconomic development
5. Invites the Governments of developing countries,
in accordance with their national development priorities
and programmes, to continue to pay special attention,
with a view to further improving and expanding their
national systems of training qualified personnel, to
measures directed towards:
(a) Achieving the equality of all members of their
society in the field of education, irrespective of race,
nationality, sex or religious and social status;
(h) Eliminating illiteracy;
(c) Increasing the role of government in the field of
education;
(d) Instituting compulsory education for all children
of school age;
(e) Achieving the planned development of national
educational and training systems;
6. Further invites the recipient Governments and the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme to take into account the urgent need
for qualified national personnel while identifying intercountry projects in the third programming cycle, I 9821986:
7. Requests the Director-General for Development
and International Economic Co-operation to make the
necessary arrangements, within existing possibilities, for
a periodic dissemination of information on the national
experience of countries with different socio-economic
systems in training qualified national personnel and enhancing their role in national social and economic development;
'' See resolution 35; Sha hove, annex.
' 'DPl443.

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

140

8. Further requests the Director-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation
to prepare, in consultation with the United Nation_s
Development Programme and the relevant organizations of the United Nations system, as well as with the
Governments concerned, a progress report on the implementation of the present resolution and to submit it
to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session
through the Economic and Social Council at its second
regular session of 1982.

84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980
35/81.

Comprehensive policy review of operational
activities for development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1768 (LIV) of 18 May I 973,
Recalling further its resolution 32/ 197 of 20 December
I 977, in particular section V of the annex thereto,
Mindful of the importance of implementing fully and
without undue delay the recommendations contained in
its resolution 32/ 197,
Recalling its resolutions 33 /20 I of 29 January I 979
and 34/213 of 19. December 1979,
Reaffirming the validity of the consensus of 1970, as
set forth in the annex to its resolution 2688 (XXV) of
11 December 1970, and of the guidelines on new dimensions in technical co-operation, as set forth in the annex
to its resolution 3405 (XXX) of 28 November 1975,
Reaffirming also the importance of the full and speedy
implementation of its resolution 3405 (XXX),
Considering that the operational activities of the
United Nations system can contribute significantly to the
accelerated development of the developing countries
and to the implementation of the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade 1;a and thus to the establishment of the
new international economic order,
Having examined the report of the Director-General
for Development and International Economic Cooperation 160 and noting with interest paragraph 8 thereof,
relating to the categorization of operational activities
for development,
Concerned by the fact that a significant part of the
resources for the technical co-operation activities of the
United Nations system is absorbed in administrative
and other support costs of the funding and executing
agencies,
Having considered Economic and Social Council
resolution I 980 /66 of 25 July I 980 on operational activities for development,
'''' See resolution 35/56 above. annex.
"" A/35/224 and Corr. I, annex

Considering that operational activities for development encompass, inter a/ia, those activities of a development co-operation character that seek to mobilize or
increase the potential and capacities of countries to promote economic and social development and welfare, including the transfer of resources to developing countries
or regions in a tangible or intangible form,
Considering also that a substantial part of world
resources, material as well as human, continues to be diverted to armaments with a detrimental effect on international security and on efforts to achieve the new
international economic order, including operational
activities of the United Nations system for development, and calling upon Governments to take effective
measures in the field of real disarmament that would
increase the possibility of allocation of resources now
being used for military purposes to economic and social
development, especially the development of developing
countries,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Director-General for Development and International
Economic Co-operation;
2. Affirms that the operational activities for development of the United Nations system should make an
effective contribution to the accelerated development of
developing countries and to the implementation of the
International Development Strategy for the Third
United Nations Development Decade, and thereby to
the establishment of the new international economic order;
3. Expresses its grave concern that financial contributions to the system's operational activities for development have not increased substantially and have
generally fallen short of targets which have been set by
the relevant intergovernmental bodies;
4. Strongly reiterates the need for a substantial and
real increase in the flow of resources for operational activities on an increasingly predictable, continuous and
assured basis;
5. Strongly urges all donor countries, particularly
those developed countries whose over-all performance is
not commensurate with their capacity, to increase
rapidly and substantially their contributions to the
system's operational activities for development on an inc:-easingly predictable, continuous and assured basis;
6. Urges all countries that are able to do so to indicate, while making their pledges, their probable contributions to the system's operational activities for development for a multiyear period, taking into account
the need to ensure increased resources in real terms on
an increasingly predictable, continuous and assured
basis;
7. Invites the governing bodies of the relevant
organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system, as appropriate, to consider new and specific
ways and means of mobilizing increased resources for
operational activities for development on an increasingly predictable, continuous and assured basis;
8. Invites the organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system to develop, in the light of section V of the annex to General Assembly resolution
32/ 197, specific recommendations on measures to reduce administrative and other support costs, to achieve
maximum uniformity and harmonization of administrative, financial. budgetary, personnel and planning
procedures and to improve the project procedures in the
execution of operational activities for development of
the United Nations system;
