89

Rcsolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committec
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ~ ~ ------

~

l. Believes that, as a temporary measure and under
the existing conditions, increased recruitment on the
basis of fixed-term contracts, especially in tbe case of
developing countries, might help to achieve a balanced
geographical distribution;
2. Invites the Secretary-General to give preference
to candi dates from inadequately represented countries;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to study the
question of determining the desirable ranges of posts
for individual countries, taking into account tbe level
of appointment togetber witb tbe number of posts;
4. Further invites tbe Secretary-General, in bis
capacity as Chairman of the Administrative Committee
on Co-ordination, to draw the attention of tbe competent
authorities of tbe specialized agencies to tbis problem
at a forthcoming session of that Committee ;
5. Requests tbe Secretary-General to take tbe present
resolution into account in his future reports on the
composition of the Secretariat.
1501st plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.

(e) Tbe four new Members-Barbados, Botswana,
Guyana and Lesotho-and Indonesia shall make advanees to tbe Working Capital Fund at their rates of
assessment for 1967 applied to the authorized amount
of the Fund for that year.
1501st plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.

2241 (XXI). Composition of the Secretariat
A

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind tbe considerable cbanges wbicb bave
occurred in tbe membersbip of the United Nations and
the specialized agencies,
Recalling tbe provisions of Articles 100 and 101 of
tbe Cbarter of the United Nations,
Recalling further its resolution 1928 (XVIII) of 11
December 1963 on this question,
N oting that in tbe determination of tbe recruitment
priorities tbe Secretary-General bears in mind the
need for a more equitable distribution of staff among
the Member States witbin the various regions, in
particular at tbe levels of ·senior posts,
Noting with satisfaction tbe efforts already made by
tbe Secretary-General to improve the geograpbical distribution of posts in tbe Secretariat and mentioned in
his report on tbe composition of the Secretariat, 28
Considering nevertbeless that arrangements sbould
be made to ensure an even more equitable distribution
of posts,
Recognizing tbe need for a large proportion of
permanent contracts and fixed-term contracts of longer
duration to ensure tbe stability and efficient operation
of the Secretariat, and noting the statement of tbe
Secretary-General in paragrapb 14 of his report,

B
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind rule 51 of the rules of procedure of
tbe General Assembly,
N oting tbe statement by tbe Secretary-General in
paragraph 3 of his report on tbe composition of the
Secretariat,28
Recognizing tbe limitations in regard to the recruitment of staff wbicb result from language considerations,
Requests the Secretary-General to study the methods
which should be used to ensure a more equitable use
of the working. languages of the Organization and a
better balance among those languages in the recruitment of staff at ali levels, and in particular at the higher
levels, of tbe Secretariat, and to include bis conclusions
on this question in bis future reports.
1501st plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.

28 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first
Stssion, Annexes, agenda ítem 81, document A/6487.

2242 (XXI). Budget for the financia} year 1967
A
BUDGET APPROPRIATIONS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 1967

The General Assembly
Resolves that for tbé financia! year 1967:
l. An amount of $US 130,314,230 is appropriated for the following purposes:
Section
([·s dollars)

I. Sessions of the General Assembly, the councils, commissions and committees; special meetings and conferences

PART

l. Travel and other expenses of representatives and members oí commissions,
committees and otber subsidiary bodies
............... .
2. Special meetings and conferences
....... .
TOTAL, PART
PART

1,241,750
l,8IR,150

I

3,059,900

II. Staff costs and related expenses

3. Salaries and wages .................................................. .
4. Common staff costs ................................................. .

57,046,500
13,572,700
