28

General AHembly-Twenty-second Session

tained in annexes A.II.4, A.II.5, A.III.3 and A.IIl.8 of
the Final Act, 21
Bearing in mind the need for a concentration of
efforts and for close collaboration between the international organizations concerned,
Having considered paragraphs 205 to 211 of the
report of the Trade and Development Board of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development22 and the report of the Secretary-General on a
proposed UNCTAD/GATT International Trade Centre,28 as well as the views expressed in the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination and in the Economic and Social Council,
Noting that the United Nations rules governing technical co-operation projects will apply in toto to those
activities of the Centre which are to be financed from
technical co-operation funds, 24
1. Approves the accord between the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade on the establishment of the International Trade Centre, effective from
1 January 1968, to be operated jointly by the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade on a continuing basis and in equal partnership;
2. Authorizes the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to come
to an agreement with the Director-General of the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade on the detailed
administrative arrangements for 1968;
3. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to report to the General Assembly at its twenty-third session, through the Trade and Development Board, on
the functioning of the International Trade Centre.
1626th plenary meeting,
12 December 1967.
2298 (XXII), Programme of technical aSBistance
in industrial development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2152 (XXI) of 17 November
1966, by which it decided that the United Nations. Industrial Development Organization would function as
an autonomous organization within the United Nations,
Recalling further resolution 2 (I) adopted by the
Industrial Development Board on 4 May 19672 G at its
first session,
1. Decides to endorse the recommendation of the
Industrial Development Board calling for the establishment of a separate section in part V of the budget of the
United Nations to provide for the programme of technical assistance in industrial development at an appropriate level commensurate with the expanding requirements of the developing countries ;
:n See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade altd Development, vol. I, Final Act and Report (United
Nations publication, Sales No.: 64.II.B.11), pp. 31, 36 and 41.
22 Official Records of lhe General Assembly, Twenty-second
Session, Suppll!fflent No. 14 (A/6714).
28 Ibid., Twenty-second Session, Annexes, agenda item 38,
document A/6879.
2, Ibid., para. 22.
211 Jbid., Twmt1-second Sesrion, Supplemtnl No. 15 (A/6715/
Rev.I), annex VIII.

2. Decides further that the provisions of paragraph
4 of its resolution 2029 (XX) of 22 November 1965
shall not apply to the programme of technical assistance
in industrial development provided for in paragraph
1 above;
3. Requests the Industrial Development Boa1'd to
consider and approve the projects and programmes in
the field of industrial development undertaken through
the utilization of the resources thus appropriated and
to provide general policy guidance and direction with
reference to the utilization of these resources.
1626th plenary meeting,

12 December 1967.
2299 (XXII). Report of the Industrial Development Board

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2152 (XXI) of 17 November
1966 establishing the United Nations Industrial Development Organization in order to promote industrial
development in accordance with Article 1, paragraph 3,
and Articles 55 and 56 of the Charter of the United
Nations and, by encouraging the mobilization of national and international resources, to assist in, promote
and accelerate the industrialization of the developing
countries,
Having considered the report of the Industrial Development Board on its first session, 28
Taking note of Industrial Development Board resolution 1 (I) of 4 May 1967, 27 by which the Board
decided that the United Nations Industrial Development Organization would carry out its functions essentially on the basis of meeting the urgent needs of
the developing countries in accelerating their industrial
development through promotional and operational activities supported by relevant research,
Recognizing the importance to all States Members
of the United Nations and members of the specialized
agencies, irrespective of their social and political systems
and their levels of development, of mutually beneficial
co-operation in all fields of economy, and particularly
in the field of industry,
Conscious of the fact that the acceleration of industrial development in the developing countries depends largely on the broadest international co-operation,
Convinced of the need for concerted efforts in order
to intensify international industrial co-operation in the
furtherance of the purpose and functions of the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization,
Recognizing that the dissemination and effective application of new technology, especially ·that suited to
the particular physical, social and economic conditions
of developing countri~s, can better be achieved through
broad international industrial co-operation,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Industrial Development Board on its first session;
2. Endorses Industrial Development Board resolution 1 (I) on the future programme of work and activities of the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization ;
3. Invites the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, in close co-operation with the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
26/bid., Supplement No. 15 (A/6715/Rev.1).
27 Ibid.,

annex VIII.
