United Nations

314th

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

PLENARY MEETING
Friday, 1 December 1950, at 3 p.m.

FIFTH SESSION
Official Records

Flushing Meadow, New York
CONTENTS
Page

Threats to the political independence and territorial integrity of China and to
the peace of the Far East resulting ftom Soviet violations of the SinoSoviet Treaty of Friendship and Alliance of 14 August 1945 and from
Soviet violations of the Charter of the United Nations: report of the
Interim Committee of the General Assembly: report of the First Committee (Aj1563) ..............................................• 511
Admission of new Members to the United Nations, including the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice
519
Co-ordination between the United Nations and the specialized agencies:
report of the Joint Second and Third Committee and the Fifth Committee
meeting jointly (A/1547) ..............................•.....•.. 520
Chapters I, VIII (section II) and X of the report of the Economic and Social
Council: report of the Joint Second and Third Committee (A/1567,
part I) ..................•............ .' .............•.......•.. 520
The problem of the independence of Korea. Plans for relief and rehabilitation
of Korea: report of the Joint Second and Third Committee (A/1567,
'......................................... 521
part II)
Budget estimates for the financial year 1951: subsistence allowances for members of commissions, committees and other subsidiary bodies: report of
525
the Fifth Committee (A/1538)
Long-range activities for children-United Nations International Children's
525
Endowment Fund: report of the Third Committee (A/1455)
Advisory social welfare services: report of the Economic and Social Council:
(a) report of the Third Committee (A/1436); Cb) report of the Fifth
Committee (A/1537)
526
Chapters V, VI and VII of the report of the Economic and Social Council:
(a) interim report of the Third Committee (A/l440); Cb) report of
.
the Fifth Committee (A/1562) ..............................•.... 526
President: Mr. Nasrollah ENTEZAM (Iran).

Threats to the political independence and terri·
torial integrity of China and to the peace of the
Far East resulting from Soviet violations of the
Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Alliance
of 14 August 1945 and from Soviet violations
of the Charter of the United Nations; report of
the Interim Committee of the General Assembly:
report of the First Committee (A/1563)
[Agenda item 23]
The President presented the report of the First Committee' and the accompanying resolutions (A/1563)
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : In
accordance with the practice established this morning

511

[313th meeting], before putting to the vote draft resolutions A and B, contained in the report of the First
Committee [A/1563], I shall call on representatives
who wish to explain their votes.

2. Mr. SUPHAMONGKHON (Thailand): In the
course of the discussion of this item in the First Committee, my delegation expressed 1 its sympathy with the
draft resolution submitted by the representative of
China [A/C.l/631/Rev.l] , by which it was proposed
to establish a United Nations commission of inquiry
for the purpose of gathering information and facts
1 See 0 jJicial Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session,
First Committee, 400th to 404th meetings inclusive.

A/PV.314

512

General Auembly-Filth Seeslon-Plenary Meetlup

from the two countries involved in the dispute, namely,
China and the Soviet Union. We took that position
because we believed that such a measure would not
prejudge the case and wottld show the interest of the
United Nations in a situation the international consequences of which are well known to all.
3. However, that Chinese proposal was later withdrawn in favour of a Syrian draft resolution [A/Col/
632], which had the effect of referring this matter back
to the Interim Committee with the requeat that it
proceed with the inquiry an~ report upo~ its findings
tu the General Assembly at Its next session. My delegcttion voted in favour of that draft, not without wond~ring, however, whether a smaller commission, such
as the one suggested by China, would not have been in
a ll,etter position to assume the task of inquiry and collecting information.
4. I would not have asked for the floor today if we
had not heard, during the debate in the First Committee, arguments of what I might call the third curtent of opinion, the third force on the subject. It was
suggested that we should not pursue the study of this
Chinese complaint any further for fear that it might
embitter the present interlmtional situation, because
the United Nations is already seized of many problems, and becau&e what is past is past. It was also
contended 'Chat, the matter having been fully discussed,
each Member nation should draw its own conclusion.
5. As the representative of a small country, who has
great faith in the success of an international Organization like ours, I cannot conceal the fact that these
statements, however good may be the intentions which
inspired them, not only surprised me, but indeed,
frightened me. Conditions in the Far East, particularly
in China, are already serious, whether we take up this
legitimate complaint or not. Would the situation be
ameliorated, for the sake of peace, if we were to close
our eyes and ears to such a complaint? Have we forgotten the lofty ideals, the noble aims and pU!p0ses for
which our very Organization was set up at San Francisco? Have we forgotten that less than a year ago
this very General Assembly of our solemnly declared
that the. question involved "the fundamental principles
of .the Charter and the prestige of the United Nations"?
6. A number of delegations very judiciously explained
that they did not consider the complaint academic;
they merely critidzed the method by which it was
proposed to deal with it. I waited to hear of any more
effective and constructive measure, but, very unfortunately, I waited in vain.
7. The only concern of my delegation is wary simple.
We should keep alive such an important item as the
alleged violation of an international treaty and the
Charter of the United Nations and not let It die an
imposed death.
8. Mr. J. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian) : In connexion with
the inclusion of the Kl.1omintang chicanery, as we 'call
it-for there is no other word to describe it-in the
agenda of a plenary meeting, the USSR delegation
wishes to make a few remarks iln explanation of its
vote and its attitude to the proposals submitted for the
consideration of the General Assembly.

9. First, it is necessary to recall tha.t as early as last

year, in spite of the objections raised by the USSR
aelogation apinst the inclusion of this matter on the
agenda.·, agamst its discussion by the General Assembly
and its :reference to the "Interim Committee", an illegal
body, under pressure of the Anglo-American bloc, this
question was nevertheless referred to that. Committee
for further cOtlsideration with a view to the submission of a report and recommendations to the fifth session of the General Assembly.
10. Since this matter was referred to the Interim
Committee last year, the Committee might have been
expected to submit some kind of report on it. The
Committee had a whole year at its disposal. It cannot
be said that the Committee did not intend to deal with
this matter. It discussed the matter twice-at its meetings in February [A/AC.18/SR.37] and September
[A/AC.18/SR.45] •
11. I am referring only to the procedural aspects of
this matter, and ant not dealing with its substance. At
the conclusion of the consideration of this question,
t~le Chairman of the Committee made a statement as
follows (I quote from the report submitted by the
Interim Committee) :
"I believe that I refleet the views of many members when I suggest that the Interim Committee
would facilitate the work of the General Assembly
if it were to decide not to debate this question and
to instruct its Rapporteur to an indicate in his draft
report to the General Assembly". B
12. Nevertheless, in spite of this statement made by
the Chairman of the Interim Committee, although this
statement, which generalizes and summarizes the consideration of this Kuomintang chicanery in the Interim
Committee, was unconditionally adopted by the Interim Committee, although the Interim Committee
failed to submit any report on this matter because for
a whole year it was not able to obtain from the slanderers and organizers of this chicanery any material
on which to base its considerations-pettifoggery-in
spite of all this, the question has once more been dragged
before the fifth session of the Genera! Assembly without any kind of justification.
13. For those reasons, the delegation of the Soviet
Union, for its part, must protest most vigorously
against the illegal inclusion of this matter on the agenda
of the fifth session of the General Assembly, against
its consideration, and against the attempt to refer the
matter once more to that same Interim Committee
which once already has refused to consider it. At the
back 0.: all this we find the sinister machinations of
the o:ganizers of the Kuomintang chicanery, which is
hostil~ to the Soviet Union and bent on keeping this
matter on the agenda of the General Assembly by hook
or by crook, in spite of all logic and in violation of the
most elementary standards of political morality. The
slanderers and those who incite them by way of these
dishonest manreuvres are trying to make relations between the United Nations and the Soviet Union more
difficult. For us there is no mystery as to who put his
hand to this dirty business, and in whose interests this
'dark political game is being played.
21iJid., Fourth Session:. Plenary Meetings. 230th meeting,
and General Committee, 61th meeting.
a Ibid., Fifth S ession, Supp~ement No. 14.

314th Meet1ng-l Deeembe.. 1950
14. It is no accident that at the present se&sion of
the General Assembly a considerable number of dele..
gations have expressed the view in the First Committee
that no further notice should be taken of this vile
Kuomintang chicanery and that the attempt to ~al­
vanize this corpse should be abandoned. The delegatiOns
of Australia, the United Kingdom and a number of
other countries have urged that the discussion of this
question should be discontinued. They cannot be suspected of any sympathy for the Soviet Union. But
they refuse to take part in dirty intrigues; they do not
wish to have anything to do with this disgraceful
business.
15. In spite of all this, the organizers of the Kuomintang' chicanery are making every effort to keep
this matter on the agenda of the General Assembly.
So once again it is proposed that you I3hould deal with
this slanderous chicanery by a private individual who
i.as no legal credentials and who claims without any
justification to represent China but who is in actual
fact only the "personal representative of Chiang Kaishek", as he was rightly described ata meeting of the
Security Council by the only true and legal representative of China, Mr. Wu HSlU-chuan.4
16. In speeches made during the fourth session of the
General Assembly and in the First Committee at the
fifth session, the delegation of the USSR and a number
of other delegations have already disclosed what really
underlies this slanderous Kuomint.ang chicanery, the
purpose of which is to deceive public opinion and represent the matter as though the collapse of the Kuomintang regime and the failure of the policy of its
American patrons in China had been caused by the
interference of some kind of external forces in the
domestic affairs of China rather than by the bankruptcy
of that thoroughly rotten regime, which has been over- .
thrown by the Chinese people.
17. The previous speaker, the representative of Thailand, urged us not to "close our eyes" to reality. I
should advise him not to close his eyes to the real
situation and to listen to the voice of 475 million
Chinese people instead of that of a small clique of political insurgents expelled by that people from the frontiers of China proper.
18. If the General Assembly and the Members of the
United Nations approach the matter in this way instead of closing their eyes to actuaiity, the solution of
this problem-the problem of the representation of the
People's Republic of China-will be expedited, and the
result will be not only a gain in prestige and authority
for tHe United Nations but also the advancement of
peace and friendship amongst nations.
19. For those reasons the delegation of the Soviet
Union firmly ubjects to further consideration by the
United Nations of thi~ -Ale. provocative, Kuomintang
chicanery, which does so mud.: harm to the United
Nations.
20. There is really no reason once again to refer this
matter to the Interim Cotrimittee; for that Committee
can have nothing to do with such a chicanery, and
has once already refused to consider it. To give this
.. S~e Official Records of the Security Council, Fifth Year,

No. 69.

513

matter any attention is determined to the authority of
the United. Nations and the dignity of the General
Assembly.
21. The delegation of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics will therefore vote against the proposals submitted on this question.
22. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Before calling on the representative of Czechoslovakia
I wish to remind representatives that the time-limit
for explanation of votes is seven minutes.
23. Mr. PISEK (Czechoslovakia) (translated from
Russian) : The Czechoslovak delegation has protested
at a plenary meeting of the General Assembly and in
the First Committee, and protests again now, against
the inclusion of item 23 in the agenda. This item,
fabricated by a group 017 Kuomintang hire1in~s, is
merely routine anti-Soviet Pi'ovocation and a maltcious
stab at the friendship and close union between the
Chinese people and the people of the USSR. Warmongers, imperialist usurpers and the mouthpiece~ of
total diplomacy are using the services of people .who
have been cast out by their own nation and have lost
all vestiges of conscience.
24. The General Assembly has been forced to deal
with an artificial and unfounded complaint submitted
by persons who have no right to represent China and
the heroic Chinese people, whieh,in its struggle for
freedom and independence, has scornfully cast out the
Kuomintang traitors.
\
25. 'l'he fact that the Kuomintang pretenders still
remain in the organs of the United Nations and submit provocative proposals is shameful and injurious to
the Organization.
26. I should like to recall to the General Assembly
the words of the representative of the Central People's
Governmen.t of the People's Republic of China, who
stated that without the participation of the legal representatives of the People's Republic of China, who represent 478 million perS0ns, the United Nations is, in
fact, unworthy of its name, and that without the participation of its legal representatives, the Chinese people
have no grounds for recognizing any decision or reso'"
lutionof the United Nations. .
.
27. When this Kuomintang chicanery was discussed
in the First Committee, many representatives were
embarrassed. The draft resolution.· submitted by the
Kuomintang pretender, which was supported by the
representative of the United States, was doomed to'
failure. The proposal to set up another illegal United
Nations commission of investigation met with complete
failure. The attempt to retain this provocative Kuo...
mintang chicanery until the next session of the General
Assembly by referring it to that illegal United Nations
organ}, the "Interim Committee", will also meet with
failure.
28. This mendacious accusation has been deleted from
the agenda of history itself, which will place on the
agenda the charge brought against the real aggressor,
the United States of America.
29. For those reasons the Czechoslovak delegation
protests against the inclusion of item 23 in the agenda
of the General Assembly and against the attempt to
postpone this question until the next session of the
General Assembly.

•

514

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

30. Fads EL-KHOURI Bey (Syria): I only wish
to explain why I submitted a draft resolution in the
First Committee when the present item was referred
to it and when it was discussed there. The only reason
I submitted the draft resolution, which calls for re-,
ferring the matter to the Interim Committee, was to
:find a way out in order to dispose of this item in some
regular way.
31. That same question was submitted to the General Assembly last year, and it was then referred to
the Interim Committee so that it might study the matter.
I have found that until now the Interim Committee
has not submitted any reply on the subject to the
General Assembly. It is natural in such a state of
affairs therefore that the same item which was reft red to the Interim Committee once before should
be referred again to that S3me organ with the reminder
that it should take action on it and attempt to make
some findings regarding the facts-if such facts are
obtainable-and then submit a report to the General
Assembly at its nex.t regular session.
32. This is the only reason why I submitted the draft
resolution. It does not at all mean that the accusations have been substantiated; accepted or agreed upon.
There has .been no report to the General Assembly
£1"001 any responsible organ wlftch. would justify or'
substantiate these accusations. Therefore, the only thing
we have to do is to reier the matter back to the same
organ to which it was referred last year. In this draft
resolution, we are now asking the Interim Committee
to submit a report to us at our next regular session.
It does not mean that the General Assembly, in accepting this draft resolution, admits the accusation is a
libel, a slander or anything of that sort. This is simply
a procedural matter, ~ken up in accordance with our
duties and our rules of procedure.
.
33. Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): The General Assembly has before it the report of the First Committee
which proposes the adoption of two draft resolutions
submitted to the Committee. My delegation intends to
vote against both draft resolutions for the following
reasons.
34. My delegation opposed the inclus~on of the item
demagogically entitled "Threats to the political.inde··
pendence and territorial integrity of China ...", because it considered that, first of all, the item is comv.letely out of place. It is out of place. because it was
illegally submitted by the representative of a clique
which calls itself .a government, even though it possesses none of the attributes of a government and which,
. with the help of the United States and its majority,
i11~gally occupies the seat of China in the United Nations.
35. As to the merits of the case, we stated and maintained that its sole aim is to bring before this Assembly
slanderous accusations directed against the Soviet
Union, one of the founders of the United Nations.
36. My delegation opposed the inclusion of this item
in the agenda because we hold that the ousting of the
Kuomintangclique f:rom power in China and the victory of the Chinese peoole ovc~· domestic and foreign
oppression is an internai affair of China which cannot
be discussed beiore this forum. Our position has not
changed, that is, what happened in China was the result
of the deep-seated needs of the Chinese people and

was brought about by the Chinese people themselves.
We proved that all the vicious charges against the
Soviet Union are mere slander, and that the United
States interfered in the domestic affairs of China in an
attempt to force the rule of the Kuomintang upon the
Chinese people. We proved that the disintegration of
the Kuomintang Party and its armies came about because of popular hatred against them, and because of
the support given by the Chinese people to the armies
of liberation.
37. We spoke fully of the hope of Chiang Kai-shek
and his clique to bring forth a third world war to
restore him to power. We amply emphasized American
military plans and economic interests in China. The
Committee· had full opportunity to see how completely
unjustified were all the accusations brought forward by
the Kuomintang. The record of friendship between the
peoples of the USSR and the );>eoples of China is wellknown and. speaks for itself. The leaders of modern
China, particularly Sun Yat-sen, always looked to the
USSR as their real friend and supporter in their strivings for national liberation.
38. The defeat inflicted upon the fascist hordes by
the Soviet Udon armies in Asia and in Europe made
nossible the full liberation of China. Today, the Chinese
people for the first time in their long history have the
right to speak for themselves and have a government
representing no other interec;ts but those of the Chinese
people. The People's Republic of· China has successfully coped with all the problems arising from the
devastation of war and is well on the way to restoring
normal economic conditions in China. The Government
of China has become an important factor of peace in
the Far East and many millions of AsicH1 peoples look
upon it as the bastion of their security against foreign
intervention and aggression.
39. The United Nations has many times been advised
to have a realistic approach to these questions and once
and f{)rever recognize the realities in the Far East.
The blind following of the aggressive designs of the
United States in the Far East is already responsible
for many of the difficulties which this Organization
and the world at large are facing. We believe that, in
view of the seriousness of the situation, this General
Assembly will fully recognize these facts and end once
and for all the fiction of Kuomintang representation
and strengthen the role of the United Nations byadmitting those who represent the hundreds of millions of
Chinese.
40. The Committee had many hesitations. Many members were aware of the irrational situation which had
c, been created and advised the Committee to drop the
case and face the issues of the Far East in the proper
light and in their real proportions. Against better juctgment. r~solutions were nevertheless adopted after the
pleas made by Mr. Dulles who needed some formalities
which would, on the one hand, cover up the bankruptcy
of American foreign policy in the Far East" and on
the other hand, sustain the fiction of the Kt.lOmintang
by keeping the problem on the agenda.
41. My delegation opposes both draft resolutions. As
regards the Syrian draft resolution which asks that
the Interim Committee be instructed to continue the
inquiry for obtaining more information concerning the

Sl4thMeethta-l Deeemher 1950

616

47. Mr. TSIANG (China): The First Committee has
Kuomintang complaintl we consider it an artificial atrecommended to the General AssemblY the adoption of
tempt to maintain this so-called complaint on the agenda
two draft resolutions. Although, in.· the opinion of my
for certain political purposes. The action proposed repdelegation, those resolutiona are not adequate, my
resents the height of illegality. It is a problem, sub...
delegation will vote for them and it asks all the
mitted by illegal representation in violation of the
representatives here to vote·for them.
principles Qf the Charter,. being sent to an iU.egal body
fer illegal action. }Iowever right the explanation some
48. The problem of Soviet aggression against China
representa.tivestried to give- ~that the Interim Com..
has been included in the agenda of the fourth session of
mittee and the Kuomintang belong to each other bethe General Assembly. However, last year, both in the
cause they are both dead organs-it does not justify
Assembly and in the First Committee, the d~legation of
the need of a resolution. Such a draft resolution is be- . the Soviet· Union refused to participate in the debate.
neath the dignity of the General Assembly and my
When this item was referred to the Interim Committee,
delegation will vote against it.
.
the Soviet Union delegation, as is usual with that
delegation, boycotted the Committee. This year, how..
42. The other draft resolution is wrong from every
ever,
all the de!egations of the SO'det bloc participated
point of view-from the political point of view and
in
the
debate in the First Committee. '
from the legal point of view. A resolutiol1 which tries
to perpetuate some treaties established with· non-exist49. Now, for the first time, the United Nations has all
ing governments and calls. for adherence to treaties up
the evidence from the defence as well as from the
to a certain date is completely out of order. So is its
accusation. For the first time the United Nations is in a
political argument.
position to arrive at a fair and conclusive judwnent on
the charges which my government has brought against
43. My delegation believes that the situation is much
the Soviet Union. I submit that the United N~tions
too serious for this General Assembly to indulge in
cannot neglect its duty.
such actions as dealing with the Kuomintang complaint
and considering the two draft resolutions which try to
50. The charges that my government has bro'lght
support both the :United States and the Kuornintang.
against the Soviet Union are serious ones. It charges
It is high time that this problem disappear, that the
that the Soviet Union, in violation of the acknowledged
Kuomintang take its rightful place in the dustbin of
sovereignty of my government over Manchuria, prehistory and that the United Nations, in a desire to fulfil
vented the re-establishment of Chinese national author..
its principal purposes, returns the seat of China to
ity in that province. It charges that the Soviet Union
those to whom it rightfully belongs, the Central People's
supplied the Chinese communists with enormous quanGovernment of the People's Republic of China. In view
tities of arms in their insutrectionand sent active
of that situation, my delegation will vote against both
comb~tant aid to that army. It charges that the Soviet
draft resolutions.
Union, taking advantage of events in China, has actually
annexed Outer Mongolia and Tannu Tuvaand is now
44. ~1r. DULLES (United States of America) : The
in control of the great areas 'of Manchuria and Sinki,ang.
United States delegation will vote for the draft resolutions, despite the fact that we believe they do not
51. These are serious; charges. They go to the very
adequately reflect the concern that the United Nations
heart of the United Nations. If the Organization closes
ought to have about the breaches of treaties and acts of
its eyes and ears to such charges it might as well close
aggression committed by the Soviet Union against the
its doors.
.
Republic of China.
52. In the debate in the First Conunittee, some rep45. A week ago, 'when we were debating this item in
resentatives opposed the draft resolutions nOw under
the First Committee, there were some people, in all of
consideration on the ground that the facts are well
our countries, who felt that any action by the United
known. If the facts are well known, then we should
Nations to inquire into the circumstances of Soviet
have a responsible and considered statement or report
aggression against China might irritate the communist
by some responsible body of the United Nations.
forces of Asia and provoke them to more viol-pnt at53. Then the position alluded to is based on another
tacks against the United Nations forces in Kort;a.. We
consideration
= that these facts belong to history and
now know that at the very time we were ha'i~~l'; this
that,
consequently,
any further examination is futile
debate, plans for a massive Chinese communist oftenand academic. Of course, the representatives of the
"sive against the United Nations in Korea had already
Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia and Poland would lik~
been made and the date of its unleashing had alto
bury free China as they have buried free Polatld, free
ready been set. Aggressors should at least be aware
Czechoslovakia,
free Latvia~ free Lithua..nia, and free
that they will encounter pO,licies of exposure and that
Estonia, and they would like. to bury many more
they cannot count upon this Organization being party
n.ations. The question is noiacademic. Free China is 11..o'C
to drawing a veil over their ugly acts.
dead. At this very moment, 1,600,000 sons of free China
have taken up arms against the puppet r.egiine at
f 46.
In the debate in the First Committee, I stated, on
Peiping. To take up arms against the terroristic 'regime
behalf of the United States, that we believed that a
of a totalitarian government is a fearful thing. Vlithout
~tudy ~£ Soviet a~gression against China ~ou1d. be
the utmost tletermination, such a struggle cannot be
mstructlve as showmg a pattem of conduct WIth which,
now or later, all of us may have to deal, and with which
waged. It is only passionate love of country andfrefljom
we could deal more competently if we had more insight
'~hat could arouse the peasants and WO.ikers 00 my
and more understanding. Because these draft resolu(~ountry to brave the cruelties and brutalities of the
communist r.eg#ne. That fight is growing and spl'eading
tions are a step, though only a short step in that
direction, the United States supports ·them.
throughout the provinces of China. Free China further..

516

General Aslembly...-Fifth Sesdon-Plenary Meetings

more holds the island of Taiwan with a population of
8 million. Free China has continued and will continue
to fight against the "russification" of China. In the
great crisis facing the world today, free China can be
counted upon to be a powerful ally of all· free countries.
An impartial report by the responsible organ of the
United Nations on the serious charges that we have
made will be a powerful moral factor in the great
struggle in my country and in the whole world.
54. During the d~bate in the First Committee, I called
the att~ntion of the delegations to the dangers of
appeasement. I do not wish to go into that story because
certain delegations, while ashamed of that word, would
nevertheless wish to resort to it. However, I should
like to call the attention of this Assembly to the activities of the League of Nations, which were proved to be
inadeq.uate, and which though inadequate nevertheless
denoted a certain amount· of regard for justice and
truth in this world.
55. In spite of i:he appeasement which prevailed at
Geneva, the Leal{ne d Nations did organize a Commission of Enquiry into the aggression of Japan. In
spite of the appeaEJement at Geneva, the free nations of
the world did accept the advice of the Secretary of
State of the United States, Mr. Stimson, in regard to
the non-recogniticm of the fruits of aggression. It is our
avowed hope that the United Nations will not fall below
the low standards set by the League of Nations.
56, Mr. BARANOVSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) (translated from Russian) : The position
of the delegation of the Ukrainian SSR on the
slanderous charge brought by the Kuomintang concerning the alleged threats to the poli~r:al independence and
territorial integrity of China was dearly stated at the
last session of the General Assembly, when we protested
against the consideration of that mendacious insinuation
by the United Nations. 5 This year, we protested just as
categorically against the inclusion of the Kuomintang
charge in the agenda of the fifth session of the General
Assembly.
57. The delegation of the Soviet Ur:oIl and the delega·tions of Poland and Czechoslovakia have proved irrefutably that the representatives of the Kuomintang clique
have stooped to filthy intrigues in order to divert public
opinioll from the real reasons for the shameful downfall
of Chiang Kai-shek's anti-popular r:egime. The Kuomilltang group are using this slander in order to ,rove
that the downfall of their thoroughly rotten regime,
which has ~een overthrown by the Chinese people
itself, was the result of so-called foreign interference
in the domestic affairs of China. As might be expected,
however t this move by the traitorous Kuomintang
clique h~s proved to be futile. The Soviet Union
delegation and the delegations of the People's Democracies have proved quite clearly, by means of texts and
official documents, that all the allegations of the Kuo..
mintang group are pure fabrications and are contrary
to the facts.
58. Even those who aid and abet the Kuomintang
clique are obliged to admit that the bankrupt i·egjme of
Cniang Kai-shek is the victim of its own policy, which
was directed against the people and protected the
interests of foreign monopolies. That faet cannot be
IS See Official Records of the Geneval Assembly, Fourth Ses.don, First Comtniltee, 277th and 338th meetiugs.

refuted by the leaders of the present United States
Government, which continues to give material and
moral support to the remnants of the Kuomintang
clique, who are hiding behind American arms on the
island of Taiwan.
59. Thus, for example, in a speech on United States
foreign policy in Asia, 6 Mr. Acheson, Secretary of
State of the United States of Amer~ca, ~aid:
·'For years, they strug'gled with unbelievable
courag-e, endurance, and patience against the adversities of nature; against internal division al1d
strife; and against foreign enemies until the end of
the war seemed to bring almost within their grasp
the achievement of the hopes for which they had been
striving.
"Then the failure of their government to respond
to their needs, its ineptitude and blindness destroyed
all th~ir confidence and support."
6Q. Mr. Ach~son went on to say: "The Nationalist
Government was overthrown in China not by force of
arms. It collapsed from its own inherent weakness and
the withdr~'val of the ~eople's SUppOIt.u
61. It is difficult to add anything to that statement of
~vfr. Acheson. That !vIr. Dulles would dou'Jtless like to
disavow it is clear from his speech todav, in which he
did his best to allude to the alleged interfe:l:'et1\:~ of the
USSR in the internal affairs of China. 111 view of Mr.
Acheson's statement, however, what value can be
placed on the irresponsible chatter of people like :Mr.
Tsiang and their United States protectors about the
so-called interference of the USSR in the affairs of
China? That slander has been unmasked and refuted
long ago. All the representatives to the General Assembly must realize that the United Nations should 110t be
called upon to discuss the slanderous charges of the
Kuomintang clique and t1?... t any such discussion cannGt
possibly promote friendly relations between nations, and
can only sour them.
62. Today, the agent of the Kuomintang again used
the words: "we accuse". Who are "we"? :f.,1ay I ask
who these accusers are? The authors of the ,ntrigue,
the personal representatives of the rernr:.lnder of Chiang
Kai-shek's anti-popular Kuomintang c1iqtle, do not express the will of the many millior~ c, of ~he Chinese
oeople, who have maintabed and still maintain brotherly friendship with the pe(!ples of tbe USSR.
63. The Government of the People's Republic of
China is bound by a treaty of friendship and assistance
with the Government of the USSR, and, naturally, ha3
not empowered the traitorous Kuomintang clique to
speak in the Generai Assembly on behalf of free and
democratic China. The great Chinese people have
thrown the traitorous anti-popular Kuomintang group
into the rubbish heap of history, and the fact that
representatives of this clique still occupy a place in the
General Assembly, which rightfully b~~longs to the legal
representative of the democratic Central Peop!e's Government of 'China, merely shows that American ruling
circles still count on their puppet Chiang K2.i-s~lek, who
is being supported by the United St~tes.
cs Address deliveT.'ed before the CoinmrJnwealth Club of California at San Francisco, California, on 15 March 1950.

314th Meetins-l DecelDber 1950

S17

64. The General Assembly now has before it a resolu.. '72. The first was submitted by .the representative of
tion adopted by the majority of the First Committee,
Syria and proposes a procedure for study and investigation of the problem of China. Although we are all aware
which proposes that the Interim Committee should
continue the study of this so..called C(question". We do
that the Interim Committee has been unable to make
any proposal following its examination of the matter in
not have to· go far in our search for the real motives for.
the course of the past year, we thiuk that the item shouid
this resolution; its sole purpose is to comply with the
remain under .consideration, that any ne'v occurrepces
wishes of the United States and to keep the Kuominshould be observed, and that the Interim CommIttee
tan~ complaint on the General Assembly age.nda. The
should thus be enabled to submit a proposal favourable
Untted States has need of this slander charge in order
to the interests of the Chinese people to the sixth session
to divert public attention from the failure of the United
of the General Assembly.
States G2vernment's policy towards China and so as to
be able to give the alleged interference of the USSR as
73. The second draft resolution is to a certain e~tent
the reason for the shameful downfall of the Chiang
a long-range one. It reaffirms principles which the
Kai..shek regime. The ruling circles in the United States
General Assembly a.ccepted aild :sp~cifica~ set fo~ in .
somehow wish to mask the unworthy part which they
a resoluti.·on [292 (IV) 1 adopted 1n 1949.:Lhe delegation
have played and continue to play in the struggle to reof El Salvador in the :First Committee was the one who
establish a colonial regime in China and to enslave the
proposed it, and it was adopted without· amendment.
Chinese people with the help of the Kuomintang clique.
74. I am sure that the two draft resolutions are com65. Instead of fostering absurd charges against the
plementary; one reaffirms the principles, which, if
USSR and 'supporting the Kuomifitang machinations,
implemented, would be liable to insure peace in the Far
the Govfrnment of the United States would do better
East, and the other proposes a procedure for study and .
from a practical angle to take stock of the changes that
investigation of the Chinese problem.
have taken place in China and to follow the example of
75. Consequently, the delegation of El Salvador has
its more clear..sighted partners by recognizing the only
no doubt that both draft resolutions will be adopted by
legal government of China, the Central People's Gova
large majority in the General Asselnbly.
ernnlent of the People's Republic of China. Thesoo"'~r
the United States Government ceases to support ic
76. Mr. KISELEV (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (translated from Russian): I had not inpretent~ons of th~ represe!1tatives of the KuominCd?g
clique 10 the Umted NatIons and calls a halt to Its
tended to speak, but I am compelled to do so by the
endeavours to prevent the legal representatives of the
statements made by M'r. Dulles and Mr. Tsiang. I shall
therefore say a few words.
.
Chin~se people from taking their rightful place in the
United Nations, the sooner it will become possible to
77. We had an opportunity in the First Cottlt'.nittee to
establish lasting peace and security in the Far East
discuss in detail the charges brought by the Kuotnintang
and in Asia.
brouP against the USSR. There is no need to resume
66. To refer the Kuomintang charge to the Inter~m
the discussion on this· matter here, and I shall therefore
Committee is a useless and harmful idea. The InterIm
be brief.
Committee has discussed that complaint for a year and
78. It may be said that these charges are not worth a
has of course, been unable to make any recommendapenny. The statement made today by the repi'esentati~
tio~ on the subject, for the complaint of the Kuomintang of
the Kuomintang clique, Mr. Tsiang, was full of
group is based on pure lies and slander, and the only
malice,
hatred and slanderous accusationsagainstt&e
place for it js the garbage can where it now belongs.
great Soviet Union, the heroic Clirese people atid its
67. In view of the above considerations, the dclegat:ion
government headed by Mao Tse..tung.
.
of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic will p1iOtest
79. During the debate in the First Committee, the rea!
categorically against the proposal to refer the Kuo17L1inmotiyes
for the slanderous accusations of therepresentang complaint to the Interim Committee and will vote
tative of the Kuomintang group became evident; tb.~ y
ag&inst the draft reEJolution which recommends such a
add
up to any attempt to mislead 'Norld pubRc op~.·:~.·"
procedure.
and to allege that the downfall of the Kuottlm~'g'
68. Mr. CASTRO (El Salvador) (translated from
regime was caused by the interferenoe of outside f'Otc(i~;
Spanish) : 1 shall be very brief. Jr. only wish to stress
in the internal affairs of China, rather than bY. the
the fact that my government and my people have always
bankruptcy of that rotten and decadent regime, which
taken fd interest in the fate of the, Chinese people.
was overthrown by the Chinese people.
69. Tha.t in.terest has, of course, led us to give serious
80. Everybody knows that this question was imposed
considenttion to the proposal submitted by the Chinese
uoon the fifth session of the General Assembly with the
delegation itself for the additiorL to the General AssemapprovaJ
and blessing of the United States by certain
bly agenda of an item calling for the examination of the
people
who
represent a small political group, the
situation-or rather the trag/~dy-which has long un..
Kuomintang, which used to hold power in China,b'ttt
folded itself in that country b,"fore the eyes of the whole
which
has been overthrown by the Chinese people;· that'
world-a tragedy which ha not yet ended.
people elected the C.entral Peopie's Government ~£ the
70. We hope that the outf.:ome of this tra~;;edy will be
People's Republic of Chma, '. fJ,11 has been the ~ttly~,
favourable to a people who h~s suffered so much and
legal government of that great c\.-~ntry since 1 OetoJ>er
to whose culture the world owes so much.
1949. The fact that a group of individuals of Mr.
71. The draft resolutions which the First Committee Tsiang's convictions-who have no right to speak or
has submitted to us constitute the minimum that the
act o~ beh~1f of the Chinese people or to insist upon
General Assembly can do wit~l regard to the item
the dIscussIon of complaints--cansubmit questiona to ,.
under discussion.
the General 4ssembly which not only hav~ nothing to
I

518

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

do with the work of the United Nations, but are openly
slanderous and provocative, can only be explaine~ by
the abnormal situation prevailing in the United N atlOns.
81. Unfortunately, the situation in the United Nations
is still abnormal: the Chinese people is deprived of its
inalienable right to send its lega! ~epresent~tives to ~he
United Nations, in order to avatl1tself of Its sovereign
right to participate in this international Organization,
whereas the agents of the Kuomintang, who represent
neither China nor the Chinese people, continue to
occupy China's place in the United N atiol1s, thanks to
the support of the United States, of Mr. Dulles personally, and of Member States of. the United N attons
led by the United States of Amenca.
82. The Chinese people is patiently awaiting the day
when this abnormal situation will come to an end. The
United States and the bloc which it leads have turned
this question into a means of pressure and political
vengeance on the new China on account of its system
and its independent domestic and foreign policy. It is,
therefore, quite obvious who was behind the idea of
including the discussion of the Kuomintang charges in
the agenda of the General Assembly, especially when
we remember that threats to peace and security in the
Far East five months ago have developed into direct
acts of aggression by the United States Government
agC\inst a number of countries and peoples of Asia.
83. The main charge brought by the Kuomintang representative against the USSR, the alleged violation of
the Sino-Soviet treaty of friendship of 14 August 1945,
is wholly and entirely unfounded. That treaty no longer
exists, just as the Chinese Government on behalf of
which the charge is made no longer exists, for a year
ago the Kuomintang clique forfeited its right to call
itself the Government of China and represent the Chinese people.
84. The Treaty of 14 August 1945 was abrogated on
14 February 1950, when a new treaty was concluded
between the USSR and China.

85. The delegation of the Byelorussian SSR therefore
considers that there is no legal or factual dispute. There
is no treaty. It no longer exists. It has been abrogated.
That is a fact which means that the treaty no longer
exists. I think that Mr. Tsiang knows this. Mr. Dulles
certainly knows it, but they are still clutching at this
treaty, which has, in fact, been abrogated and which is
now a scrap of paper which has been thrown onto the
rubbish heap.
86. It is clearly stated in the Sino-Soviet communique
that the Treaty of 14 August 1945 has been annulled by
mutual agreement between the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics and the Central People's Government of the
People's Republic of China. Relations between China
and the USSR are regulated by the new Treaty signed
on 14 February 1950. That is the legal aspect of the
question.
87. The representative of the Kuomintang group ignores this. The Kuomintang clique ignores the new
Treaty, just as it ignores the great historical changes
that have taken place in China in recent years. The whole
Kuomintang clique lives in the past. It has forgotten
nothing and has learned nothing. That is why it has
ine1uded in the agenda of the fifth session of the General
.. A$sembly a slanderous and provocative question which

undermines the prestige of the United Nations f

.

plac~s t~le Gener~l Assembly in an absurd Positio~rbit

forclllg It to consider charges of the violation of a y
.
non-t
eXistent
treaty, b rough t by a non-existent national'
" governmen.
t" That " government" l'Ives on memories ISof
the past,

88.

The wh?le world k?ows that American troops
are now ,,:agll~g war agat~st .the, Korean people, that
they are v101~tl11g, the terntona~ l11tegrity of China by
their armed lllvaSlOn of the Chu;ese island of Taiwan
and by the bombardment of Chlllese territory by th
American Air Force, and that they are committin;
acts of aggression against a number of other countries
in the Far East.

89.

These facts cannot be concealed by any accusations or abuse against the USSR and the People's Republic of China. The Kuomintang group and their
prote~tors will not succeed in misleading public opinion
111 Chma and throughout the world by their slanderous
and mendacious assertions that the downfall and bankruptcy of the Kuomintang Government was brought
about, not by its rottenness and its decadent regime
but by outside forces, and by the interference of th~
USSR in the interna~ affairs of China. These are fairy
tales. No one can beheve these tales. Even children do
not believe them.

90.

In the First Committee, Mr. Tsiang spoke of tlus
alleged interference openly, without any diplomatic dissimulation j he again referred to it briefly today.

91.

-

ggravate matter!
differences, and, a~
trouble in the Far

96, I submit thal
us of the n~e~ to
From the polthcal :

97. The delegati<
fore proposes that
jected and that the
the agenda of the
so that we are no

98. Let us rather
inviting represent~
China into the Um
That is a serious 1

99, RAFFAT ]
French) : As my <

First Committee, it
resolutions now bel

100. The Egyptia
lor two reasons. Ir:
sented here recogn
China as the sole
Those States must
plaints made by th
Secondly, the two
reaffinn and suppll
year.

There is no need for me to state here, Mr. Dunes,
who interfered over a period of years and who is still
interfering in the struggle of the Chinese people against
the hated Kuomintang clique. I could adduce many
examples. We have already adduced them in the First
Committee· and have referred to the White Book of
the United States State DepartmenF and to other documents in which United States interference in the in·
ternal affairs of China is acknowledged, and proof is
given of American support of the Kuomintang group
by subsidies amounting to thousands of millions of
dollars and supplies of armaments and other material
resources. This American aid is still being given to
the remnants of the Kuomintang group in Taiwan.
92. Mr. Dulles, you are clinging to a rotten tree trunk.
It is rotten, and should have fallen lortg ago.
93. With regard to the Syrian draft resolution, for
which you obtained the support of the majori~ of the
First Committee so that once again the questIOn could
be brought bef;re the Interim Commi!tee for .study
and would then be reconsidered at the Sixth sessIOn of
the General Assem bly, the delegation
the Bye1orussian SSR strongly protests against thiS draft resolution for the following reasons:
94. In the first place, we have never recognized and
do not recognize the Interim Committee..We hav~ always considered and still consider that thiS Committee
is an illegally constituted body.
95. In the second place, we do no~ cons~der that t.he
Interim Committee should deal With thiS complatnht
'l'ty m
. t Ie
because it will not lead to peace and stab11
Far East. On the contrary, such a complaint can on y

So~~t Socialist ReBfltam and Northf
Burma, Byelorussial
Abstaini1lg: Franl
lands, Pakistan, Afl

See United States RelatiotlS with China, Department of
State Publication 3573, Far Eastern Series 30.

With 7abstentions..

a!

7

101. Furthermore,
Committee to comJ:
so far it has not b~
102. The PRESIJ
We shall now vote
contained in the
[A/1563]. I shall I
vote separately.
103, The represen
vote by roll-call on
resolution to the vo

Avote was take1:
Chile, having bef
was called upon to
In favonr: Chile
Dominican Republi
Ethiopia, Greece (
Iraq, Liberia,
Panama, Paraguay
Syria, Thailand
Uruguay, Vel1~zt1E
Brazil.

Mf
T

Agai1lst: Czechm
Isr~el" Norway, P
Soc~ahst Republic .

praft resolution

519

314th Meeting-l December 1950
aggravate matters still further and foment political
differences, and, as you all know, there is quite enough
trouble in the Far East as it is.
96. I submit that political :~easoning should.convince
us of the need to reject the Syrian draft resolution.
From the political angle, that draft resolution is harmful.
97. The delegation of fhe Byelorussian SSR therefore proposes that the Syr.ian draft resolution be re·
jected and that the Chinese complaint be deleted from
the agenda of the Gener~I.l Assembly once and for all,
so that we are not called upon to deal with it again.
98. Let us rather turn to the fundamental question of
inviting representatives of the People's Republic of
China into the United Nations. That is a vital problem.
That is a serious political problem.
99. RAFFAT :Bey (Egypt) (translated from
French) : As my delegation has C:1lready stated in the
First Committee, it wiU vote in favour of the two draft
resolutions now before us.
100. The Egyptian delegation will vote in that way
for two reasons. In the first place, many States repre·
sented here recognize the Nationalist Government of
China as the sole h:g2.1 government of that country.
Those States must therefore study carefully the complaints made by the Chinese Nationalist Government.
Secondly, the two dr8ft resolutions submitted to us
reaffirm and supplement the resolutions adopted last
yec'\r.
101. Furthermore, that vote will enable the Interim
Committee to complete the task assigned to it, which
so far it has not been able to carry out.
102. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We shall now vote on the draft resolutions A and B
contained in the report of the First Committee
[A/1563]. I shall put the two draft resfllutions to the
vote separately.

103. The representative of Turkey has requested a
vote by roll-call on draft resolutjon A. I put the draft
resolution to the vote.
A vote was taken D>' roll-call.
Chile, having been draVv'n by lot by the President,
was called upon to vote first.
In favour: Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador's Egypt, El Salvador,
Ethiopia, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Iran,
Iraq, Liberia, Mexico, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Saudi Arabia,
Syria, Thailand, Turkey, United States of America,
Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen, Argentina, Bolivia,
Brazil.
Against: Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Iceland, India,
Israel, Norway, Poland, Sweden, Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic, Union of South Africa, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and NortI1ern Ireland, Yugoslavia, Australia,
Burma, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Canada.
Abstaining: Frant::e, Indonesia, Luxembou.:-g, Nether·
lands, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Belgium.
Draft resolution A was adopted by 35 votBS to 17,
with 7 abstentions.

104. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I put draft resolution B to' the vote.
Draft resolution B was adopted by 39 'Votes to 6,
with 14 abstentions.
Adnussion of new Memhers to the United Nations,
indUdiTlg the adVISOry opinion of the International Court of Justice
[Agenda item 19]
(Lt) ADVISORY OPIl'fION OF THE INTERNATIONAL COURT
OF JUSTIC& (.A/1353)
( b) JOINT DRAFT RESOLUTION PROPOSED BY BRAZIL,
CANADA,

PHILIPPINES,

SWEDEN

AND

SYRIA

(A/1571)
105. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) ~
Wc shall now pass to the next item on our agendathe admission of new Members.
106. I would point out to the General Assembly that
this question has not been studied by any Committee
and that it will be directly discussed in the General
Assembly.
107. At the moment we have two draft resolutions
before us, one submitted by the delegations of Brazil,.
Canada, the Philippines, Sweden and Syria [A/1571]
and the other by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
[A/1577].
108. The ddegation of El Salvador has informed me
that it proposes to submit a draft resolution. The representative of that country is not the first speaker on
my list, but if he wishes to read out his draft resolution, I think it would be very helpful to the General
Assembly. I call on him on a point of order.
109. Mr. CASTRO (El Salvador): Several delegations are greatly intere:sted in this question of the
admission of new Me.mbers, and, in fact, w{~ are ex"
changing views with these delegations £01"" the' purpose
of presenting a joint draft resolution. My delegation
has already prepared a draft resoiution; it is being
considered at the present time by other delegatlons,
and it is our hope that a joint proposal will bl'; put
before the General Assembly.
110. I did not come here to take part in the debate
or to be the first speaker, but merely to suggest to the
General Assembly that it might postpone the debate
on this item and place it at the end of our present
agenda. That procedure would cause us great convenience:Then we would have time to deal. with this important matter.
111. If this proposal proves unacceptable to the Gen.eral Assembly, then the delegation of El Salvador
will be compelled to submit its draft resolution, but we
would first like to discuss it with other delegations
before definitely presenting it. Thus, I request that the
matter now before us be placed at the end of the list
of items on our present agenda.
112. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
You have heard the suggestion made by the representative of El Salyador. He requests that the examination
of this question bE:: adjourned in order to give his delegation time to prepare and circulatce its draff resolution.

I

520

General .tbsembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

113. If there is no objection, I think his request can
be granted. We have other items on our agenda which
we have decided not to discuss; we could examine them
this afternoon. The draft resolution of El Salvador
would be distributed tomorrow and we could then
debate the admission of new Members at that time. Is
there any objection?
.
114. As no obje<:non has been raised, the discussion of
this item is adjourned and we shall take up the next
item on our agenda.
It 'Was so decided:

Co-ordination between the United Nations and the
specialized agencies: report of the Joint Second
and Third ':::ommittee and the Fifth Committee
meeting joindy (A/1547)
[Agenda item 29]
The President presented the report of the Joint Second and Third Committee and the Fifth Committee
meeting jointly and the accompanying resolutions

(A/1S47).
Resolutions A, Band C were adopted unanimously.
Resolution D' WitS adopted by 49 'Votes to none, with
S abstentions.
'
. Resolution E was adopted by 48 'Votes to S, with
2 abstentions.
115. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : I

. call upon. the representative of the USSR, who wishes
to explain his vote.
116. Mr. ARUTIUNIAN (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): The delegation
of the USSR has voted against resolution E submitted
by the Joint Second and Third Commit~ee and the Fifth
Committee meet1ng jointly, for the following reasons.
117. The delegation of the USSR considers that questions o£penal law fall within the internal comp~tence of
St~tes and tb~t the United Nations should not, therefore, interfere in that field. The fact that the International Penal and Penitentiary Commission, set up in
London in 1872, has not yet been able to include a large
number of States in its membership proves that a
large majority of States do not feel able to participate
in this Commission, because questions of penal law fall
within the internal competence of States. Every State
must settle such problems independently, in accordance
with its national conditions, usages and traditions.
118. If cerfcain governments consider the joint study
of certaitt problems of penal law essential, they can retain
the Internati01'nu Peool and Penitentiary Commission in
the form iu which it exists at present. There is no justification for transrerring its functions to the United
Nations, the majority of whose Members are not members of the Commission, since s1Jch ?b measure would be
clearly. contrary to th'e principles, purposes and tasks
of the United Nations.
119. The report which we are considering states that
the transfer of the functiol1~ of the Intrtrnational Penal
and Penitentiary .Commissiun to tbe United Nations;
would help to eliminate the duplication between the
work of the Commission and that of the Economic and
Social COGncil. This argument is absolutely unfounded.

120. It is well known that the Economic and Social
Council is not concerned with problems of penal law;
consequently there cannot be any duplication between its
work and that of the International Penal and Peniten..
tiary Commission. It is therefore impossible to speak of
the elimination of any alleged duplkation between the
work of the Economic and Social Council-or of any
other organ of the United Nations-a-:1 that of the
Commission.
121. None of the organs of the United Nations has
hitherto infringed the sphere of action of the Inter..
national Penal and Penitentiary Commissiun, because
the U~ited Nations does not and should not deal with
questions of penal law, since these questions do not fall
.
within its· competence.
122. Those were the precise reasons why the delega..
tion of the USSR has protested against the.transfer to
the United Nations of the functions of the International
Penal and Penitentiary Commission, because that trans..
fer would be contrary to the principles, purposes and
tasks of the United Nations. The delegation of the
USSR has therefore voted against this resolution.
Chapters I, VIII (section Jl) and X of the report
of the Economic and Sodal CouncD: report
of the joint Second and Third Committee '
(A/1567, part I)
[Agenda item 12]
Mrs. Sinclair (Canada), Rapporteur, presented the
first part of the report of the Joint Second an.d Third
Committee (A/1567) and the three accompanying resolutions dealing with th~ organization and operation of
the Economic and Social Counril and its commissions.
123. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):

The Assembly will be called upon to vote separately on
each of these three draft resolutioml.
124. I shall first put draft resolution A to the vote.
Resolution A w~ adopted by 48 votes to 2, 1iI'ith
2 abstentions.
125. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We shall now vote on resolution B.
Resolution B was adopted by 51 'Votes to none, with
2 abstentions.
126. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):·

We shall now vote on resolution C.

.

Resolut,,'i,on C was adopted unanimously.

127. Mr. TANGE (Australia): In connexion with
the votes which have just been taken, in connexion with
part I of document A/1567, the Australian delegation
abstained from voting on resolution A. This resolution
expresses the opinion of the General Assembly that the
regional economic commissions should be maintained.
128. We wish to explain our position. Our objection to
this resolution is a procedural or tonstitutional one;
The regional economic commissions are the creations of
the Economic and Social Council. They are responsible
not directly to the General Assembly, but f;: the Eeo..
nomic and Social Council which supervises and directs
their activities. The Council, by its resolution 295 B
(XI), has just set up an ad hoc committee to review all .
j

511

S14lh MeetL·.-l Deee~ 1950

---------------------

its subordinate machinery, including t1~e regivnal eca-.
nomic commissions. It seems to my d~!egation most
unwise for the General Assembly to intervene at this
stage and to interfere with the right of a princl~ organ
of the United Nations, namely the Economic p..nd Social
Council, to form its own independent views as to the
future of its own machinery and its own regional eco..
nomic commissions. As we see it, tll.e General Assembly
must have the right.of review of any decisions made.by:
the Economic and Social Council. But it is our belief
that this reviewshoitld have taken place at the next
session of the General Assembly after the EconoIrllc anl
Social Council had formed its own conclusions.
;
129. Those .are the reasons which prevented us from
voting in favour of resolution A. But at the same time
we do not wish to take a position here and now ~st
the maintenance of regional economic commissionsthat might have been the interpretation given to a vote
against this resolution. Our experieoce as a member of
the Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East
has led us to value very highly the regional approach to
international economic problems. But we are opposed
to forcing a view upon the competent organ of the
.United Nations, namely, the Economic and Social Coan~
cil, and for that reason we abstained in the vote on
this patticular resolution.
<

The problem. of the independence of L.orea. Plans
for reliei and rehahilltation of Ko\rea: report
of the Joint Second and Third Committee
(A/1567, part ll)
[Agenda item 24]

Mrs. Sinclai1'" (C(lnad.a), Rapporteur, pr~sent(Jd Par.t 11
of the report of theJo~nt Second and Thf·rd Comm#tee
(A/1567) on the problemoj the independence of Korea
and plans for relicf and rehabilitation of Korea together
tttith the accompanying resolution. 8
130. The .PRESIDENT (translated from French) : I
should like to know whether Mrs. Sinclair consiaers
that parts A and B of resolution A should be put to the
vote together or separately.
.
131. Mrs. SINCLAIR (Canada), Rapporteur of the
Joint Second and Third Committee: I thitlk we can vote
on them both together.
132. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Accordingly the General Assembly is now seized of the
draft resolution on "relief and rehabilitation of Korea".
133. I call upon' the representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, who wishes to explain his
vote.
134. Mr. ARUTIUNIAN (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian) : As I understand
.the positionJ you have called for a vote on the two resolutions contained in t~e second part of the report:
resolution A concerning the relief and rehabilitation of
Korea, and resolution B concerning financial arrange. ments tor the organization of the relief and rehabilita...
tion of Korea. If I have understood you 'correctly, I
. should like to explain the vote of the delegation of the
Soviet Union on the~e resolutions.
8 This resolution was official1y submitted to· the Jomt Second
.and Third Committee by the Economic and Social Council.

<

135. The Joint Second and Third (,~mmittee has submitted to the plenary meeting of the General Assembly
a .C4"aft resolution on assistance to Korea. The preamble
to '<~ tllat resolution contains an incorrect refer~ce to
ua~ession by North Korean forces" whereas, in fact,
it IS United States aggression which is being carried on
in Koreaag~inst the Korean people•.
136. When the question of the independence of Korea
was discussed in the General Assembly, the head of the
USSR delegation adduced irrefutable facts and docu-:ments [293rd. meeting] proving American aggression
in Korea and the interference of the armed forces of the
United States in Korea•. This is becotnin:g inC1"easingly
obvious daily. Even the~outh Korean politicians are
beginning to understand this. Thus, aJ;cording to an
Atnerican press communique dated 4 N'ovember 1950,
a considerable group of the South Korean National
Assembly st!bmitted a petition stating that. the. guilty
party in the Kor(~an war was the Gover~ent of Syngman Rhee, Wl1ich is known to be a puppat of the United
States. .
137. United States intervention in Kor~~ has brought
untold suffering upon the Korean people. The destruc...
tion which has taken place in Korea is a direct result of
Amel'ican ~ggtession. The" United States Air Force
has batbaroudy bomb~;(ded and is still bombarding the
peaceful inhabitants of. Korea, Korean. vjllages and
towns, industries, agricultural centres and means ~o£
transportation., This barbarous bombardment has
flicted great lO~lses on Korean economy and has deprived
the country of the resources essential for its rehabilita...
tion. This is&dmitted even by American correspondents
in Korea. Thus Robert Martin, a correspondent of the
NewYQrk newspaper The Sunday Comp(J)Ss~ wrote
what follows ina.despatch from Korea on 20 October:
l'As a result of three months of bombing, Korea
now must import practically everything needed for
rehabilitation. of the country's economy, plus huge
quantities of fertilizer to keep the people from starving. The country will have no source of forei~ll exchange."
The report goes on to say
"The cost of reconstructing the bombed-out indus~
tries will be in terms of many hundreds of millions of
dollars."
138. That is what an American correspondent writes
about Korea.
.
139. Thus we see that even American correspondents
. are obliged to admit. that the bombardments of peaceful.
industries in Korea by the United States Air Force is
causing destruction in that country. ~ince the end of
October the American Press has begun to. publish communiques containing the belated admission that the
" 'strategic' bombing" of industrial targets in Korea was
not necessitated by military considerations and was "a
costly mistake". That is stated ite the 22 October issue
of The Sunday Compass.
140. Reports that whole districts of Korean dwellinghouses have been "vYiped from the face of the earth by
United s.tates bombs are regarded by some American
newspapers as a tragic mistake. In actual fact y however,
the bombardment of the civilian population, towns and
villages, industrial targets, agricultural centres and
<••

<

m-

<

522

General Asstambly-Fiflh See.lon-Plenary Meetinll

means of transpo:..i: by the American Air Force in Korea
was no tragic and costly mistake but a barbarous act
committed in accordance with the planned policy known
in American military circles as "strategic bombing".
141. It is ~so well known, that American forces in
Korea are p\1rsuing a "scorched earth" policy and are
razing to the ground the peaceful villages that lie in their
path as they re'treat.
142. How then is it possible to say that the destruction
of Korea is not the result of American aggression, but
of some other aggression, a North Korean aggression?
Such an erroneous presentation of the question is inadmissible in a General Assembly resolution.
143. The delegation of the USSR therefore proposes
that the first, third and fourth paragraphs be deleted
from the preamble to the resolution submitted by the
Joint Second and Third Committee. We have submitted
the relevant amendment to the plenary meeting of the
General Assembly and it has been distributed to all delegations as document A/1579.
144. The delegation of the USSR considers that reUef
to Korea should not be used for any political p~rpose
contrary to the interests of the Korean people. Reltef for
Kor~a. should be carried out in such a manner as to
promote the rapid rehabilitation of the country's economy in accordance with the national interests of the
Korean people and to strengthen the political and economic independence of Korea. It must not serve as a
pretext for foreign economic and political interference
in the internal affairs of Kore&. or be accompanied by
any political conditions whatsoever.
145 .Decisions of the aSf'iistance required by Korea for
its rehabilitation, and the consideration of programmes,
plans and statements concerning assistance for rehabilitation, Should be made with the participation of representatives of the Korean people. The United Nations
should carry out the whole work of providing relief for
Korea with the active participation of representatives of
the Ko!ean people.
146. The draft resolution submitted by the Joint Second and Third Committee contains provisions which
wm.tld allow foreign interference in the internal affairs
of Korea. For instance, paragraph 10 of section B of
draft resolution A submitted by the Committee would
allow interference in the economic policy and economic
life of Korea.
147. The delegation of the USSR therefore proposes
an amendment to delete the second part of paragraph 10
of section B of this resolution, from the words "Among
these . • ." to the end of the paragraph.
148. The resolution confers extraordinarily wide powers on the Agent General, who is entrusted with the
whole organization of relief in Korea. At the same time
extensive obligations are imposed on the Korean authorities. The delegation of the USSR therefore objects to the
second part of paragraph 10 and proposes its deletion.
149. In conclusion, I should like to point out that the
delegation of the Soviet Union considers that the con"
tributions of all countries should be voluntary and should
be made in national currencies, for use in purchasing
commodities for the rehabilitation of Korea.
150. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
There are still two speakers who wish to explain their

votes. I would ask representatives please to confine
thetnselves to explaining their votes. If they have prepared a speech in the hope that the General Assembly
would decide to hold a discussion, I urge them not to
deliver it now. If a speak;r g'oes beyond explaining his
vote and indUlges in abusive and insulting language, I
hereby give warning that I s~all be obliged to stop him.
151. I call upon the representative of Czechoslovakia.
152. Mr. VAVRICKA (Czechoslovakia) (tralzs1ated
from French) : The Czechoslovak delegation has already·
had occasion in the Economic and Social Council 0 an,cl
also in the Joint Second and Third Committee 10 to express its reservations concerning the draft resolution
now before the General Assembly.
153. The discussion which has taken place concerning
plans for the relief and rehabilitation of Korea is characteristic of the methods and objectives of the United
States delegation. The Australian delegation submitted
a draft resolution in the Economic and Social Council.l l
Although the ~echoslovak delegation could not endorse
'lll the provis10ns of that resolution, it thought that it
consti\~utecl an acceptl\ble basis for discussion. The Council, hO'vever, was not lable to consider the Australian
draft resolution on account of the intransigent attitude
of the United States delegation and the pressure it exercised, and a new draft resolution was submitted jointly
by Australia and the United' States.12 That draft introduced two new paragraphs, the third and fourth paragraphs of the preamble, according to which North Korea
had committed the aggression and that so-called aggression was the cause of the economic destruction in Korea.
154. The Czechoslovak delegation, basing its view on
actual facts, rejects such an attitude. The Chairman of
my delegation, Mr. Siroky, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, proved from this very rostrum, by irrefutable
facts, that not Northern Korea but the United States is
the sole aggressor in Korea [293rd meeting] .
155. Similarly the Czechoslovak del~gation rejects the
declaration that it is the armed forces of North Korea
that have caused the economic destruction.
156. In the course of this session, the delegation of the
Soviet Union has submitted a draft resolution for a
pacific settlement of the conflict in Korea [A/1426].
The development of events during the last few days has
again confirmed that the peace policy of the Soviet
Union serves to promote world peace. If the USSR proposals had been accepted, Korea might have been spared
the horrors of war, economic destruction and the death
of tens of thousands on human beings.
157. The resolution now before us qgain shields the
real aggressor and attempts to conceal the true reasons
for the devastation of Korea. It makes no reference to
the barbarous bombing carried out by the United States
Air Force, to the thousands of men, women and children
.who have bet:n slaughtered, or to the towns, hospitals,

- o For the discussion on this subject in the Economic and

Social Council, see 0 ;fficial Records of the Bconomic and Social
Council, Eleventh Session, 417th to 433rd meetings inclusive.
10 For the disc:ussion on this subject in the Joint Second and
Third Committf.'e, see Official Rtcords of the Gentral A.ssembly,
Fifth Session, Joint Second and Third Committees, 52nd to

54th and 56th meetings.
11 See document E/1852.
12 See document E/1858/Rev.l and Rev.VAdd.l.

.

314th Meetiug-l Deeember 1950

schools and transport systems that have been destroyed;
there is no mention of the "scorched earth" policy being
applied by United States units in Korea.
158. In the course of our discussion, several delegations have frankly opposed the inclusion of the third and
fourth paragraphs in the draft resolution. Some of those
delegations voted against those provisions while others
abstained. We must therefore consider why the United
States delegation has tried to get those provisions included in the resolution . . .
159. The PRESIDENT· (translated from French):
Would you please simply explain your vote and not the
votes of others? Others are free to vote as they deem
fit. A speaker who comes to the rostrum should confine
himself to eJtplaining his vote. Do not question why some
other delegation has voted one way or the other; delegations act in accordance with instructions from their
governments and probably in accordance with their
consdence.
160. Mr. VAVRICKA (Czechoslovakia) (translated
from French): I beg the President's pardon; I shall
confine myself to the matter in hand.
161. What is the significance of these provisions? They
seek to divide the Korean people, to crush their strenuous resistance to the occupying forces and to authorize
the American armies occupying the territory and the
South Korean Authorities to take discriminatory and
repressive measures against the people of North Korea.
Under the camouflage of the old slogan "divide and
conquer", their aim is to facilitate the domination of
Korea by American monopolies.
162. The draft resolution has yet other faults. H considerably restricts the Korean people's inalienable right
of self-determination. Instead, it confers broad powers
upon the Agent General of the United Nations, making
him a veritable governor, 'endowed with almost unlimited
authority.
163. The Czechoslovak delegation tak«:!S a positive attitud~ with respect to the plans for the reHef and rehabilitation of Korea, which is being devastated by
aggressors who hide their imperialist aims under the
flag of the United Nations. But it cannot accept a procedure which, under the pretext of economic assistance,
facilitates interference in the internal affairs of Korea
in order to reinforce the domination of American imperialists and to deprive the Korean people of their
fundamental rights.
164. Economic assistance for Kor~ must repair the
destruction caused by war, and encourCige econ0111ic
development and the development of the political, social
and cultural life of the Korean people. The draft resolution, on the contrary, sanctions intl~rvention in the internal economic and political affairs of Korea and deprives
the Korean people of the right fJf self-dettlrmination.
165. The Czechoslovak delega.tion suppotts the Soviet
Union amendment [A/1Si9]. H that amenc1ment is not
adopted, my delegation will vote against the first, third
and fourth paragraphll of the preamble an d will abstain
from voting on the resolution as a whole.
166. Mr. SANTA CRUZ (Chile) (translated from
Spanish) : I take it that I may say a few words about
the amendment which the USSR delegation has sub111itted to this draft resolution.

528

167. The USSR delegation has proposed the deletion
of the folk'wing paragraphs from the preamble of the
draft resolution concerning relief and rehabilitation of
Korea:
"Mindful that the aggression by North Korean
forces and their warfare against the United Nations
seeking to restore peace in the area has resulted in
great devastation and destruction which the Korean
people cannot themselves repair,
"Rcc(Jg:::d;"g that as a result of such aggression
the people of Korea are desperately in n<. ~d of relief
suppli'~s and materials and help in reconstructing their
econotnv.
..
U Deeply moved by the sufferings of the Korean
people and determined to assist in their alleviation •••"
168. I believe that the USSR representative himself
has given the best reason for retaining the paragraphs
I have just read by against asserting that ~he events in
Korea are due to aggression by the United States. In the
face of this lie, which is intended to deceive world public
opinion once more and which contradicts the conviction
of fifty-three governments here present, as officially
stated in the General Assembly in the face of the renewed act of aggt'ession against. Korea committed .by
Communist China, it morally behoves the United Nations to assert and ,,·eassert the truth at every opportunity
and by all possible means. The vote which the Assembly
is about to cast on the amendment t~ delete those
paragraphs of the preamble will provide the required
reaffirmation of that truth by the General Assembly.
169. The USSR delegation has alsoca1led for the
deletion of the second part of paragraph 10 of the sec..
tion of general policy on the ground that it amounts to
intervention in the domestic affairs of Ko~. The reso- .
lution on relief and rehabilitation of Korea was drafted
by the Economic and Social Council and reviewed by
the General Assembly, always bearing in mind the obligation not to intervene in the internal affairs of Korea.
The sole purpose of the paragraph is to recommend that
the authorities in Korea should take the appropriate
economic measures to insure that the aid to be furnished
by the United Nations is effective, without laying down
at any point what those measures should be.
170. We shall vote for this resolution, even though it
may be difficult to implement it in present circumstances.
In the past few days nothing has seemed certain now
that Chinese commuuist aggression is leading to more
destruction and creating new situations which will bring
hunger and misery to Korea. Nevertheless, I believe
that the resolution must be approved now. It will constitute a confirmation of the will of the United Nations
to recpnstruct and rehabilitate Korea and a proof that
the United Nations has had no other objective in intervening in Korea than to fulfil the principles of the Chatter and ensure the well being of the people of Korea
within the £ramework of those principles.
171. Mr. SPARKMAN (United States of America) :
On behalf of n1;Y delegation, I wish to say that we most
heartily agree with the statement made by the Presi...
dent as regards explanations of votes. We should not
have spoken if the Soviet Union representative had. not
made a statement in which he, in effect, placed before
the Assembly his delegation's amendment. In the light
I

I
r

124

General APetnhly.-Fifth Seedon-Plenary M"tlnse,
'JI(

~"':-

,

of that statement) I feel thai. r must explain the position
of the United States; I feel that I cannot allow to go
unchallenged the Sov~et Union contention. that the draft
resolution erroneously refers to aggressIon by North
Korean forces.
172. It seems to !X1e entirely unnecessary to make ~'4D
exhaustive st~tement refuting the charges of the r~1Jresentativ~:; of the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia, since
this whole question has been thoroughly discussed and
decided upon by the United Nations bodies entrusted
with these ,matters. The draft resolution submitted {o,r
the cOl~sideration of the General Assembly merely
records what has already, in fact, been decided UPO?
It is a known fact that on 25 June 19JO there was In
Korea a commission representing the United Nations;
that Commission had military observers on the scene,
whg just..prigr to the ev~nts .of 25 June had .com~leted
an 1nvesttga!i0n of the SItuation ~ong th~. thlrty-elg~th
par-aUel. It IS a fact that the UnIted !'IatlOns Sommlssion on Korea reported to the Secunty Counctl 18 that
aggression had, in ~act, taken place, and ~t it cam~
froin the North. It 15 a fact that the Secunty Councd
a.Cted on this information which it received from the
United Nations Commission on Korea and, on 27 J une
1950, passed a resolution calling upon all Members Qf
the United Nations to ((furnish such assistance to the
Republic of Korea as may be necessary to repel the
armed attack and to restore international peace and
security in the area".u That is a direct quotation from
the resolution of 27 June 1950. It is a fact that during
the present session of the General Assembly the whole
question of Korea has been debated at length 15in the
First Comtnittee, and later in plenary meeting. The
arguments. ·which have been brought forward today by
the tepresentatives of the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia were also advanced in those previous debates
and were exhaustively considered. They were rejected
by an overwhelming majority of the Members of the
United Nations..

173" The resolution passed by the General Assembly
on i October 1950 [A/14351 stated, that tt• • • an attempt t-as been made. by an armed attack from North
Korea to extinguish by force the Government of the
Republic of Korea'''.
174.. It therefore does not appear to me either necessary or desirable to go over this same ground again.
It is cleat\ that now we are faced not only with North
Korean aggression but also with intervention by Chinese
communist forces. This is not the time to temporize
with Soviet Union attempts to change the actual course
of history, to change the record which has been establishedafter long and careful study by the Economic md
Social Council, by the First Committee, and by the
General Assernbly in plenary meeting.
175. In view of these well established, wen recorded
historical facts, our delegation will of course vote against
the Soviet Ul1ion proposal, which would attempt to reverse all of the finCtings heretofore made by the Assembly and all of its organ·s. We shall sup·port the resolution

. . __

.',.,.

''._.'''

--,,',._.

--_.

proP9sed by the Economic and Social Council. which
has been placed before the General Assembly by the
Joint Second and Third Committee.
176. Mr. STADNIK (Ulcrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) (translatl,d from Russian): The dele~tion of
the Ukrainian SSR has had an opportunity of giving
its political appraisal of the events that are taking place
in Korea at a plenary meeting of the Genera.l Assembly.
177. In connexit:m with the draft resolution submitted
to us on the prog:ramme for relief and rehabilitation of
Korea, the delegntion of the UkHllnian SSR deems it
necessary to state once again that the domestic economy
of Korea, which has suffered as a result of foreign intervention, requires effective economic assistance. The re..
lief which will bl~ given to Korea must promote the
rapid and effective rehabilitation of the country's econ..
omy in accordance with the national interests of the
Korean people itself, and the re-establishment and
strengthening of the economic and the political independence of Korea should be a ptimary consideration.
178. The delear.ation of the Ukrainian SSR considers
0h
.
f
it to be important and essential t at representatIves 0
the Korean people should take part in preparing plans
for economic and technical aid tt) Korea. These fundamental conditions, however, arc i~ored in the draft
resolutions submitted for our conSIderation.

179. The draft resolution excludes the possibility of
large-scale participation by representatives of the Korean people in preparing plans and re-establishing the
national economy of Korea.
'
180. The resolution gi'!es the Agent Gen eral extremely
wide powers in deciding questions relating to economic
rehabilitation. Conferring such wide powers on the
Agent General may lead to a situation in which thp. Agent
General will become an autocratic dictator in matters
relating to the economic life of Korea.
181. An analysis of the draft resolution adopted by
the 'Joint Second and Third Committee at the recommendation of the Economic and Sodal Council leads
to the conclusion that, if adopted, th(~ draft resolution
will promote further interference in the internal affairs
of Korea.

182. The resolution also contains absolutely inadmissible political elements which distort th~ true state of
affairs. This applies to the third and founh p::!.ra,graphs
of the preamble. The delegation of the Ukra1jnian SSR
considers it to be an established fact that the civil war
in Korea was started by the Syngman RJ'lee clique with
the direct support of the United States~ and that the
United States, by intervening in the civil war, cornmiL:e~ an act of aggression against the Korean people.
183. It is outrageous and inadmissible to refer i'l a
plan for relief and rehabilitation to an '(aggression" by
the anned forces of North Korea. This is apparently
an effort. to conceal the evidence of international crimes
which are costing large numbers of human lives.
U
S R· hink .
184. The delegation· of the krainian S t
s ~t
appropriate to remind the General Assembly that the
11 See Official Record.r of fTtt Securifjl Council, Fifth Year,
destruction of the domestic economy of Korea. was
No. 15, document 5/1496.
brough1: about by the barbarous bombardments by
ulbid' No. 16..
' U n i t e d States air and naval forces operating under the
U See Official RecQY;
... d.r. 0of.· th, General AssemblYI Fifth Sts
United Nations Bag and that these destructive bom.n08 Pllf!lM'Y Meenngsl 292nd to 294th meetings inclusive, and
Firlt COfftmittet, 34<ith to 353rd meetinis inclusive..
bardments are still continuing and are causing further
'R

•

l

R

1

314th Mel'ting-l December 1950
damage and destruction to the ecoi1omir: and cultural
resource$ of the Korean State.
185. For the above reasons the delt:~il.tion of the
Ukrainian SSR will abstain from voting on resolutions
A and B submitted to the General Assembly in con...
nexion with the plan for relief and rehabilitation of
Korea; and for the same reasons will fully and wholeheartedly support the amendments submitted by the
delegation of the USSR.
186. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) :
Before putting the two draft resolutions to the vote, I
invite the General Asselll~tv to take a decision with
regard to the amendmt.~~te· )?\"esented by the Soviet
Union delegation, which are to be found in docum€Qt

A/ISi9.
187. The Soviet Union delegatii'm proposes that certain parts of the preamble and I)f section B of draft
resolution A should be deleted. 1 must therefore put
these at'i1'endments to the vote se,parately.
188. The USSR delegation fir.;t proposes the deletion of the first, third ~md f01.t1th paragraphs of the
preamble to the draft "esolutiou Froposed by the Joint
Second and Third COfi"lmittee.
189. The Chilean delegation has requested a roll-call
vote on this fir§t amendment.
A vote was M,j~en by roll-call.
Chile, having been drawn by lot by the President,
was called upon to vote first.
In favour: Czechoslovakia, Poland, Ukr:tinian Soviet
Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republks,
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic.
Against: Chile, China, Costa Rica, Cuba, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, EI:uador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Ethiopia, Fran.ce, Greece, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Liberia, Luxeubourg, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Norwa.y, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines,
Saudi Arabia, Swc{}en, Syria, Thaila!ld, Turkey, Union
of South Africa, Unit'ed Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Yemen, Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia,
Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Burma, Canada.
Abstaining: Yugoslavia.
The amendment was rejected by 50 votes to 5, with
1 abstention. .
190. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The second amendment presented by the Soviet Union
delegation proposes the deletion of the second part of
par.'lgI'aph 10 of section B.
191. I put this amendment to the vote.
The amen'ament was rejected by 47 votes to 5.
192. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I put to the vote resolution A: "Relief and rehabilitation of KCl"~J) (Aj1567).
Resolution A was adopted by 51 votes to none, with
5 abstentions.
193. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I put to the vote draft resolution B: "Relief and re"
habilitation of Korea: financial arrangements".

52$

Resolution B was adopted by 51 votes to nonel with

5 abstentions.

194. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
So much for our sixth item. I do not propose that we
should take up items 71 8 and 9, as th~y are reports
from the Ad Hoc Political Committee, which is· now
meeting, and whose members are consequently unable
to be present here.

Budget estimates rei' ihe financial year 1951: sub..
sistence allowances i{lr members ofconmUs..
sions, committees and ~;dler subsidiary bodies:
report of the Fifth C.ollBmittoo" (A/1538)
[Agenda it'::m 39 (c)]
The President presented a~e 'report pf the Fifth Committee on subsistence allowa'i~ces for members of commissionsJ committees and 'Othet' sltbsiA1iary bodies anrl
the accompanying draft resolution (Aj1538).
The draft resolution was adopted umani'mously.
195. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):;
We cannot deal with our eleventh and twelfth items
since the Fourth Committ~e is at present meeting. We,
will therefore pass 011 to item 13.
Long-range activities for children - UnitedNa..
tions International Chlldl"en's Endowment
Fund: report of the Third Committee (AjI455)
[Agenda item 64] ..
The President submitted the report of the Thinl
Committee on long-range acti'llities for children and the'
accompany'ing d1"aft resIJlution ;'-4./1455). .
196. Thed PRES[AIDj·lE5'~1~ (t.,-ansldatedttfrom French):
A n amen ment.
0, J to the
n resolution proposed by the Third Committee [A/1455] has been pro..
posed by AtJistralia, Chile, Denmark, Ecuador and
Yugoslavia. This amendment proposes. the insertion of
the words "f(lr appropriate terms" in operative. paragraph 6, sub-paragraph (a), after the words "Economicand Social Council".
197. I put this amendment to the vote.
The amendment was adO'pted by 33 votes to noneJu~th 5 abstentions.
198. Mr. CORREA (Ecuador) (translated from
Spanish): There is another amendment to the draft
resolution. It is contained in document A/1580 and has.
been submitted by Bolivia, Canada, Ecuador and the
Netherlands. It proposes the insertion after paragraph
6 (a), of a new paragra;~& 6 (b).
199. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Yes, there is another amendment to the draft resolution
submitted by the Third Committee.
The President read out the tezt of the amendment'
(A/1580) as follows:
"6 (b) During the period of the Fund's existence,.
as provided in paragraph 6 (d), the Board, in accordance with such principles as may be laid down by the
Economic and Social Council and its Social Commission, shall with due regard to the urgency of the
needs and available resources, formulate the policies,
determine the programmes and allocate the resources
of the Fund for the purpose of meeting, through the-

1

1

I

I
lj'.

I'
I
1

I
Il

I
i

I
j

!
I
'
I.

J

1

i

General Auembly-FUth $easlon-Plenary Meetlnge

526

provision of supplies, training and advice, emergency
and long-range nee.ds of children and their continuing
needs particularly in under-developed countries, with
a view to strengthening, wherever this may be ap..
pl'opriate, the permanent child health and child welfare programmes of the countries receiving assistance."
200. The PRESIDENT (translated from French}:
I put tMs a.mendment to the vote.
Th~ ame,t1;{/ment was adopted by 51 votes to one, with
5 abstem'iolls.
201. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
S\lb-paragraphs (b), (c) and (d) will, of course, .be
renumbered as a result of the adoption of this amendment.
202. I will now put to a vote the draft resolution
[.4/1455] as a whole, as amended. I was about to
announce that the draft resolution had been adopted
unanimous1y, but I see that there is one abstention.
However, my opinion, an abstention does not signify
lack of unanimity.
The draft resolution was adopted, unanimously.
203. Mrs. SAMPSON (United States of America):
I regret exceedingly that Mrs. Roosevelt is not able to
be present to make this explanation. Before the General
Assembly passes on to the next item on its agenda, I
want to make a brief statement.
204. The Government of the United States and the
American people are fully aware of the plight of children in many part~ Gf the world. We are second to
none, as shown by the record, in Ollr willingness to help
these children. For this reason we hope that UNICEF
will be able to Cot~tinue and develop its work on behalf
of children,. and that the resolution which has just been
passed by such a lar:ge majority will help other countries to mobilize adr.ditional resources for the Fund. It is
for this reason th~t we chose to abstain rather than
vote against a resolution which, from our point of view,
is unsatisfactory.
205. We had hoped that it might be possible at this
session of the General Assembly to set up the Fund on
a permanent basis. We wanted to make certain that the
United Nations would be spear-heading child welfare
programmes, particularly in the under··developed countries, not only this year or the n€'Y.:t or the year after
that, but that such work for children would become an
integral part of the programme of the United Nations.
The present resolution does not offer any such
assurance.
206. F urthermor~, we had hoped that all countries
here represented would have been willing to assume
some share of the financial burden involved by including
the central administrative expenditures of the Fund in
the regular budget of the United Nations. Here again
we were disappointed. I still find it difficult to understand the opposition to this modest proposal.
207. This is not the time to emphasize the misunder• standings which characterized so much of the debate on
this issu.e. There are hundreds of millions of children
in need, and we cannot forget them.
208. The Executive Branch of our goverr.lment expects to ask the United States Congress for a contribu-

in

tion to the Children·s Fund in 1951, and we hope that
Congress will give favourable consideration to our
request. The reaction of this request will undoubtedly
be greatly influenced by the extent of the willingness
of other countries to give substantial support to the
Fund. Beyond this, my country will do everything
possible to help improve the lot of these children in
need as well as the lot of their parents by assisting in
the economic development of under-develored countries.
Furthernl0re, our voluntary agencies wit undoubtedly
continue to devote a large part of their funds for aid
to children abroad.
209. All I wish to say, in conclusion, is that it is our
earnest desire and hope that ways and means may yet
be found to ensure that the economically disinherited
among the children of the world will receive effective
United Nations aid over the years to come.

Advisory social welfare services. report of the
Economic and Social Council. (a) report of
the Third Committee (A/1436) I (b) report
of the Fifth Committee (A/1537)
[Agenda item 31]
The President presented the report of the Third
Committse a1ld the accompanying draft resolution
(A./1436).
The r\vsolu,t~'on was adopted unanimously.
Chapters V, VI and VII of the report of the Economic and Social Councll I (a) interim report
of the Third Committee (A/1440); (b) report
of the Fifth Committee (A/1562)
[Agenda item 12]
The President presented the report of the Third
Committee and the accompanying draft resolulion
(A./1440).
Resolution A. was adopted by 33 votes to 3, with
3 abstentions.
Resolution B was adopted by 34 votes to 9, ,with 4
abstentions.
210. Mr. YOUNGER (United Kingdom): I should
like to explain why my delegation voted against those
two resolutions. We did so not from any lack of interest
in the work of the two Sub-Commissions, the contrary
is the case, and I think that any member of the SubCommiss~ons who may be present here would agree
with me that the United Kingdom representatives have
played an active and even an enthusiastic part in their
discussions.
211. The reason why we have been unable to agree to
these two proposals is that.we do not believe that it is
in the best interests of the Sub-Commissions themselves
to meet in 1951. Both Sub-Commissions, as was pointed
out in the Third Committee, have adopted programmes
of work which, as a next stage, require the collection of
a considerable amount of information from governments
and in the case of the Sub-Commission on Freedom of
Information and of the Press, also fr:.m professional
organizations.
212. The request to governments to submit the in..
formation required by the Sub-Commission on the

521

314th Meeting-l Dece7nber 1950
Prevention of Discrimination and the ProtectioJ! of
Minorities was r.,nly sent out by the Secretary-General
some three or four weeks ago, and it would take
ftovr"nments some time to collect it. But even when
that new information has been collected, more time will
be n~eded bdore the Sub-Commissions will be able to
do any useful work on it. That information will first
have to be collated and analysed by the SecretaryGeneral, and that will take time. We should remember,
I think, that thl" function of these Sub-Commissions is
not merely to hol.d meetings, but to make proposals for
increasing freedom of information and for protc"Cting
minorities and prev\;!lting discrimination. I think that
that is perhaps a point to which sufficient attention was
not given when the Third Committee adopted these
resolutions.
~13. There is i~ the opini0!1 of m~:. delegation.no virtue
m the mere holdmg of meetmgs. ''vve are tonvmced that
it is a fallacy to suppose that the objectives of these two
Sub-Commissions are necessP.£'ily furthered· by holding
a meeting every year. VIe are convinced that the
important point is not that meetings should be held
every year, but that th(''y should be held when the
Sub-Commissions are in a position to do useful work,
and I do not believe that it would be po~s!ble for them
profitably to hold a 17.1eeting next year.

Printed in U.S.A.

214. All these factors were taken into consideration by
the Interim Committ<:e on Progral11lmes of Meetings of
the Economic and Social Council when it reached its
unanimous decision not to reco1l11t!end the holding of
meetings of these two Sub-Commissions in the course
of 1951. It also took into account the special appeal from
the Secretary-General to cut out meetings in 1951 which
are not indispensa.ble. When the Council decided to
endorse this decision,16 it took into account all the
reievant factors. It consid~red the reports of the two
Sub-Commissions and the present status of their work
programmes. No attempt was made by the Third Committee to consider the~ work programmes of these two
Sub-Commissions in any detail and thus to consider
whether these programmes required the holding of
meetings in 1951, and nothing which was said in the
Third Committee persuaded my delegation that the
decision of the Economic and Social Council was wrong.
We are satisfied that it was right, and that is why we
voted as we did against these two resolutions.

The meeting rose at 6 p.m.
16 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Eleventh Sessionl Supplement No. 1, Resolutionsl No. 336 (XI).

A-40464-January 1951-3,600
