~xlml~llnnlllli~llalesnlllalllols
;
11949 00102 7916

UNITED NATIONS’

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS
aJ%il Li8W~..RY

THIRTY-FIRST,Y.EAR

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1870) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Tribute to the memory of Chou En-lai, Premier of the State Council of China

1

Opening statement by the President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

The Middle ‘East problem including the Palestinian question.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

S/PV. 1870

.;
,

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements
of the Officiul Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which infor‘mation about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
qf the Security
Council.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

i

:’

:

1870th MEETING

President:

(United

Held in New York on Monday,

12 January

Mr. Salim A. Salim
Republic of Tanzania).

his wisdom. Surelv he must have seen the important
role now played by China in the Organizatidn as a
positive and welcome fruit of his international policy.
I believe that, as representatives of Member States,
we feel united with the Government and people of
China in their great loss.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics;. United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania and United States of America.

3. On behalf of the members of the Security Council,
I should like to request the representative of China to
be good enough to transmit to the Government and
people of China our deepest condolences at this time
of sorrow and grief. May I also be allowed to make a
personal remark. I have cause to feel personally the
loss of Premier Chou En-lai as I had the honour of
serving in the People’s Republic of China as my
country’s ambassador to that great country. The vivid
memories of his warmth and interest only serve to
exacerbate in me the sad sentiments which have
gripped all of us.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1870)
1. Adoption

1976, at 3.30 p.m.

of the agenda

2. The Middle East problem including the Palestinian
question

Tribute to the memory of Chou En-jai, Premier
of the State Council of the People’s Republic of China

1. The PRESIDENT:
The international community
has lost a towering figure in the death of Premier
Chou En-lai of the People’s Republic of China. Not
only was he, in the terms of China’s official announcement, “a long-tested leader of the Party and State”,
but his lasting influence transcends the frontiers of
his country. There are few people in this century who
have left as strong an imprint on the world scene as
he has.

4. The PRESIDENT:
General.

I now call on the Secretary-

5. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Mr. President, I
wish to associate myself most sincerely with the
sentiments which have been expressed by you on the
death of Mr. Chou En-lai, the Premier of the State
Council of the People’s Republic of China. I have
already conveyed my sympathy and condolences to
the Government of the People’s Republic of China.

2. Premier of his country since the formation of the
People’s Republic of China in 1949, Chou En-lai was a
man of reason and cultivation.
He combined the
qualities of revolutionary and administrator and could
transform vision into reality for the benefit of his
people. His sharp intelligence, his astonishing memory,
his alertness in dialogue and his versatility impressed
every foreign visitor who was privileged to talk with
him so often throughout the night. He had a rare
.knowledge of problems and people, an exceptional
capacity to work and to lead, and a loyalty to the
political goal which he identified with the best interests
of China. As a companion of Chairman Mao Tse-tung
in the “Long March” and later in the reconstruction
of his nation, he played a unique role. He became
known-to the world community as China’s interlocutor.
One recalls even now his presence in Geneva in 1954
and in Bandung in 1955. He was no stranger to the
United Nations. Each Secretary-General
has known

6. The death of Mr. Chou En-lai is indeed a great
loss, not only to the Chinese people but to the world
at large. He played a historic role both in the development of his own country and in its relations with the
world community. He was a distinguished and beloved
leader of his people, whose wisdom and statesmanship
spread far beyond the boundaries of China. His
influence in fostering better understanding
among
nations and in furthering international
peace was of
particular importance.
7. Mr. Chou En-lai’s character and personal qualities inspired the greatest admiration and respect in
those who were privileged to meet him. I shall always
remember the warmth and the graciousness with which
he received me when I visited China. I was also
1

deeply impressed by his profound grasp of international
issues and by his acutely perceptive understanding
of the United Nations. I shpuld like, once again, to
convey to the representative of China and, through
him, to his Government my sympathy and condolences
on this great loss, a loss which the world shares with
the Government and people of China.
8.

Mr. El Hassen of Mauritania and Mr. Oyono of the
United Republic of Cameroon, as well as the members
of their delegations that served with us, that all of us
who had the pleasure of serving with them on the
Council will long remember our work together. I also
wish to extend a very warm welcome to the five new
members of the Council who are with us today for the
first time. I wish to assure Mr. Boya of Benin,
Mr. I(ikhia of the Libyan Arab Republic, Mr. Akhund
of Pakistan, Mr. Boyd of Panama and Mr. Datcu of
Romania that all the members of the Council and its
staff look forward with pleasure to working with them
in the weeks &d months to come.
8.

Mr.

HUANG
Hua (China) (trtrnskrtion
from
Chou En-lai, Vice-Chairman of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of China and
Premier of the State Council of the People’s Republic of China, passed away on 8 January 1976. Premier
Chou En-lai was a great proletarian revolutionary of
the Chinese people, a loyal revolutionary fighter of the
Chinese people and an outstanding, long-tested leader
of our Party and State. His death is a gigantic loss to
the cause of China’s revolution and construction as
well as to the cause of human progress.

Chinese):

‘Adoption of ihe agenda
I

12. The PRESIDENT:
1 turn now to the business
before the Council, the first item of which is the
adoption of the agenda. The agenda has been drawn
up in the light of resolution 381 (1975), adopted by the
Security Council on 30 November 1975. If I hear no
objection, I shall take it that the agenda is adopted.

9. In these days of profound grief, the President of
the Security Council, the Secretary-General and the
representatives
of many countries have extended
deep condolences both at today’s meeting and on other
occasions to the Chinese delegation on the death of
Premier Chou En-lai and their kind sympathy to the
bereaved family and the Chinese people. We are deeply
moved by all this. We consider it a tremendous
encouragement for the just cause undertaken by the
Chinese people. I wish to take this opportunity,
in
the name of the Chinese delegation, to express our
heartfelt thanks to the President, the SecretaryGeneral and our fellow representatives, and we will
convey their profound sentiments to the Chinese
Government and people and to the bereaved family.

The ‘Middle East problem including
the Palestinian question

13. The PRESIDENT:
I should now like to inform
the members of the Council that ‘I have received
letters from the representatives of Egypt, Jordan,
Qatar, the Syrian Arab Republic and the United Arab
Emirates in which they have requested, in accordance
with rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure, to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the
question just included in the Council’s agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice and in conformity
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and the
provisional rules of procedure, I propose, if there are
no objections,
to invite those representatives
to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote.

Opening statement by the President
10. The PRESIDENT:
At the very outset of this first
meeting of the Security Council to be held during the
month of January 1976, I should like to express to my
predecessor in the office of President of the Council,
Mr. Richard of the United Kingdom, the appreciation
of all of us who served under his presidency during
the month of December last year. During that period,
when the General Assembly was at the height of its
activity,
Mr. Richard presided over no less than
12 full meetings of the Security Council, on four
difficult agenda items, and called one meeting at which
he ceded his chair, invoking rule 20 of the provisional
rules of procedure. In addition, Mr. Richard conducted
countless meetings of consultations. I am certain that
I can speak for all in expressing to him on behalf of
the Council our sincere gratitude.

14. * The PRESIDENT:
Members will recall that, on
30 November 1975, following the adoption of resolution 381 (1975) wherein the Council decided to reconvene on today’s date, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement:
“It is the understanding of the majority of the
Security Council that when it reconvenes on 12 January 1976 in accordance with paragraph (a) of
resolution 381 (1975) fhe representatives of the
Palestine Liberation Organization
will be invited
to participate
in the debate.” [/856th mwting,

Il.
On this occasion, when the Security Council has
lost five non-permanent members and gained five new
ones, I consider it appropriate to pay a tribute to our
former colleagues for their devoted service during
two arduous years. I wish to assure Mr. Tchemouchtchenko of the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Mr. Salazar of Costa Rica, Mr. Al-Shaikhly of Iraq,

prrrcr. 23.1

15. With this background in view, I should like to
put forward the proposal that the representative of
the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) be invited
to participate in the debate on the item included in the
2

Council when the Security Council considers that the
interests of that Member are specially affected, or
when a Member brings a matter to the attention
of the Security Council in accordance with Article 35 (1) of the Charter.”

agenda. This proposal is not being put forward under
rule 37 or rule 39 of the provisionat rules of procedure
of the Security Council, but, if it is adopted by the
Council, the invitation to the PLO to participate in
this debate will confer on it the same rights of participation as are conferred when a Member State is
invited to participate under rule 37.

21. It goes without saying that a Member of the
United Nations is a State. We do not have Members
and the Charter does not provide for Members which
are not States. The PLO is not a State. It does not
administer a defined territory. It does not have the
attributes of a Government of a State. It does not
claim to be a State. This is the basic relevant fact
we have here with respect to the proposal before us.

16. Does anyone wish to speak before I put the
proposal to a vote?
17. Mr. MOYNIHAN
(United States of America):
Thank you, Mr. President, in the first instance for
the pleasant opportunity which my speaking first in
this first meeting of the Council in the new year gives
to me to express first the appreciation and admiration
which we all feel for the distinguished service which
Mr. Richard, our colleague from the United Kingdom,
performed in his role as President of the Council in
the month of December, a month not without its
tribulations and not without its dangers. The extent to
which they were averted surely attests to the skill of
Mr. Richard and his colleagues.
.

22. When we were faced with a similar proposal on
4 December, it elicited, as I have said, the strongest
protest from several members of the Council, including
the United States. 1 described it as a concerted
attempt to disregard the rules of procedure and to
accord to the PLO a role greater even than that which
over the years the Council has granted to Governments of observer States, and a role greater by far
than has in more recent times been granted to the
spokesmen of legitimate national liberation movements invited here under rule 39. I said then, and I
repeat, that the United States is not prepared to agree,
and we do not believe the Council should agree, to an
crll hoc departure from the rules of procedure which
ignores the needs of this institution.
Unfortunately,
despite our opposition and authoritative
statements
by other permanent members and elected members
of the Council, rule and precedent were ignored on
4 December to the extent that the invitation
was
proposed.

IS. Also, Mr. President, the opportunity presents
itself to me to congratulate you on your ascent at such
an early and youthful age to a position of such
eminence in which we have every expectation you
will distinguish yourself as you have done in so many
other positions In the past. I would like hereupon,
.Mr. President, to thank you for the opportunity to
state the views of the United States with respect to
the motion which you have presented.
19. As will be recalled, on 4 December 1975, the
last occasion on which the Council dealt with Middle
East affairs, it was proposed to invite the PLO to
participate in that debate with “the same rights of
participation as are conferred when a Member State
is invited to participate under rule 37” [/859th ntwtirrg,
ptrrtr. 31. The same proposal has been made today.
The proposal of 4 December 1975 elicited strong objections from some members of the Council, including
the United States. Our position today is unchanged
from that of four weeks ago.

23. I wish to emphasize at this point that I am not
addressing the question of whether our proceedings
are of interest to the Palestinian people. The United
States view that the legitimate interests of the Palestinian people are an intrinsic part of the problem of
lasting peace in the Middle East is also well known
and is unchanged. This is not the matter I am addressing. It is not my intention to deal with these
matters today at all.

20. What is at issue today in significant measure is
the integrity of the processes of the Security Council.
We have already seen a startling decline in the confidence with which the processes of the General
Assembly are viewed. Seeking to create precedents
while at the same time not adhering to the rules
can erode the Council’s influence and authority, as
has occurred in the Assembly. It is in nobody’s interest
for this same process to take hold in the Council.
Rule 37 of the provision rules states that:

24. The specific issue before us is our responsibility
to the integrity of Security Council procedures and to
the future effectiveness of this body. If we take
liberties with those procedures and, under the influence
of immediate political positions with respect to a given
question before the Council, establish or reaffirm
unwise precedents, this will come back to haunt us.
I want to stress that a decision to invite the PLO to
participate in our deliberations
not under existing
XJouncil rules, but as if it were a Member State with
the same rights as a State Member of the United
Nations. would upen a veritable Pandora’s box of
future difftculties.

“Any Member of the United Nations which is
not a member of the Security Council may be
invited, as the result of a decision of the Security
Council, to participate, without vote, in the discussion of any question brought before the Security

25. Were that box to be opened, there are groups in
all parts of the world that could seek to participate
3

in our proceedings as if they were Member States; No
nation represented at this table, including my own,
would necessarily be immune from the pernicious
consequences.

establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East; and it requested the Secretary-General to establish contacts with the PLO on all matters concerning
the question of Palestine.

26. I repeat: the PLO is not a State; it does not claim
to be a State. For the most elemental of reasons, only
Member States can participate in our proceedings as
Member States. Unless, of course, we change the rules,
whereupon we shall look forward to welcoming the
dissident factions and nationalities of half the world,
for in point of fact roughly half the nations in the world
today face serious to extreme problems of internal
cohesion owing to internal ethnic conflict. This is true
of more than half the present members of the Security
Council.

32. Furthermore, in its resolution 3237 (XXIX) concerning observer status for the PLO, the General
Assembly noted that the Diplomatic Conference on the
Reaffirmation
and Development
of International
Humanitarian
Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts,
the World Population
Conference and the, World
Food Conference had in effect invited the PLO to
participate in their respective deliberations, and’that
Ehe Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the
Sea had invited the PLO to participate in its deliberations as an observer.

273 Moreover, the PLO, which is not a State, much
less a Member State, suffers from an additional
disability in seeking to participate in the work of the
Security Council. It does not recognize the right to
exist of the State of Israel, which is a Member State,
and whose right to exist is guaranteed by the Charter
which the Council is pledged to uphold.

33. The General Assembly,
in resolution
3237
(XXIX), invited the PLO to participate in the sessions
and the work of the General Assembly in the capacity
of observer; it invited the PLO to participate in
the sessions and the work of all international. conferences convened under the auspices of the Assembly
in the capacity ‘of observer; and it considered,that the
PLO was entitled to participate as an observer in the
sessions and the work of all international conferences
convened under the auspices of other organs of the
United Nations. So, Mr. President, this motion is in
line with all those practices and resolutions.

28. Finally, the PLO, which is not a State and which
does not recognize the right to exist of Israel, which
is a Member State, further refuses to acknowledge
the- authority of the Council, which in its resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) has undertaken to
uphold the rights of the States of the Middle East. My
Government is not prepared to go along with an action
which will tmdermine the negotiation process, which
is the only process that can lead to peace.

34. Furthermore, the Security Council in its resolution 381 (1975) decided “to reconvene on 12 January
1976, to continue the debate on the Middle East
problem including the Palestinian question”.
That
resolution was followed by this statement:

29. The representatives of the PLO have repeatedly
told the General Assembly of their hostility to systematic negotiations and their hostility to the work of
the ,Council. They categorically
rejected Security
Council resolution 242 (1967). which for .years has
served and continues to serve as the only agreed basis
for serious negotiations.

“It is the understanding of the majority of the
Security Council that when it reconvenes on 12 January 1976 in accordance ‘with paragraph (lf) of
Security Council resolution 381 (1975) the. representatives of the Palestine Liberation Organization
will be invited to participate in the debate.” [1856rh
meeting,

30. The Security Council is the capstone of the United
Nations. It can act and has done so with distinction
in ways which have been essential to peace, especially
in the Middle East. The preservation of its integrity
and effectiveness deserves. our care and attention.
.The Council should ‘not repeat its mistaken hid hoc
decision of 4 December. The United States asks that
a vote be taken on your motion, Mr. President. The
United States will vote against the motion.

prrrtr. 23.1

Practically speaking,
Security Council.

the decision

was taken by the

35. The statement to which you, Mr. President,
referred was a part and maybe, juridicatly speaking,
an annex linked to resplution 381 (1975). That statement was presented by the representative of Guyana,
as the-representative of the sponsors. He said: 1 !.
“As a result of those efforts, the members of the
Council now have before them two documents.
The first [S///888] contains the text of a draft resolution which, in the opinion of its sponsors, reflects
to a large extent the need for Security Council
action on this matter.” [/hid.. porrr. 7.1
.
-

3 1. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic): Mr. President, the motion proposed by you is, in the view of
my delegation, in line with the practices; decisions
and resolutions adopted by the Organization for two
or three years now. By its resolution 3236 (XXIX),
the General Assembly recognized that the Palestinian
people is entitled to self-determination,
in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations; it recognized
that the Palestinian people is a principal party in the

..

36. The representative of Guyana added that the
second document [S///889] contained a draft statement
4

bv the President of the Council, simule in its language
and clear in its terms. Anyhow., the-opposition of the
representative of the United States was expected: he
maintained his position declared at the meeting of the
Security Council on 30 November [/856th meeting].

tional peace and security. The Soviet delegation
expresses the hope that friendly, business-like
relations of mutual understanding will develop between
the delegations of the ,new members of the Security
Council and the delegation of the Soviet Union for
the sake of the success of the work of this chief organ
of the United Nations for the maintenance of peace.
For our part, we shall spare no efforts to achieve this
purpose.

37.’ I should like to stress that the procedure that you
proposed to the Council, Mr. President, is in line with
the practice of the Council, and I invite ail representatives to vote for it.
’
.’
38.

41. The past year was not an easy one in the work
of the Security Council: the Council had to consider
and adopt important decisions on pressing intemational questions. We believe that the decisions of
the Council on such important questions as those of
the Middle East, Cyprus, Western Sahara and Timor
doubtless had a positive influence in improving and
stabilizing the international
climate. Unfortunately,
in view of circumstances known to all, we were not
able to take important decisions on the problem of
decoionizing the African continent. That problem is
awaiting decision. Neither was the Council able to
take a positive decision on recommendations
for the
admission of two new independent States, namely the
two Vietnamese States, to membership in the United
Nations. Whatever the business of the Council,
experience of its work shows how vast and positive
a role in its activities has been, is being and doubtless
will be, played by delegations of non-permanent
members of the Council, and particularly by delegations of non-aligned countries. We look forward to
working with them in a spirit of co-operation in the
interest of strengthening
international
peace and
security.

Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(interpwtcrtion
jhn
Russian):
Speaking for the first
time in the new year 1976at this meeting of the Security
Council, the delegation of the Soviet Union first of
all would like to congratulate the members of the
Council and the Secretary-General and wish them a
Happy New Year with good health, personal happiness
and success in discharging the main task devolving
upon the Council: that of maintaining international
peace and security. May we also greet you, Mr. President, as an outstanding representative of the African
continent. I am very pleased indeed to point out that
strong relations of mutual understanding, co-operation,
assistance and friendship are being developed between your country and the Soviet Union, as well
as between the Soviet Union and many other African
States.
39. On the basis of its principled Leninist policy
of granting total assistance to the revolutionary
struggle of peoples for their national liberation and of
giving assistance and support to young independent
countries in the construction of their new lives, the
Soviet Union has been and will be the firm supporter
and friend of the peoples of Africa struggling against
the vestiges of colonialism, racism and neo-colonialism
on the continent. The members of the Council know
you, Sir, as an outstanding diplomat from an independent African country which has already, .gained
immense authority in the international
arena. The
delegation of the Soviet Union sincerely wishes you
great success in the responsible post of President .of
the Security Council and, for its part, will exert every
effort to co-operate with you. May we also express
our gratitude to your predecessor in the presidency of
the Council, Mr. .Richard, whose task it was to preside
over a whole series of Council meetings on extremely
complex questions.

42. In welcoming today the representatives of States
non-permanent members of the Security Council, the
Soviet delegation should like to pay a due tribute also
to the delegations of those States whose Council
membership expired at the end of 1975. I refer to the
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Iraq, Mauritania. the United Republic of Cameroon and Costa
Rica. In their joint work and friendly co-operation
with all the other members of the Council, they made
a substantive contribution
to its work during their
terms of membership.
43. Turning now.to the problem before the Security
Council, ‘our delegation would like to make the
following statement. In connexion with the motion just
put forward by you, Sir, on the invitation of the PLO
to participate in the work of the present meeting of
the Security Council, each of us knows very well that
this question’was already considered by the Council
in November of last year,‘when the representative of
the Soviet Union was presiding over the Security
Council.
_.
.:

40. It is with great satisfaction-that the Soviet delegation welcomes in this chamber today at this first
meeting of the Security Council in. the new year 1976
the new members of the Security Council: the Socialist
Republic of Romania, the Libyan Arab Republic,
Benin, Pakistan and Panama. we are certain that these
new members of the Council-among
which are countries that have already acquired great experience from
participating in its work-will
actively participate in the
work of the Council and will make a worthy contribution to the search for generally acceptable solutions
to questions involving the strengthening of interna-

44. It is ‘our firm conviction-and
in this matter I
fully endorse what was stated here by the representative of the Libyan Arab Republic-that
the question
of inviting the PLO to participate in the Security
5

49. The argument put forward to the effect that the
General Assembly apparently allowed an error to creep
in is quite unjustified. What error? At its thirtieth
session the General Assembly, by an overwhelming
majority of votes, adopted a resolution to invite the
PLO to participate in the search for peace in the
Middle East. In paragraph I of resolution 3375
(XXX), the General Assembly

Council’s discussion of the item on the agenda was
decided-or,
if you wish, was pre-decided-by
the
Security Council on 30 November 1975 by its adoption
. of resolution 381 (1975).
45. This opinion, which was expressed in the official
statement of the President as the understanding of the
majority of the Security Council, was closely linked
with Council resolution 381 (1975). In the statement
made by the President of the Security Council, in
accordance with the agreement reached in the consultations between members of the Security Council, the
following announcement was approved. I shall read it

“Requests
the Security Council to consider and
adopt the necessary resolutions and measures in
order to enable the Palestinian people to exercise its
inalienable
national rights in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 3236 (XXIX)“.

in extenso:

In paragraph 2, the General Assembly

“It is the understanding of the majority of the
Security Council that when it reconvenes on 12 January 1976 in accordance with paragraph (u) of resolution 381 (1975) the representatives of the Palestine
Liberation
Organization
will be invited”-and
I
stress “will be invited”
“to participate in the
debate.” [1856th meeting, pclru. 23.1

“C&s for the invitation of the Palestine Liberation
Organization, the representative of the Palestinian
people, to participate in all efforts, deliberations
and conferences on the Middle East which are held
under the auspices of the United Nations, on an
equal footing with other parties, on the basis of
resolution 3236 (XXIX)“.

46. Consequently the Security Council-or,
at least,
the majority of the members of the Council-expressed
its will and position in the most resolute terms to the
effect that the representatives of the PLO would be
invited to participate in the debate on the issue which
is today included on the Security Council’s agenda.
Thus the question has been predetermined.

50. This is the legal basis on which the Security
Council should also proceed, if it does not wish to
enter into confrontation with the General Assembly.
Where is the mistake of the General Assembly? Where
is the error? Quite the contrary, the Assembly-where
the balance of forces is fairer than in the Council and
where those who feel for the victims of aggression,
including the Arab people of Palestine, are more
numerous-actually
adopted a just resolution,
a
resolution that was unequivocal and very fair, to
restore and recognize the international rights of the
Arab people of Palestine, who have been expelled from
their homeland by the aggressor.

47. Those who now subject this opinion of the
majority to doubt, who call it into question and who
object to this invitation were well aware of the contents
of this consensus of the members of the Security
Council. When I read out the statement in the Council,
they did not insist on a vote. They agreed with it. In
this official statement of the President of the Council,
it was unequivocally
stated that the representatives
of the PLO would be invited to participate in the
debate on the Middle East problem including the
Palestinian question. That was a kind of consensus.
The matter. is clear. But for unknown reasons, the
matter is now being raised anew, in order to waste
the Council’s time and to distract it by a procedural
discussion instead of immediately and urgently turning
to the discussion of the item on the agenda and to
its substance.

5 1. During the Second World War, quite a few people
were driven from their homeland and left homeless.
There were quite a few Governments in exile. No one
questioned the right of those Governments to speak
on behalf of their countries and peoples, not even those
countries whose representatives are now calling into
question the right of the Palestinian people to speak
here in the Security Council and the right of its delegation to defend the rights ofthe Arab people of Palestine.
52. History has many such examples; hence there is
decidedly no basis whatever to dispute the decision
of the General Assembly, to call it into question, to
cast doubt on it or to consider that the. negative
votes of eight Member States on this resolution are
right and that the 101 Member States which voted in
favour of it are wrong. Only a person who has a
rather srri generis way of thinking could agree with
that. From the point of view of the normal procedure
of the General Assembly and the Security Council,
this Assembly decision, taken by a majority, is an
official resolution of the Assembly and it would indeed
be quite regrettable should the Council take a different

48. On the basis of the foregoing, the Soviet delegation believes that this question is not subject to any
doubt. The representatives of the PLO should be
invited as the representatives of the Arab people of
Palestine and they should participate in the debate on
this issue from beginning to end. The Security Council
already set a precedent when at one of its previous
meetings [/859th meeting]
it invited the representatives of the PLO to participate as full representatives
in a debate of the Security Council from beginning to
end of that debate. At that time the Soviet delegation
took the same position as it takes now.
6

decision and not permit the delegation of the PLO
to participate in a debate which is so vital to the Arab
people of Palestine. I think that there could hardly
be more than very few persons around this table who
would agree with such an approach to the question.

obedient tools in the hands of a small mechanical
majority. I say “small”
because compared to the
majority of the contemporary United Nations it was
indeed a small majority. But it was strong and it
imposed its decisions. Of course, in the eyes of those
who commanded the United Nations at that time the
authority of the United Nations has indeed been
undermined. But the prestige of the United Nations
has been increased in the eyes of the overwhelming
majority of States and people, and there are now
144 States in the United- Nations. A small group does
not like the Organization now; it cannot get a majority
for anything.

53. I state that, because as President of the Security
Council in November I was convinced that most of the
members of the Council at that time were in favour of
the delegation of the PLO participating in the debate
on this question. Today an attempt has been made to
bring up the fact that five members of the Council
that were among the majority at that time have left the
Council and that their place has been taken by five
new members whose position on this issue is not yet
known. But I am deepiy convinced that those five
new members of the Council agree with the decision
taken by the majority in November last and will support the opinion of the majority of the Council, and
that there will be no attempt on their part to review
or revise the decision.

58. That is the situation. That is the reality. It must
be reckoned with. Those who do not do so will find
themselves in an invidious
position. Those who
describe the decisions of the General Assembly on
the Palestine question as erroneous decisions are
trying to confuse the Security Council so that it will
not act in conformity with the decisions of the General
Assembly. Our delegation cannot agree with such a
position. The Security Council must, on the contrary,
act in keeping with the decisions of the General
Assembly. As I have already said, in its resolution 3375 (XXX) the General Assembly recognized
the inalienable national rights of the Arab people of
Palestine. It requested the Security Council to consider and adopt the necessary measures to enable
those rights to be exercised. It called upon the Security
Council to invite the PLO, the sole representative of
the Arab people of Palestine, to participate in all
efforts, deliberations and conferences on the Middle
East held under the auspices of the United Nations.

54. It has been alleged that the prestige and authority
of the General Assembly have been undermined by
the adoption of the resolution on the Palestine question. Let us analyse that allegation. Is it really true that
the authority of the General Assembly or the Security
Council has been undermined? And, if so, in whose
eyes has it been undermined? In the eyes of the Fascist
Chilean junta. Why? Because at its thirtieth session
the General Assembly resolutely condemned
the
Fascist Chilean junta for the terror and violence to
which it subjects people. Further confirmation of that
treatment is to be found in the recent tragedy involving
a British doctor. The sad news of that incident has
been heard by the whole world.

59. On what basis could the Security Council take
a different decision, object to that General Assembly
decision, set itself on a collision course with the
Assembly? On the sole basis that the Assembly decision displeases Israel and some of its protectors? I
think that the Security Council-orat
least the majority
of the Council-should
not take the course of disputing
the General Assembly decision on this question,
should not set itself on a collision course with the
General Assembly. We are convinced that the Security
Council-or
at least the majority of the Council-will
act fairly, logically, correctly, and in conformity with
the position taken by the General Assembly, by voting
in favour of the participation of the delegation of the
PLO in the debate on the item on the Council’s agenda
today in an appropriate manner and from the beginning
to the end of that debate.

55. Who else is displeased with the United Nations
and its General Assembly? In whose eyes has the
prestige of the United Nations been undermined? In
the eyes of the South African racists, who were
expelled from the General Assembly at the twentyninth session and did not dare to show themselves
at the thirtieth session. No one can be surprised that
the authority of the United Nations has been undermined in their eyes.
56. In whose eyes has the authority of the United
Nations been undermined? In the eyes ofthe aggressors
that have seized foreign territory. In the eyes of
Israel. Israel ignores the Security Council. It has not
appeared here today to participate in a debate of
.direct concern to it, because it understands that it is
the guilty party in all the tragedies of the Middle East,
including the tragedy of the Arab people of Palestine.

60.

Mr. BOY D (Panama) (intc~rp~~~tation Jhn SptrnSince this is the first time the Security Council
has met in 1976, I should like on behalf of my delegation cordially to greet all the members of the Council,
the Secretary-General and the members of the Secretariat. It is symbolic that we begin our work this year
under the presidency of the representative of the
United Republic of Tanzania, Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim.
All of us are aware of the intense efforts he has

ish):

57. Who else is displeased with the United Nations?
In whose eyes has its authority been undermined?
Apparently in the eyes of those who during the years
of the cold war dictated their conditions to the United
Nations, during the time when the United Nations and
its General Assembly and Security Council were
7

deployed in the task of liberating Africa and solving
all the problems connected with colonialism and the
strengthening of peace.
61. In 1976 my country will celebrate the one hundred
and fiftieth anniversary of the Amphictyonic Congress,
which was convened in Panama’ by Simon Bolivar
and which has been recognized as the first demonstration in the history of mankind of international solidarity
and co-operation. Panama’s presence in the Security
Council at this time has particular importance and
significance, therefore. We are -here because of the
generosity of the countries of the Group of Latin
American States in the United Nations. At this decisive
moment of its history, Panama needed to occupy this
important place in order better to defend its position
of effective sovereignty over the Panama Canal Zone,
a goal for the achievement of which we have been
struggling relentlessly.
62. We wish to acknowledge the brilliant work which
has been done by the distinguished delegation of the
sister Republic of Costa Rica, and we are honoured
now to take its place. We would particularly like to
thank its representative, Mr. Fernando Salazar.

tive of the people of Palestine and since it has been so
recognized in resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly in the past. Once again, it is a pleasure for
us to express our support for the presence of the PLO
so that it may participate in the debate on matters
touching on the inalienable rights of the’ Palestinian
people in that area of tension.
66. I do not wish to extend this procedural debate,
but we should like to indicate the fact that, in aur view,
the PLO does indeed have the right to be represented
when any questions in this connexion are debated in
any of the bodies of the United Nations, and that it
may participate on an equal footing.with other States.
Panama, which is struggling for sovereignty over the
Panama Canal Zone and which is ready to claim its
inalienable rights over its territory by all possible
means, must act in conformity with this position. Thus
it is a pleasure for us enthusiastically to support the
legitimate right of the Palestinians‘to their own homeland in the Palestinian territory,
without thereby
signifying that Panama is modifying its position.with
regard to the right of States of the Middle East to
live in peace within secure and recognized borders.
67.

63. Panama is a peace-loving nation and in the
Security Council it will fully discharge its duty ‘to
work for the maintenance of peace throughout the
world. We are a country with an international vocation,
a country which wishes to entertain friendly relations
with all States of the world. The leader of the revolutionary Government,
General. Omar Torrijos,
is
now in Cuba on a goodwill visit and he has been
able to.capture the sympathy and the solidarity of the
broad majority of countries in America and in the
third world because of his independent and worthy
foreign policy, the positive results of which have
already been translated into the unity of the Latin
American continent in the defence of our cause which
constitutes a problem of the highest priority in the
western hemisphere.
64. I have touched briefly on this topic because
we should like to take advantage of our first public
appearance of our term of membership at this meeting
to indicate the fact that there are very clear symptoms
in my country that the Panama Canal Zone will
continue to be one of the most sensitive centres of
international tension. While it is true that the meetings
held by the’ Council in Panama in March 1973 did
contribute to strengthening peace in the region, it is
none the less true that we have as yet been unable to
reach a solution of the problems of the Canal Zone
because the efforts made by the United States towards
recognition of the inalienable rights of my country
over the Canal Zone have not been sufficient. Therefore it should surprise no one that Panama will support
the presence of the PLO in the debate we begin today.
65. We believe that their presence here is fully
justifiable, since the PLO is the authentic representa-

Mr.

DATCU
(Romania) (intcvpretcrtion
from
Mr. President, I should first like to express
our particular satisfaction at seeing you presiding over
the work of the Security Council this month, and to
extend to you the cordial congratulations
of the
Romanian delegation as well as our wishes for success.
I should like to take this opportunity to thank you for
the kind words you addressed to my.delegation,
and
to assure you that we will co-operate fully. Our thanks
go equally to our colleagues who have congratulated
my country as we begin our term of membership in
the Security Council.

French):

68. I should also like to say how deeply grateful we
are to those States Members of the United Nations
which by their votes have entrusted my country ‘with
this honourable. task and at the same time ‘have
conferred on it a lofty responsibility.
My delegation
would like to assure the Security Council and all
Member States that Romania has decided to contribute
in so-far as it can to the accomplishment
of the aims
and purposes of the Organization so that it will be
able to fulfil the hope vested in it by the peoples.of
the world.
69. Mr. President, turning to the topic of our procedural discussion I would like to reply to you, on
behalf of the Romanian delegation, and express our
full support for your proposal. The Security Council
is meeting today to study the general problems of the
including
the Palestinian
Middle
East situation,
question. When the Council took that decision on
30 November last [/856th meeting], it was also decided
that the oral statement made by the President of the
Security Council would be included in the. records
of the Council. In that statement the President said that
a majority of the members of the Security Council

understood that when the Council met again on I2 Jan;
uary-today-in
accordance with subparagraph (u) of
resolution 381 (1975) the representatives of the PLO
would be invited to participate in the debate.
70. We believe that this decision accords fully with
the requests made by the General Assembly. These
requests have been mentioned here and they indicate
that the representatives of the PLO, the representative of the Palestinian people, should be invited to
participate in all efforts, deliberations and conferences
held under the auspices of the United Nations.
71. In our view, the debate did not have to be
resumed, because this question had already been
decided; but since we have proceeded in a different
manner I should like briefly to clarify the position of
my delegation. First let me recall that the General
Assembly had recognized, in its resolution 3236
(XXIX),
that the Palestinian people is a principal
party in the establishment of a just and lasting peace
in the Middle East. In resolution 3375 (XXX), the
General Assembly requested that the PLO be invited
to participate in deliberations and conferences on the
Middle East on. an equal footing with other parties.
It would be only normal for the PLO to enjoy the same
rights of participation
as those conferred upon a
Member State which has been invited by the Security
Council to participate in a debate under rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.
72. If the Security Council is to create- a climate
conducive to the holding of a true dialogue among all
the interested parties, it must ensure equality among
the interlocutors.
This is a necessary condition in
efforts to open and pursue any debate or any negotiation among the parties.
73. The arguments raised against this decision are
based on various’of the rules of procedure but they
are not convincing to my delegation-for
two reasons.
The first ‘reason is that this is a situation. which is
totally new. It was not foreseen ,30 years ago when
the rules of procedure were drafted. In parenthesis
let me say that these rules of procedure were provisional, and it is high time they were updated. The
second reason is the well-known principle according to
which the Security Council, like any other body of the
United Nations, is the master of its own procedure.
Romania, like the majority of States Members of the
United Nations, is convinced that the participation
of the Palestinian people through the PLO, its authentic
representative,.is necessary and indeed essential in all
efforts for the establishment of a just and lasting peace
in the Middle East.
74. .Therefore the delegation of Romania resolutely
supports the full participation of the PLO in the present
debate and in any future debate in the Security Council
with regard to the problem of the Middle East, as well,
as with regard to any other questions which might
directly affect the Palestinian people. The Romanian

delegation, therefore, will vote in favour
proposal, Mr. President.

of your

75. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom): Mr. President, at the outset I wish to thank you for the kind
remarks that you and other representatives around
this table have made about me and about my month
as President.
May I welcome you-or
perhaps
commiserate with you--on your assumption of the
office of President of the Security Council for this
month. I also welcome to the Council the representatives of Benin, the Libyan Arab Republic, Pakistan,
Panama and Romania. I am sure that in the months
to come we in the Security Council will have the
same co-operation from them as we had from their
predecessors, the representatives of the Byelorussian
SSR, Costa Rica, Iraq, Mauritania and the United
Republic of Cameroon.
76. It would be idle to say that this is an important
debate. It clearly is. It would be superfluous to say
that this procedural matter we are at present discussing is also of great importance. It clearly is. How
disappointing,
therefore, that at the outset of this
debate we should have been treated to a diatribe from
the representative of the Soviet Union which was at
the same time . misleading
and mischievous and
which was designed to confuse rather than to clarify.
The representative of the Soviet Union said-and
I
noted his words carefully as he said them-that
the
question of inviting the PLO to participate was decided
on 30 November, in the adoption. of resolution 381
(1975). That is, quite simply, untrue.
77. The position, as those of us who .were present
on that occasion and were members of the Council
at that time know, was this: The President made a
statement in which he said:
“Now, in accordance with the agreement reached
at the consultations between members of the Council, I shall make statement on behalf of the majority
of its members. As I said in my prefatory comments,
the text of the statement is to be found in document
S/ 11889. It reads as follows:
” ‘It is the understanding of the majority of the
Security Council that when it reconvenes on 12 January 1976 in accordance with paragraph (a) of resolution 381 (1975) the representatives of the Palestine
Liberation Organization will be invited to participate
in the debate.’ ” [Ibid.. pwa. 23.1
78. That. is in fact what the then President of the
Security Council said. I shall make three observations
on it. First of all, he himself described it as an opinion
of the majority. Secondly, the document itself uses the
phrase “It is the understanding of the majority of the
Security CounCil”. Thirdly, it says that the PLO “will
be invited to participate in the debate’*-not
that it has
been invited to participate in’ the debate, but that it
will be. It is,.with great rsepect to the representative
9 -A

of the Soviet Union, straining language, logic and
credulity to claim that a decision was taken on 30 November to invite the PLO to participate in this debate.
. There was not a decision, there was no resolution,
there was neither a motion nor a proposal, there was
no consensus, and, with respect to him, as he must
know, this is clear on the face of it in the record.
There is only one meeting of the Security Council
that can take a decision, and that is this meeting of
the Council, meeting in public. It cannot be done in
private, in informal consultations,
no matter how
much the representative of the Soviet Union might
wish otherwise.

Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto the architect of a friendship between our two countries which, on the basis of
mutual respect and a common pursuit of peace, has
deepened and grown with time. By Mr. Chou En-lai’s
death the people of Pakistan have lost a true and
steadfast friend.
82. Mr. President, I wish to thank you and the other
members of the Council who were good enough to
address to my delegation and those of the other new
members some very kind words of welcome. We
look forward during the period of our tenure to working
together with other members in the pursuit of our
common tasks. It is a matter of particular gratification
to my delegation, Sir, to begin its term on the Security
Council under the presidency of the representative of
a country with which my country has the closet and
friendliest relations. We know you for the strength of
your convictions, for your great ability and experience
and for your impartiality. These are good auguries for
the successful outcome of this meeting and those that
are to follow in the course of this month.

79. He accused us of wasting time. I shall now,
unlike the representative of the Soviet Union, turn
to the matter before us this afternoon. When I spoke
in the Council on 4 December [/859th meeting],
I
explained, on behalf of the United Kingdom, why my
delegation found it necessary to vote against the
proposal that was then before us concerning the
participation in the debate of a representative of the
PLO. The proposal we are now discussing is essentially
the same as that proposal, and my Government’s
attitude to the procedural issues involved has not
changed. In our view, the proposal constitutes an
undesirable and unnecessary departure from our
established practice. The provisional rules of procedure of the Council make a clear distinction between
the Eight of participation which may be enjoyed by a
State Member of the United Nations in certain circumstances and the facilities which may be made available
to other bodies and persons to make their views known
to the Council in an appropriate manner. We think
this is an important and valuable distinction. We think
it is very undesirable to ignore it or to allow it to be
blurred.

83. Pakistan was not a member of the Council in
December but we had the occasion to observe the
conduct of those meetings by our colleague the representative of the United Kingdom, Mr. Richard. I wish
to place here on record the respect and admiration
of my delegation for the skill, the aplomb and the
exemplary sense of propriety with which he discharged
his responsibilities.
84. I should now like to speak briefly about the
question at hand. My delegation has some difficulty
in grasping the reasons that have been advanced against
inviting the representatives of the PLO to participate
in our work. If the legitimate interests of the PLO are
recognized-and
we find that a rather curious, halfhearted phrase, “legitimate
interests”; one should
have thought that rights would come before interestshowever, if it does have legitimate interests, who
then is to come and express them for it?

80. However, we also have to take account of the fact
that, as was shown by the agreed statement made by
the President of the Council on 30 November 1975,
[/8.5&h nzeetirrg.
ptrrcr. 231, the majority
of the
members of the Council as it was then composed
took the view that the representatives of the PLO
should be invited to participate in the debate which we
are beginning today. That also seems to be the view of
the majority of the Council as it is now composed.
We have also taken into account the fact that the
decision taken by the Council itself on 4 December
[18591h nwcving]
showed that the procedural objections which my delegation entertained were not shared
by the majority of our colleagues on the Council. In
these circumstances my delegation does not think it
right to press these procedural objections to the point
of voting against the proposal, and therefore we will
abstain.

85. It was urged that it does not represent a State
and that it is not a Government, and that therefore we
would be doing violence to the principles and purposes of the Charter in inviting the PLO to come
and address us here and participate in our debates.
But the reason that the Palestinians have no Government and the reason that they have no State is
precisely why we are gathered here today. This is the
very subject-matter of our debate. We shall have more
to say about it when we begin our substantive discussions. Meanwhile I wish only to say that, far from
being a dangerous precedent, the invitation to the PLO
is a step towards correcting, after long years, a wrong
which was done to it, let us not forget, by this very
Organization-in
very different times and in very
different circumstances. It has been a travesty of
justice and negation of reality that the Council has so
far turned its face away from the issue of Palestine.
There are numerous decisions; which my neighbour

81. Mr. AKHUND
(Pakistan): Mr. President, I wish
first of all to associate my delegation with the tribute
you paid to the late Premier Chou En-lai of China
and the condolences you offered on behalf of the
Council. Mr. Chou En-lai was together with Prime
10

90:

and colleague from the Libyan Arab Republic has
cited, by the Organization cecognizing the status and
legitimacy of the PLO as the representative of the
Palestinian people, decisions taken in due and proper
form. This very Council invited the PLO to this table
and heard it last month. Pakistan considers that the
participation
of the PLO in the .debates is essential
and useful, and we shall vote in favour of the proposal.

“This statement, in any event, did not report a
bdecision but was merely a summation of the views
of some members of the Council. We do not consider that the extraneous ‘matters which have been
introduced into the Council’s actions today can have
the effect of changing either the negotiating framework, the basis for these negotiations”-referring
to the Middle East and Security Council resolution 242 (1967)-“or.
the participants .in them.”
[Ibid.]

86. Mr. MOYNIHAN
(United States of America):
May I first take the pleasant opportunity of welcoming
the representatives of our new members-the
Libyan
Arab ‘Republic, my brother from Panama, my colleagues from Romania and Pakistan, and to congratulate them on their maiden speeches, which were
set forth in a spirit of inquiry and goodwit!. I look
forward to the maiden speech of my colleague,
Mr. Boya from Benin, and I assure him that I have the
same expectations of him.

91. Obviously, on 30 November we were proceeding
in an orderly way, as has been the pride of the Security
Council. As a matter of comity, it had been the wish
of a majority in this case to record a view it had-and
there was never any objection in the Council to
members stating their views. Six members of the
Council did not share the view-at least some members; we did not vote, as members will recall. We
said: “We do not have to vote. This is not a decision,
but by all means do this. This is good. If that is what
you want and you would like to have that matter on
record, fine; that is your right and we are desirous of
having nations state their views here and. when there
are more than one. to state them as a group.” So
as a matter of comity, of good sense, we went forward.

87. It is necessary to intervene this second time,
and hopefully this last time, to share with you,
Mr. President, some of the alarm-I
think that is not
too strong a term-expressed
by your predecessor and
our colleague, the representative of the United Kingdom, alarm at the persistence of an assertion before
the Security Council, with which we dealt all morning
in informal consultations and with which it appears we
shall go on dealing, despite insurmountable
objections of language and of logic to this assertion. The
assertion, as will be clear, is the one made to the effect
that the Council decided on 30 November to invite
the PLO to our gatherings.

92. But now, suddenly, we are presented with a
proposition to the effect that we did not do what
everyone present thought we were doing but that we
did something quite different: that we bound ourselves, when we merely thought we were listening
to one another on a .matter of interest and obvious
relevance; that the procedures as we all understood
them at the time have somehow in retrospect changed;
that some kind of obligation arose from a process in
which no obligation was asserted and none perceivedat least none that I am aware of, and certainly not
at the time.

88. Mr. President, we did not. We did not-that
is
all-which
does not say that we cannot or that we
will not. No one for a moment hesitated in the
informal consultations this morning to say, as many
have said this afternoon, that we should proceed
to do so., Why this insistence that in fact we have
done so? What is this? Let me read to the Council
for.the record this afternoon what I read this morning,
an example of one representative’s
perception of
what took place on 30 November-our
perception of
30 November.
g9. If you recall, Mr. President,
then, as you do now. .I stated:

93. The representative of the United Kingdom said
of that assertion that it was designed to confuse rather
than to clarify. I would like to go beyond that and
ask if something larger is not in our presence and if
it ought not to be erased, because it is precisely the
matter which the United States addressed in its opening
statement.

you sat to my right

“My delegation wishes... to make clear that the
United States does not support the statement made
by you, Mr. President”-the
statement that the
majority wishes to extend this invitation when the
time comes. We were simply making the point that
we were not part of that majority, since by definition, some members were in the minority, if it was
not a unanimous decision-“indicating
that the PLO
will be invited to participate in the Januar.y session.
This statement, in any event, did not report a decision but was merely a summation of the views of
some members of the Council.” [/856tk nrerting.
prrrvr.

That was my language. I shall repeat it:

94. Some may wonder why this matter was confined
to procedural questions and not to substantive ones.
The answer in the first instance is that there is a
procedural matter before us. But there is a second
answer, and that comes out of the experience of two
centuries of constitutional
government which is that
process is everything.; that when procedure is destroyed liberty is destroyed; that the way one goes
about affairs of government is the essence of the
outcome. It is not an aspect of governance; it is the
essence of government. The term “due process” in
American jurisprudence and constitutional
law is the

118.1
I1

single, central concept, as we understand it, of the rule
of law of constitutional government.
95. And so, when the United States speaks from the
experience of two centuries, in this our bicentennial
year, of the “erosion of procedure” we speak of a
matter of fundamental concern to us. We speak of a
matter concerning which we may at least be said to
speak with the experience of two centuries.
96. What is going on in regard to this matter of the
sudden appearance amongst us of t,he proposition that
an informal, friendly statement or arrangement that
suited the purpose and that was contrived to suit a
certain circumstance, and did so well at’the time,‘in
retrospect acquires enormous, ominous, foreboding,
alarming proportions? I will tell you. What we may
very well have to come to judge and are seeing here
today is the commencement
of an effort to subvert
the open and public proceedings of the Security Council and replace them by the rule of an extra-legal,
semi-secret uppurut,
which is inaccessible to the
membership of the United Nations and inaccessible
to the processes of inquiry. There is a term for this;
the term is “totalitarianism”.
97. In the nineteenth
century, the great Swiss
historian Jacob Burckhardt said that the twentieth
century would be “l’age des terribles simplificateurs”
-with
apologies to my cousin from France for my
pronunciation-the
age of the terrible simplifiers, the
age’ of those who took complex reality and asserted
it to be anything but, crushed it into a slogan, stamped
it *into a phrase. This has happened under different
names in the t,wentieth century, with different slogans
in different regions, but always the same technique
is involved: the transfer of real authority and true
power from the established constitutional
centres,
institutions,
organs, out of the public light and the
fresh air of exchange, inquiry and review, into the
dark recesses of totalitarian conspiracy.
98. It is not the nineteenth century where one can
look forward with some uncertainty to such a thing
happening. We approach the latter part of the twentieth
century where it has happened in nation after nation;
people after people have succumbed to it. We have
seen the constitutional
organs of the world subverted
by-this process in every region of the world among
peoples of every condition and peoples of every
aspiration. And the most damning thing said about
the process is that it works, it does work, it has
succeeded; liberties have disappeared the world over,
and procedure has been eroded and institutions have
been sucked dry of their life and ended as empty
shells.
99.’ My Secretary of State has spoken of the prospect
that ,this institution will end as an empty shell. And
we speak out of concern; we speak out of a desire
that this should not happen and out of the perception
that it may be happening.’ And so when we raise the

question of procedure I would hope that it be understood that we raise not a peripheral matter but what to
us is a central matter, and we raise it in the context
of this baffling, this alarming assertion of what I have
described as a proposition which faces insurmountable
objections of logic, and of language and, as.8 matter of
record, an assertion which my colleague from the
United Kingdom has chosen to ‘describe in even
stronger terms. This worries us.
100. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretution
from Russicrn): I befieve that the
present procedural debate should be postponed until
after the vote, since the vote will confirm whether
indeed the question of inviting the representatives of
the PLO to participate in today’s meeting was decided
or not. That would be. the best course-to
seek confirmation by the majority of the Council of the position
it took at its meeting. Therefore, Mr. President, why
do we not proceed to the vote? The vote will show who
is right and who is wrong.
I .I
101. As for the lecture we were given on liberty,
democracy and totalitarianism,
I of course agree with
the professor, who lectured us to the effect that totalitarianism is a terrible thing indeed. But no less terrible
is gangsterism in politics.
102. Mr. MOYNIHAN
(United States of America):
It is time for an element of seriousness in these
proceedings. Totalitarianism
is bad; gangsterism is
worse. But as my colleague and friend from the Soviet
Union will no doubt agree, capitulationism is the worst
of all-a prospect which we must be careful to avoid,
and in fact which I do not propose to succumb to.
103. Mr. President, ‘I agree with you as follows: if
we now proceed to vote, it will demonstrate that we
did not take a decision on 30 November, because had
we done so there would be no need to vote. The fact
that we are going to ‘vote is proof positive of the
fact that it is necessary to vote: If it is necessary to
vote, it is because no vote has been taken. If no vote
has been taken, it is concluded, as-it must be, that. it
was not taken on 30 November, or on any other day.
A vote proves the necessity of voting because of the
necessity to reach adecision which has not been taken.
104. The PRESIDENT:
The question on which the
Council will now‘ vote is’ the following: whether the
representative of the PLO shall be invited to participate
in the debate on the item included in the ‘agenda on
the basis which I outlined earlier.
A wtc

W~I.Staken

by shk

of hrmds.

,’

,

In @+ollr: Benin, China, Guyana,’ Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan; Panama, Romania, Sweden;
Unionof Soviet Socialist Republics, United Republic
of Tanzania.
I
Ag:crir;st: United States of America.
x

of Great

tinian problem. Is it not normal that they should be
able to express their views on a matter which involves
their own rights? It was in this spirit that the French
authorities recently decided to authorize the opening
in Paris of a PLO information and liaison offtce.

105. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative
of France, who wishes to explain his vote after the
vote.

111. But the rules of the Security Council are
unambiguous: outside the framework of rule 39, which,
according to the actual terms used by the President
does not apply to the invitation extended to the PLO,
only representatives of States, whether Members or
non-members of the Organization, may be heard by
the Security Council. Therefore,
notwithstanding
whatever relations we may have established with the
PLO, we must recognize the fact that it is not, nor
does it claim to be, a State.

;4bstcrinin~: France, Italy, United Kingdom
Britain and Northern Ireland.

106.

Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (intprprcJtcrtic~~1
Mr. President, my delegation can only
rejoice at seeing you presiding over our work at this
time when the Council is embarking on a particularly
diffrculi month. Your outstanding talents, which are so
well known to us, will surely be brought to bear in the
complex. and sensitive matters before the Council.
I should like to extend to you my warmest congratulations and to assure you of my delegation’s full support.

Jrtm

Frcwch):

112. The abstention of my.delegation therefore can be
explained by the status which the Council, contradicting its rules of procedure, is attempting to confer
upon the PLO in our work. Our abstention does not
call into question either the role which .the French
authorities recognize as being that of the representatives of the PLO or the fact that those representatives
must be allowed to speak during the very important
debate which our Council is beginning.

107. Our workin December, too, placed a particularly
d~ifftcult burden on the President. The representative
of the United Kingdom, ourfriend Mr. Richard, proved
to be the man of the hour, as all of us had expected,
and 1 cannot fail to ‘extend to him the deep gratitude
of my delegation. His qualities as a diplomat and his
parliamentary experience were valuable assets in the
Council.
.- -

113. Mr. VINCI
(Italy):
Mr. President,
before
explaining my delegation’s vote, I should like to
begin, in this first meeting of the Security Council
in 1976, by saying that I find it both meaningful and
rewarding for all of us here that this series of meetings
has begun today under your presidency. We all
recognize in you a distinguished and talented representative of the United Republic of Tanzania, a leading
country in Africa and highly respected as such. At the
same time, we see you as Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim,
one of the strongest voices of Africa, of the
emerging countries and of all they stand for. ,Our
respect and our esteem are strengthened by empathy
with the personal ‘human touch which you put into
your mission, a mission inspired mainly by a deeprooted commitment
to the ideals of the Organization
and in particular to those ideals that relate to, the
political, social and economic emancipation of under-,
privileged and emerging societies. So we know how
fortunate we are to have you presiding over this
most important debate and the discussion of other
issues on the agenda of the Security Council this
month. For your part, you may rely on the full cooperation of my delegation in order to bring to fruition
your gifts in carrying out your high responsibilities.

108. As we meet today in this first meeting of the
year, we note with regret the absence of the retiring
members. ,For two years we had the benefit of the
co-operation and activity of the representatives of
Mauritania, the United Republic of Cameroon, Costa
Rica, Iraq and the Byelorussian SSR.. We shall miss
them for their valuable and outstanding contribution
to the Council’s work. However, we are pleased to
welcome the five new members, who, for the most
part. are experts in the United Nations and doubtless
are familiar to all within this hall. We have no doubt
whatsoever that they will immediately
contribute to
our debates the knowledge and experience which they
have demonstrated on other occasions, and at times
even here.
109. I do,not wish to go into the substance of the
matter before us without first saying that my delegation unreservedly associates itself with the excellent
and .very apt statement which you, Mr. President,
made with regard to the sad death of the outstanding
Premier of China; Mr. Chou En-lai. We associate
ourselves also with the condolences which you
addressed to the Chinese delegation.

114. I could not proceed without once again paying
my deep respect and admiration to Mr. Ivor Richard
of the United Kingdom, who presided over the Council during the month of December. The results we
achieved during three very busy weeks speak for
themselves. The esteem and prestige which the British
representative rightly enjoys in United Nations circles
for his global vision of the world, for his political
instinct and his siraightforwardness
were so widely

110. To its great regret, my delegation was unable
to associate itself with the proposal just adopted by
the Security Council, It is obviously not the principle
of having the Council hear representatives of the PLO
which explains our position. On many occasions the
French authorities have emphasized how desirable it
was, in their view, to have the voice of the Palestinians
heard in international. debates dealing with the Pales13

known that we took those positive results for granted.
However, as a fellow member of the European Community I wish to say how much I rejoiced in the
. success of his presidency.

Council in resolution 381 (1975) of 4 December, does
not require a lengthy explanation. In fact I made our
position clear on previous occasions, namely, on
30 November [ihid.] during the debate on the renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer force and on 4 December [/859rh mec~ina],
when the Council met on the issue of the Israeli air
raids in Lebanon. In order to spare the Council’s time
after so many statements, I shall simply refer to the
statements I made on those occasions.

115. I should now like to extend a cordial welcome
to the five States-Benin,
the Libyan Arab Republic,
Panama, Pakistan and Romania-which
have now
joined the Council. Italy enjoys friendly and very fruitful relations with all these countries. I wish to assure
their representatives-among
whom I am glad to
notice some good friends and colleagues of past
association and partnership-that
the Italian delegation
will at all times offer them its full co-operation in our
common work and responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. I have no doubt
that their participation will contribute to the enrichment
of our work and to making it more constructive.

120. To sum up my delegation’s position, we do not
have reservations as to the participation of the PLO
in the present debate. Our reservations concern the
terms under which this invitation is to be extended.
We still have doubts about those terms, since they do
not seem to our delegation to be consistent with the
provisions of the Charter and the rules of procedure
as they now stand. This cannot be construed as
indicative of less interest on the part of my delegation
in the debate starting today. On the contrary, as I
stated twice on 8 December [/862nd m~~eting], we look
forward to a debate which could produce a very comprehensive review of the Middle East situation
including the Palestinian question.

116. If I may insert a note of historic value not only
for my country, I would add that the current presence
of the Libyan Arab Republic and Italy on the Security
Council could not perhaps better epitomize the great
changes which have taken place in the world community. It is a significant event, and I should like to
share the pride which our Libyan colleague Mr. Kikhia
must rightly feel in taking his seat as the representative
of a member of the Council.

121. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the
decisions taken by the Security Council, I now invite
the representatives of Egypt, Jordan, the Syrian Arab
Republic and the Palestine Liberation Organization to
take places at the Council table.

117. This meeting also calls for a tribute from us to
the five members which ended their term on the Council on 3 I December-the
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Costa Rica, Iraq, Mauritania and the United
Republic of Cameroon. Each of their delegations
assisted the Council with its specific experience and
political orientation resulting from its geographical
situation, its culture, its past and its present concerns
and directions. Imbued with the sense of responsibility
flowing from membership in the main organ entrusted
with the maintenance
of international
peace and
security, each of their permanent representatives
together with their delegations in one way or another
tried in this chamber to find solutions which, in their
‘view, reflected the best interests of the international
community. The Security Council owes them a debt
of gratitutde for their two years of service on the
Council.

122. The PRESIDENT:
Because ‘of the limited
number of places available at the Security Council
table, I shall invite the representatives of the United
Arab Emirates and Qatar to take the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber, on the
usual understanding that they will be invited to take a
place at the Council table when it is their turn to
address the Council.

118. I wish also to associate my delegation and
myself to the eloquent tribute which you, Mr. President, paid to Premier Chou En-lai, a great statesman,
one of the chief figures of our times, an outstanding
politician and a leader of the People’s Republic of
China. I wish to associate myself also with the condolences which you conveyed to the representative
of China.

123. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council will
now begin its examination of the question placed on
its agenda pursuant to its resolution 381 (1975).
124. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic): Before ,
the Council begins its discussion of the substance of
the item before it, I should like to make a very brief
statement. First, I should like to say that it was with
profound grief that we learned of the passing away of
Premier Chou En-lai. On behalf of the delegation of
the Libyan Arab Republic, I wish to express our deep

119. I now turn to the explanation of my delegation’s vote. The position taken by the Italian delegation
on the invitation to the PLO to participate in the debate
on the Middle East problem including the Palestinian
question, following the decision taken by the Security
14

Libyan Arab Republic at the fact that the first meetings
of the Security Council in 1976 will be held under the
presidency of an eminent African brother. I am convinced, Sir, that thanks to your long political experience and your high personal qualities you will succeed
in directing the Council’s proceedings during the month
of January to the general satisfaction. You can always
count on my fullest co-operation and support towards
the successful discharge of yaur high and delicate
responsibilities.

and heartfelt condolences on the death of that great
statesman and eminent son of Asia to the representative of the People’s Republic of China and, through
him, to the delegation, Government, Party and people
of the People’s Republic of China, as well as to the
family of the deceased.
125. As this is the first meeting of the Security Council
in the new year, I should like to extend my best
wishes to you personally, Mr. President, and to all the
members of the Council. I should like also to express
to you, Mr. President, and to the members of the
Council my sincere gratitude for the generous words
of welcome addressed to the delegation of the Libyan
Arab Republic as we take up our responsibilities
as
members of this important organ of the United Nations.
Those words of welcome constitute encouragement
for the policy of peace, co-operation and understanding
among nations which is ours, as well as for the
tenacious and continued struggle of the Libyan people
against imperialism, colonialism, racism and exploitation in the world.

130. I should like to express my appreciation also to
the Secretary-General
for his great efforts in the
interest of the causes of humanity and peace and
towards consolidating the role of the United Nations
at ‘a time when its burdens are increasing and when it
must face the difficulties and conspiracies of which
it is a target on the part of those who want the Organization to remain an exclusive arena of their influence
and manipulations,
as well as an instrument serving
their ambitions. We reiterate on this occasion our
indefatigable support for the Secretary-General in his
struggle to preserve the independence and the effectiveness of the United Nations within the framework
of full respect for the decisions of the majority.

126. Since this is the first time that the Libyan Arab
Republic has participated in the deliberations of the
Security Council as one of its members, may I be
permitted on behalf of my Government and people
to convey our sincere and deep gratitude to those
friendly States which voted in favour of our election
to membership of the Security Council, and especially
to the members of the Organization of African Unity
for the confidence they expressed in my country by
lending us their unanimous support and endorsing
our nomination to membership of the Council.

131. We come to the Security Council without any
pretensions. We know that the Libyan Arab Republic is a small, developing country. History teaches us.
however, that small nations can and must play a very
important role in international politics and within the
Organization. Especially now, in the so-called era of
detente, they can play their role and influence events
individually or collectively, in spite of the fact that they
are threatened, pressed and blackmailed by some big
Powers. Recently a super-Power was reported to be
aiming punitive cuts at nations that have sided against
its policy in the United Nations. The reported cutback
in aid involves in some cases food and humanitarian
relief. According to The Nru* Yorli Tiuws of 9 January,
agreements on development aid to two non-permanent
members of the Security Council have been postponed because of their votes in the General Assembly
to condemn Zionism and because of their opposition to
certain positions on Korea. Other nations, which
supported that super-Power in the United Nations,
will be given additional aid. No comment can be made
on that cynical approach except to deplore it and to
affirm to big Powers that the policy of punishing the
small countries because they are small and to show
them that their behaviour in the Organization is not
cost-free is cynical. dangerous, immoral and, finally,
counter-productive.

127. In assuming membership in the Security Council, we in the Libyan Arab Republic are conscious of
the privilege and the heavy responsibility which will
be ours. We shall work in close co-operation with
you, Mr. ,President, and with our other colleagues
in the Council, and I hope we shall be equal to the duty.
I am certain also that this new experience will be a
most rewarding one. It is indeed a high point of our
involvement in the work of the United Nations.
128. I look forward with optimism and confidence to
our work in the future, including the weeks ahead. As
a representative of the third world, the Libyan Arab
Republic has a particular and keen interest in the solution of those problems before the Security Council
that have their origin in imperialism,
colonialism.
racism and the economic exploitation of our nations.
‘May I add that we are aware of the special responsibility we have assumed as one of the three countries
from Africa and the only Arab member in the Council. We do not represent only the Libyan Arab Republic; we are justly expected to represent here the special
interests of our African continent as well as the larger
Afro-Arab community.
129. I cannot let this
expressing the satisfaction

132. Our delegation, during the debate in the General
Assembly, warned against this new so-called get-tough
approach. However, we are confident that in .our
fight for freedom and justice against imperialism,
racism and exploitation
we shall stand together in
solidarity and resist any kind of pressure from any
big or super-Power or group of Powers. We must be
very cautious and not remain silent in the face of this

occasion pass without
of the delegation of the
I5

aggressive policy of intimidation.
As Mr. Moynihan
said moments ago, and I agree 100 per cent with him,
that capitulation is the worst of all. It is a sign of the
times that super-Powers talk of capitulation.

testifies to the profound and widespread international
understanding of the Palestine question. They reflect
the concern of the majority of the States of the world
with rendering justice to .the Palestinian people and
with responding affirmatively to their national rights.
It is for the attainment of these national rights that the
Palestinian people have resorted to armed struggle.

133. In connexion with the discussion of the item on
the agenda, my delegation will express its views during
the following days in the course of the debate.
However, my delegation would like, from the outset,
to stress some important points, and so I ask you,
Mr. President, to allow me to speak after the statement
of our brother, the representative of the PLO.

140. However, I should note the deliberate absence
of Israel from this discussion. Why is. Israel not
present? What is its pretext for boycott’ng the Council’s meeting? Israel is absent simply because :the
representatives of the people of Palestine are invited
to .take ‘part in these deliberations.. This is symboljc
of who is anxious to participate in the process of
peace-making and who is deliberately eager to frustrate
the will of the Council.

134. Mr. MOYNIHAN
(United States of America):
Mr. President, could I make a point of order.
135. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative
of the United States on a point of order..

141. Moreover, the Council’s decision constitutes a
basic and imperative
step along the path of confronting the facts as the Council prepares itself to
issue a just decision, the decisive resolution for which
our people has long waited. Our people has been
waiting for such a just decision for over 28 years,
during which our people suffered anguish, deprivation, exile and oppression. This Council’s decision,
in our view, is a courageous international. recognition
of the fact that whoever wishes to search for a serious
resolution of the Middle East conflict will have to
begin with its root cause and heart, which, is the
question of Palestine. Had there not been the question
of Palestine, all the wars our region has suffered, in
1948, in 1956, in 1967 and in 1973 would never have
been; there would never have been the constant tensions which threaten further wars. In short, had there
not been a question of Palestine there would not have
been what is mistakenly termed “the Middle East
crisis”.

136. Mr. MOYNIHAN:
On a point of order, the term
is “capitulationism”.
It is a failing said to have been
revealed in a fourteenth-century
Chinese novel, The
Wutcr

Mcrrgin

.

137. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the‘representative of
the United States, although I think that that was not
a point of order but a point of clarification. To begin
our discussion of the item on the agenda, I now call
on the first speaker, the representative of the Palestine
Liberation Organization.
138. Mr. KHADDOUMI
(Palestine Liberation Organization): Mr. President, since this is my first appearance before the Security Council, I should like to
express our warm. congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency. We are fully confident that
you, as the distinguished representative of a great
African country that steadfastly struggled for the
extension of human freedom, equality, justice .and
independence for oppressed people, will chair the
session and guide the discussions objectively and most
competently.
Your broad experience,
your total
familiarity
with
international
questions,
your
championship of liberation movements, and your wellknown attributes of originality and nobility of purpose
constitute an important resource in providing guidance
to the Council .as it responsibly deliberates issues
involved in one of the most dangerous contemporary
political crises known as “the Middle East crisis”.

142. Although the invitation of the Council comes
after very long and painful years, it is better late than
never. For without addressing the essence of the
“crisis” with which the Council is dealing, it would be
useless to attempt to find its solution, and consequently
there’would be no peace in the Middle East or, perhaps,
in the world. The Council’s invitation to the PLO
to participate in the detiberations of the Council is
right and just, but it is also based on the serious
search for peace in our region, where peace is most
threatened.

139. May I be permitted, Mr. President, to express
to you and to the representatives of friendly Member
States in the Council our appreciation for the efforts
you have exerted to enable the people of Palestine
to exercise its legal right to speak for itself. Our
people’s case, the question of Palestine, is the essence,
the core of the crisis with which the Council has been
concerned and of which it is endeavouring to reach a
just settlement. The Council’s decision to invite the
PLO to participate in the discussions of the Council,
combined with the totality of the resolutions adopted
by the General Assembly over the past two years,

143. The question of Palestine, its background,
details and causes, is no longer a strange and unfamiliar
question to the United Nations. Although the sinister
design against the land and people of Palestine was
formally initiated in 1917 with the issuance- of the
Balfour Declaration,’
the tragedy of Palestinian dispersion commenced right here, in the United Nations,
in the aftermath of the recommendation
to partition
Palestine in 1947,* which was unjust and infamous.
Since then-that
was over 28 years ago-our case has
been in suspension; it has been awaiting someone
I6

‘.

who would deal with it justly and fairly, someone who
would possess the moral and human courage to reaiize
justice and to t&slate it into reality.

,conse&ently
opened for the immigration
European Jewish settlers.

of alien

148. That w’as the beginning. That was the beginning
of the sinister scheme against our people, which had
lived its entire life ‘on its national homeland. Our
people lived in all of Palestine: in its cities and
villages. We had built mosques and churches; we
had farmed the land; we had established its workshops
and factories. We lived in the land, respectful of its
heritage, and we looked forward to contributing, like
all peoples of the world, to the enrichment of humanity.
Our people were in the land when civilization
was
born, long before any Zionist had entertained the
idea of Israel. We confronted the sinister designs on
our land. Our people confronted the Zionist onslaught
and British colonialism,
which then sponsored and
sustained that onslaught. Our country witnessed continual revolutions: in 1920, in 1929, in 1936 and in
1947, to mention only those which occurred during the
British colonial administration.
The end of the Second
World War considerably weakened the old colonial
empires, whose power began to recede, and the
Mandates System, which was established by the
League of Nations, lost its viability. After the: Second
World War, the United Nations was founded and was
entrusted with the task of dealing with the Palestine
question.

144. Throughout these years the Zionist enemy, in
collaboration
with its imperialist
supporters, was
betting that with time the tragedy and the sinister
design would become a LIP fnc.ro political reality with
which the Palestinian people would come to terms and
to which they would capitulate. For half a century
various malicious attempts were made to liquidate the
people of Palestine- and dispose of our land. Acts of
extinction, through either genocide or assimilation
and emigration,
have been attempted;
all those
&tempts failed, and, nothing weakened the resolve of
our people. The struggle and the perseverance of our
Palestinian people, supported by our brothers and
friends, have voided this artificial political reality which
is based on aggrtssion and treachery; Despairing of a
peaceful’ solution, we resorted to armed struggle to
attain our national rights and to put an end to injustice
and aggression. The Security
Council
should,
therefore, consider the oniy remaining alternative:
-namely, to recognize our people’s national inalienable
rights and to assist it irrrealizing its national aspirations.
145.’ Where do you wish us to begin? Shall we begin
with the initiation of the sinister design in 1917? Or
shall ,we begin with the Palestinian tragedy? Shall
we begin with the iniquitous Balfour Declaration by
which those who did not own the land of Palestine
promised it to those who had no right to it? Or shall
we begin with the unjust recommendation
of the
General Assembly on 29 November 1947 to partition
Palestine?

149. At the request of the British Government, which
exercised the Mandate over Palestine, the SecretaryGenral convened a special session of the General
Assembly on 15 May 1947. The General Assembly
established a Special Committee to investigate and
report on the question. The Special Committee presented its report3 and recommended the partitioning of
Palestine; a minority report4 recommended the independence of Palestine and its unity and envisaged the
possibility of all Palestinians living in aunified Palestine
on a footing of equality. When that report was presented at the second session of the General Assembly,
the Assembly, many of whose members were subjected
to extreme pressure and intimidation
by the United
States Government and the Zionist movement, recommended the partitioning of Palestine and adopted the
infamous resolution 181 (II) on 29 November 1947.

146. We shall not dwell on the joint British-Zionist
scheme to usurp Palestine; that scheme has been
suficiently exposed and condemned. We shall concentrate instead on the Palestinian tragedy, since it is
a consequence of the joint action of imperialism and
Zionism. a tragedy which came about within the
framework of the United Nations, which recommended
the partitioning of Palestine.
147. The First World War ended with the defeat of
the Ottoman ~Empiie and the triumph of European
colonialism in the Middle East. The European Powers
decided to partition the entire Arab provinces of the
Ottoman Empire in accordance with the infamous
Sykes-Picot Agreement. Palestine became a distinct
potit.ical unit inhabited by its rightful Arab population.
At that time Palestine had a population of approximately 700,009 people;of whom 55,000 were indigenous and European Jews. Palestine was placed under
the, Mandate of Britain which was-committed to implement the Zionist scheme. Britain, in co-operation with
the Zionist movement, began to undertake effective
measures to create the appropriate. political, social
and econotiic circumstances in which to establish a
Jewish national home in a land which it did not own
and to which the Zionists had no right. Palestine was

150. It is axiomatic that the United Nations did not
have the right in I947 to partition our country against
the wishes of its citizens, just as it does not today
possess the right to partition any country in the world.
I wish to add that the General Assembly did not discuss
the question of Palestine at the request of the Paiestinian people but rather debated the issue at the express
request of the British Mandatory Pqwer. The General
Assembly, by its decision, did not resolve that the
Jews should be independent in Palestine but rather
determined that Palestine was to be partitioned into
two States, one Arab and the other Jewish.
151. The United Nations did not deem fit;after
it
had adopted its resolution, to inquire into the wishes
17

_.‘,

I,.

of the Palestinian people and did not permit them
to express their will. The United Nations, & fuc.tc>,
permitted the Zionist movement to implement and
.transcend the limitations of that decision, a task which
it effected through the brute force of its gangs which
had been armed by the Mandatory Power. It was
natural that our people should reject this unjust resolution, whose effects we continue to experience in the
form of exile, dispersion, oppression and wars.

Mediator to Palestine to undertake political initiatives,
the most important of which was to encourage the
search for a peaceful settlement of the future of
Palestine. Count Folke Bernadotte was chosen for
this task.
156. Count Bernadotte carried out his mission. He
visited Palestine, ascertained the facts and finally submitted a report’ proposing the modification
of the
frontiers of the proposed Jewish State; the new
modifications
restored the role which Palestine had
historically served, namely, that of a bridge between
the Arab east and the Arab west. The Zionists,
enraged by the report, decided to liquidate the
Mediator; he was eventually assassinated by Zionist
gangs in Jerusalem. This act was condemned by the
Security Council, which asked the Government of
Israel to apprehend the criminals.

152. The Zionist demand traditionally
had been for
an exclusive Jewish State; but the recommendation
for the partition of Palestine envisaged a Jewish State
which had a population of 498,000 Jews and 497;OOO
Moslem and Christian Arabs. The Arab State, on the
other hand, was to have 10,000 Jews and 725,000
Moslem and Christian Arabs. From this, one important
conclusion is inescapable: the real object of the partition resolution was the dismemberment
of Palestine,
not the separation of its people. And if we keep in
mind that the Jews of Palestine at that time did not
own more than 6 per cent of the total land area, then
we realize the degree of injustice, illegality and harm
the partition
resolution entailed. That resolution
entailed the transfer of about 55 per cent of Palestine
to the owners of about 6 per cent. Within the projected Jewish State, Jews had title to no more than
9 per cent of the land. These facts underlie our people’s
rejection of the partition proposal.

157. The Security Council reconvened on I5 July
1948 [33&h martins] and adopted resolution 54 (1948)
establishing the second truce. That was followed by
Council resolution 62 (1948) adopted on I6 November 1948 [38lsf /n~vting] and which called for a truce
in all parts of Palestine in preparation for a move
towards lasting peace. That resolution led to the
General Armistice Agreements signed in Rhodes in
1949,6 with the United Nations representative, the
late Mr. Ralph Bunche, acting as Mediator. The
General Armistice Agreements clearly stipulated that
the demarcation lines agreed upon were dictated by
military considerations and thus were military, not
political, boundaries, and in no way prejudiced Arab
territorial claims or the rights of the Palestinian people.

153. It was natural for the Zionist movement subsequently to declare the establishment of its State.
It was natural for it, as a colonial racist movement,
to undertake all measures designed to expel the
Palestinians who came under its military control and
to utilize the most vicious forms of terrorism to compel
them to depart. By doing so even then it was defying
the will of the United Nations and all principles of
law and justice. As a matter of fact, since it was
established, Israel has not committed
itself to the
implementation
of any decision or resolution concerning the Palestine question, including the partition
resolution.

158. The General Assembly had previously debated
and expressed its appreciation of Count Bernadotte’s
report. It adopted resolution 194 (1II)‘on 11 December 1948. That resolution affirmed Count Bernadotte’s
orientation regarding the necessity of modifying the
partition resolution to take into account the rights of
the Palestinian Arabs. It entrusted this task to the
United Nations Conciliation
Commission .for Palestine, composed of France, Turkey and the United
States of America. In paragraph 11, the resolution
called for the repatriation of all Palestinian refugees
to their homes and property and for the compensation
of those who did not wish to return. Instructions
were issued to the Conciliation
Commission
to
facihtate the repatriation of the Palestinians.

154. On I April 1948, the Security Council held a
special meeting to discuss the situation in Palestine
[277th nre~tina] and subsequently
adopted resolution 44 (1948), which requested the Secretary-General,
in accordance with Article 20 of the Charter, to convene a special session of the General Assembly in order
to consider further the question of the future government of Palestine.

159. When the Conciliation
Commission
held its
meetings at Lausanne in April of 1949, Israei’ had not
yet succeeded in joining the United Nations. On
12 May 1949, the representatives of Israel, Egypt,
Syria, Lebanon and Jordan signed documents, known
as the Lausanne Protocols, which states that the
delegations of the Arab States and Israel accepted
the Commission’s
proposal to use the partition map
proposed by the United Nations as a basis for discussion with the Commission.’

155. It should be recalled that Security Council
resolution 44 (1948) took into account that the General
Assembly resolution recommending
the partitioning
of Palestine entailed injustice to the Palestinian Arabs
and that therefore it was necessary to revise it either
entirely or partially to realize the interests of the
Arabs. However, the Assembly did hoId a special
session at the request of the Council and resolved in
resolution 186 (S-2) to dispatch a United Nations
18

160. After the signing of the Lausanne Protocols,
Israel’s application for membership in the United
Nations was considered. Although the General Assembly expressed misgivings at Israel’s request, it
nevertheless accepted its application in its resolution 273 (III) of 1 I May 1949, reaffirming first General
Assembly resolution 181 (II), and secondly, General
Assembly resolution 194 (III).
I.
d$ :
161. Not only did the United Nations fail to assume
its responsibility of compelling Israel,to carry out its
resolutions but, more disastrously, ih:began gradually
to omit altogether the question of Palestine from the
agenda of the General Assembly. Instead, it began to
substitute the discussion of the report of the Commissioner-General
of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees ‘in the Near
East for the debate on the question z.afPalestine and
thereby conveyed the harmful impression. that the
question had become either one of displaced persons
or a matter of disputed frontiers between the adjacent
Arab States and Israel. Such a depiction of the question of Palestine was a blatant attempt to ignore the
existence of the Palestinian people, its national rights,
its right to self-determination,
independence and
sovereignty, and even the resolution@. of the United
Nations-unjust
as some of these were.

of confronting them, and for our rejection of the
cease-fire and, finally, for our determination to carry
out our armed struggle.
165. We resumed our armed struggle on 1 January
1965, when our people despaired of peacefully restoring
their national rights and sovereignty and declared that
armed struggle was the only means to achieve the
Iiberation of our homeland and to attain our national
rights.
166. We are more aware of and experienced with our
Zionist opponent. We know its expansionist objectives
which are based on its racist, backward ideology.
We warned all concerned that Israel would ignore and
try to subvert any United Nations resolutions limiting
its colonialism and expansionism. Although some of the
States of the region committed themselves to resolution 242 (1967), Israel ignored it, as it had ignored
prior resolutions. Thus, another war in the Middle
East became inevitable to compel Israel to evacuate
its occupation forces from Arab lands; hence, the
1973 war.
167. Subsequently, the Security Council met and
adopted resolution 338 (1973) which, like its predecessor, was devoid of any reference to the question
of Palestine and ignored the national ,rights of our
people. Our people rejected it, because its intention
was to deal only with the effects of the 1967 aggression against the Arab States. It in no way refers to
our national rights or to our existence in Palestine
prior to 1967. Additionally,
that resolution asked the
Arab States to recognize the boundaries of a State
established in a land which, originally and according
to the principles of international law, was the property
of the Palestinian people. It is surprising and shocking
that the Arab States should be asked to recognize
an entity which contravenes even resolution 181 (II),
on the basis of which it was established, and notwithstanding the damage done by this resolution to the
rights of the Palestinian people.

162. Palestinian exile continued within the framework
of the Rhodes Armistice Agreements until 1956, when
Israel participated in the tripartite aggression against
Egypt and the Gaza Strip. Israel thus militarily
occupied additional Palestinian land. The Security
Council in its resolution 119 (1956) of 31 October
1956 dealt with that act of aggression. Because of the
exercise of the veto by a permanent .member, the
Security Council was unable to discharge its responsibility to adopt a resolution calling for the immediate
withdrawal of the aggressors. Therefore, the Security
Council requested the General Assembly to convene
an emergency special session to deal with Israel’s
aggression and to adopt appropriate resolutions calling
for the withdrawal of the military forces of the aggressors.

168. Did the Security Council forget, when it adopted
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), that Egypt, Syria
and Jordan were in a state of war with Israel before
June 1967 and before October 1973, a state of war which
had prevailed since 1948 and which was caused by the
serious Zionist-imperialist
attempt to liquidate the
existence of Palestine and its national inalienable rights
to independence and sovereignty? Was the Council
unaware of the fact that the armistice lines of 1949
were military and not political? Was the Council
unaware of the fact that Israel had earlier occupied
more than 60 per cent of the land of the Paletinian
Arab State for which the United Nations called in the
partition resolution-resolution
181 (II)-on
the basis
of which Israel was accepted as a Member of the
Organization?
Was the Council unaware that this
earlier aggression and occupation
prevented the
Palestinian people from exercising its right to selfdetermination
and establishing its independent State
in its homeland?

163. In June 1967, Israel launched its next aggression
and occupied what remained of Palestine, as well
as Sinai and the Golan. The Security Council met to
study the Middle East crisis but ignored the heart
and essence of the conflict, namely, the question of
Palestine. It adopted resolution 242 (1967). which
addressed itself to the so-called “Middle East crisis”.
That resolution dealt neither with the Palestine question nor with the national rights of the Palestinian
people to independence and sovereignty.
164. Since then it has become commonplace to speak
of the “Middle East crisis”, with the intent of camouflaging, obscuring and evading the essential question,
which is the question oi Palestine. This was the
reason for our people’s rejection of that resolution,
which compounds the errors and the injustice instead
19

169. The Security Council undoubtedly recalls the
considerations which governed Israel’s acceptance as
a Member of the United Nations in accordance with
resolution 273 (III), Israel’s pledge before the United
Nations Conciliation
Commission
at Lausanne in
1949, and its signature of the Lausanne Protocols.

to self-determination
and to sovereignty on their
national soil;--TTrirdly,
that the 1967 war was not in
reality a conflict over regional frontiers between the
Arab States and Israel: it was one of the inevitable
results of the continued Israeli usurpation of Palestinian land and violation
of Palestinian
rights;Fourthly, that resolutions of the Arab summit conference at Rabat and General Assembly resolution
3237 (XXIX) deeisively confirmed the PLO as the
representative of the Palestinian people.

170. The Council undoubtedly
also recalls that
Israel’s so-called declaration of independence based
itself,on the partition resolution. According to international law, recognition of the existence of.States and
of regimes is a prerogative of.sovereign States which
cannot be imposed by international resolutions.

176. The resolutions of the General Assembly at
its thirtieth session-resolutions
3375 (XXX) and 3376
(XxX)-have
&&eased our hope of reaching a just
solution through the United Nations. We trust that
the Security Council .will not make us lose that hope,
especially sin&’ the Council today has ‘a historic
opportunity to right a wrong and to relieve the oppression of our patient and steadfast people.
fv’
177. The Zionists established their ticist entity in
our Palestinian homeland, relying on a racist ideology
already condemned by the General Assembly at its
thirtieth session. The Zionists have used all methods
of conquest and oppression to usurp the homeland
of others. They have also relied on external Powers,
some of which ‘have supported them in order to protect
their own imperialist interests in the Arab region and
in order to retard the development and unity of the
Arab countries.
,
178. The Zionists have never yet been able to base
their claim on any law or internationally
recognized
charter. We, the people of Palestine, as you have
noted from our narratidn’ of our cause, are struggling
for just goals endorsed by the United Nations and
anchored in international legitimacy. We struggle to
attain freedom and peace, not to seize what does not
belong to us. What we aspire to is consonant with
the principles of international law and the Charter of
the United Nations.

171. Such is the tragedy which affects our people.
We have summarized its unfolding within the framework of the resolutions of the United Nations and
the concepts which underlie them. We have avoided
the details, which are available to Members and which
exemplify this tragic reality which our people endures
and suffers;
172. If we wished to summarize this tragedy in a
single short sentence, we would say that it is a tragedy
,epitomized by two types of resolutions: unjust resolutions, which found States to support, sustain and
implement
them and to extend their purview; and
resolutions which tried, sometimes partially, to relieve
oppression and injustice, which remained ink on scraps
of paper and .have never been implemented.
173. Thus we resumed our revolution. We took up
arms and had recourse to force in defence of our very
existence, of our right to live in our land, and of our
independence and, sovereignty. While we carry out
our armed struggle, we continue to hope to attain our
goals through political options.
174. Accordingly,
the Palestine Liberation Organirepresentative
of the
zation, . the sole legitimate
Palestunan people, moved politically in the aftermath
of the October 1973 war to rectify the mistaken view
of the identity of the conflict in our region. We
requested the inclusion of the question of Palestine
as an independent item on the agenda of the twentyninth session of the General Assembly. Our request
was supported by the overwhelming
majority of
Member States, which were dissatisfied with the
continuing deliberate disregard of the question of
Palestine and the fate of its people. The question was
debated in the presence of the Chairman of the PLO
Executive Committee, Mr. Yasser Arafat, who spokes
in the name of the people of Palestine, explained our
cause in all its dimensions and intricacies, and shared
with you his vision of the Palestine of tomorrow.

179. Therefore we wish to emphasize here the resolve
of our people to continue their struggle, military and
political, until they attain the fulfilment of their national
responsibility to restore and return to their national
soil and to exercise their self-determination
and to
establish their independent State. We have legitimate
national rights-not
“interests”,
as some like to put
it. The difference between interests and national
rights is obvious, and our belief in peace is no less
than our belief in right and justice. Were it not for
the disregard of our rights, none of these wars and
tragedies would have occurred in the Middle East.
180. We want peace for us and for the Jews in
Palestine; we wish to stress, with the utmost sense of
responsibility,
that the Security Council can assume
a basic and effective role if it applies the Charter and
compels the aggressors to put an end to their aggressions. The time has come for the Security Council to
.adopt a resolution which recognizes the objective facts
/’
.

175. The international
community
then recognized
the following facts:-First,
that the question of Palestine is the central issue in the Middle East conflict;Secondly, that peace in the Middle East is contingent
upon the realization of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, beginning with their right to return,
20

recognized our national rights and our right to independence. The United States Government, which has been
the principal political,
diplomatic,
economic and
military sponsor and sustainer of the continuing aggression and expansion of Israel, is isolated by its obdurate equivocation on these facts. This undoubtedly
accounts for the abysmal failure of the United States
Government to contribute to a just solution of the
conflict in the Middle East. For how can a solution
be found to a conflict which is derivative? How can
we resolve a conflict when we ignore its heart and we
deny the legitimacy of the principal party to that
conflict in all international
efforts concerned with
iI
peace?

in the region, beginning with the;Palestine
question
and the necessity of finding a just solution to it so that
our people may exercise their inalienable rights in their
homeland. The time has come for the adoption of a
resolution which would rectify the error and which
would rely on practical,. correct and effective means
for its implementation.
Such a resolution would contribute to the relaxation of tensionsand to the realization of peace.
;
181. It is of concern to us to declare before the
Council that the PLO, the 1egitimat.e representative
of the people of Palestine, rejects the;false allegations
propagated by Zionist and imperialist,+-cles
regarding
its intention, or the intention of our people, concerning
the fate of the Jews in Palestine. Our struggle is not
against the Jews. No, it is not against the Jews in
Palestine, but against the Zionist movement, its racist
doctrines, its expansionist practices and’its aggressive
intentions, which have led, in fact, to; the exile and
homelessness of our people.

187. We wish to emphasize that a just and lasting
peace will not prevail in the Middle East unless and
until the historic, inalienable national rights of the
Palestinian people are fully realized and Palestine
resumes its historic role as a bridge between the
Arab States west and east of Suez and between Africa
and Asia.

182. We have also declared our categorical rejection
of any alternative homeland. Our people have one
homeland, which is Palestine, and werstruggle for its
restoration and the exercise of our,, historic and
inalienable rights over its sacred soil. ,

188. We await a decisive, effective’lresolution
and
meaningful measures from the Council,, in accordance
with Article 36 of the Charter, which would consolidate, strengthen and implement
General Assembly
resolutions 3236 (XXIX) and 3376 (XXX). The PLO
is prepared to participate in and contribute to all
international
efforts based upon General Assembly
resolutions 3236 (XXIX) and 3376 (XXX), in order to
bring.peace with justice to all.

183. The General Assembly in its last two sessions
offered us some hope with its positive resolutions.
And here we are today, looking confidently to the
Security Council for the realization pf this hope,
especially since the Council, according to Article 36
of, the Charter, has the power to implement its resoluhons.

189. Meanwhile, our people will cont&ue its just
struggle by all legitimate means to attain its legitimate
goals. When these are attained-hopefully
with the
Council’s affirmative resolution-a
just and lasting
peace will prevail in the Middle East.

184. Those of’ our people who have lived in exile
since 1948 and those who live under occupation
expect the Security Council to adopt a resolution
which would end this tragedy and offer them a brighter
future and a path to return to their homeland. The
PLO, on behalf of the people of Palestine, offered,
and continues to offer, a solution to the question of
Palestine. Its democratic solution assures all Arabs
and Jews of Palestine .a peaceful and dignified life
therein; its solution is predicated upon the unqualified
acceptance of the principle of human equality.

190. Mr: KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic):
In
connexion with the discussiqn of the item on the
agenda-namely,
the Middle East problem including
the Palestinian question-my
delegation will express
its views during the following days in the course of
the debate. However, my delegation would like, in
compliance with our basic attitude explained on more
than one occasion, now and from the outset to stress
the following points.

185. The PLO, in its transitional programme which
preceded .General Assembly resolution 3236 (XXIX),
envisaged an independent Palestinian State in Palestine. Israel today, in yet another of its more notorious
.attempts to frustrate the will of the international
community and to subvert the intent of that resolution, is proceeding shamelessly with “elections”
under military occupation. .Our people, in exile and
under occupation,
have made it abundantly clear
that our immediate aim is the establishment of an
independent sovereign State on our national soil.

191. First:the Palestinian problem is the centre, the
source and the origin of the Middle East question.
No peace will reign in the area as long as the centrality
of the Palestinian question is not recognized and as
long as the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people
are not restored.

186. Members of the Security Council are fully
aware that the majority of Member States have

((I) There can be no peace in the area without
justice, and there will be no justice without full

192, Secondly, we reafftrm our unconditional
support for the principles declared in the General
Assembly by the representative of the Palestinian
peopleon 3 November 1975,y comprising the following:

21

implementation
and full recognition
rights of the Palestinian people;

of the national

194. Fourthly, peace in the Middle East cannot be
established
without complete
and unconditional
withdrawal from ail Arab occupied land and the
enjoyment by the Palestinian people of its inalienable
national right in secular democratic Palestine and the
eradication
of the Zionist, racist and colonialist
aggression.

(h) No international
conference has the right to
discuss the question of Palestine in the absence of the
PLO as the sole legitimate
representative of the
Palestinian people;
(c) Any resolution which ignores the national rights
of the Palestinian people is to be rejected;

195. Fifthly, in the face of the scandalous Zionist
record of defiance and obstruction and the Zionists’
treatment of the United Nations with the most cynical
contempt, the international community must find the
appropriate answer. Platonic resolutions have been
simply and contemptuously
ignored by Israel and its
allies and protectors. In’ fact, the Zionist entity is
playing for time while creating facts in the area. The
international community must take effective measures
by imposing appropriate sanctions against the aggressive Zionist authorities. As I said, I shall elaborate
later and at the‘appropriate
time on the points which
I raised in this meeting.

(J) The PLO refuses to participate in any conference
which considers such a resolution as the basis of
its work;
(e) The PLO welcomes any international
arising out of General Assembly resolution
(XXIX);

effort
3236

These principles have been reiterated today by my
brother Abu Lutf, representative of the PLO.
193. Thirdly, we reaffhm our previous attitude with
regard to Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973). These resolutions are not relevant as a
framework for any possible durable solution of the
Middle East question. In fact, General Assembly
resolution 3236 (XXIX), which recognizes the legitimate national rights of the Palestinian people-rights
that would logically and normally lead to the achievement of national sovereignty-and
resolution 3379
(XXX) condemning Zionism as a racist movement, in
addition to resolution 3376 (XXX) advising on the
means to implement
Palestinian
national rights,
reflect a profound change and development in the
attitude of the United Nations and international
public opinion and call for a review of the entire
question and the method of dealing with it.

The meeting rose ut 7.20 p.m.

Notes
I See O@cicd
rim?. Suppkmcwt

2 See General

R~wnd.~

of the

No. II,
Assembly

vol. II, annex 19.
resolution
181 (II).

Gcncrd

Asscmhly.

’ See Officid
Rr~cord.v
of the Gcnerul
Assembly,
sion,
Supplement
No. II, vols. I-IV.
’ Ibid.,
Supplement
No. II, vol. I, chap. VII..
5 Ibid.,
Third
Session.
Supplement
No. II..
2
6 See Offiiul
Racord,~
of the Security
Council.
Specid
Supplements
Nos.
14.
’ See Officid
Rcwnds
of rhc Gencrul
Assumhly,
sion.
Ad Hoc Politicd
Committee.
Annex,
vol.

Al9i7,
8 Ibid..
9 Ibid..

annexes

Second

Scs-

Second

Ses-

Fourth

Yew.

Fourth

SW

r

II, -document

A and B.

Twenty-ninth
Session,
Plenary
Meetings,
2282nd meeting.
Thirtieth
Session.
Plcnury
Meetings,
2,390th meeting.

22
Litho in United Nations, New York

00400

:*
8360801-May

1984-2.200
4
