80

General Assembly-Fifth Session

Noting that progress has been made by the present
session of the General Assembly with regard to certain
of the points contained in the memorandum of the Secretary-General,
ReaiJirming its constant desire that all the resources
of the United Nations Charter be utilized for the development of friendly relations between nations and
the achievement of universal peace,
1. Commends the Secretary-Ccneral for his initiative in preparing his memorandum and presenting it to
the General Assembly ;
2. Requests the appropriate organs of the United
Nations to give consideration to those portions of the
memorandum of the Secretary-Ceneral with which they
are particularly concerned;
3. Requests these organs to inform the General Assembly at its sixth session, through the SecretaryGeneral, of any progress achieved through such
consideration.
312th plenary meeting,
20 November 1950.
495 (V).

Admission of new Members to the
United NatiomThe General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 296 (IV) A to l and K of
22 November 1949 concerning the reconsideration, by
the Security Council, of pending applications for membership,
Noting that the General Assembly has not received
recommendations for the admission of any of the applicants,
Requests the Security Council to keep the applications ·under consideration in accordance with the terms
of the above-mentioned resolutions.
318th plenary meeting,
4 December 1950.
496 (V).

International control of atomic energy

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the effective regulation and reduction of national armaments would substantially diminish the present danger of war, relieve the heavy economic burden placed upon the peoples of the world in
the absence of a system of armaments control, and
permit the greater use of man's resources to projects
devoted to his betterment,
Recognizing that the regulation and reduction of
armaments to be effective must cover weapons of all
kinds, must be based on unanimous agreement, and so
must include every nation having substantial armaments
and armed forces,

N.,·coyni::;:ny further that any plan for the regulation
and reduction of armaments and armed forces must be
base( I upun safeguards that will secure the compliance
ui all na rions,
N.,·cog111~;ing the inahility to date to achieve agreement among nations on the elimination of atomic weap( ,11s under a svstem of effective international control of
;1to111ic encrg:,~ and on the regulation and reduction of
, ,t her ar111aments and armed forces,
N.c, o!liny that a plan" has been developed in the
Lnikd '.\ations Atomic Energy Commission, and approvl'd'" \,y the c;eneral Assembly, for the international
control ui atomic energy, which would make effective
the prohibition of atomic weapons; and that much useiul planning work has been accomplished in the Commission for Conn:ntional Armaments,
/!csirin,1;, ho\\'evn, to carry this work forward toward
;, curnprl'hensi \'(' system of armaments control,
I i,·cides ro cscalilish a committee of twelve, consisting ()J rcpresent:ttives of the members of the Security
Council as uf i _l;muary llJSl, together with Canada,
to cunsidn and rqiurt to the next regular session of
the l~eneral Assembly on ways and means whereby the
work of the Atomic Energy Commission and the Commission for Conventional Armaments may be co-ordinated and on the advisability of their functions being
merged and placed under a new and consolidated disarmament commission.
323rd plenary meeting,
13 December 1950.

497 (V). Place of meeting of the sixth regular
session of the General Assembly

/'he Grneral Assembly,
Considering that the building intended for the holding
of the Ceneral Assembly will not be completed until
J()52.
Considering that in these circumstances there may
arise technical difficulties liable to impede the normal
functioning of the G.eneral Assembly and the convenience of its deliberations,
1. Decides, in conformity with rule 3 of its rules of
procedure, to convene its sixth re,gular session in
Europe;
2. Instructs the President of the General Assembly
and the Secretary-General to select the city most suitable for the above purpose and to make the necessary
arrangements.
324th plenary meeting,
14 December 1950.
9 See Official Records of the Atomic Energy Commissio"
Special Supplement, Report to the Security Council, Part II C
and Part III; and Ibid., Second Year, Special Supplefflfflt,
Second Report to the Security Council, Part II.
10 See resolution 191 (III).

Printed in U.S.A. - 40897-February 1951-4,650
Reprinted in U.N., N.Y. - 07119-May 1968-200
May 1974-250
Reprinted in U.N., N.Y. · 10351 · May 1980-200
