General Assembly-Forty-first Session

140

3. Notes the meeting on assistance to the Palestinian
people held at Geneva on 2 July 1986 in response to General Assembly resolution 40/170;
4. Expresses its thanks to the Secretary-General for
convening the meeting on assistance to the Palestinian
people;
5. Regards such a meeting as a valuable opportunity to
assess progress in economic and social assistance to the
Palestinian people and to explore ways and means of enhancing such assistance;
6. Urges the international community, the United
Nations system and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations to disburse their aid or any
other forro of assistance to the occupied Palestinian territories only for the benefit of the Palestinian people and in
a manner that will not serve to prolong the Israeli occupation;
1. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To convene in 1987 a meeting ofthe relevant programmes, organizations, agencies, funds and bodies of the
United Nations system to consider economic and social
assistance to the Palestinian people;
(b) To invite the Palestine Liberation Organization,
the Arab host countries and relevant intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations to participate in the
meeting;
8. Requests the international community, the United
Nations system and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations to sustain and increase their
assistance to the Palestinian people in co-operation with
the Palestine Liberation Organization;
9. A/so requests that United Nations assistance to the
Palestinians in the Arab host countries should be rendered
in co-operation with the Palestine Liberation Organization and with the consent of the Arab host Government
concerned;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-second session, through the
Economic and Social Council, on the progress made in the
implementation of the present resolution.
100th p/enary meeting
8 December 1986
41/182.

lndigenous entrepreneurs in economic development

The General Assemb/y,
Reaffirming the right of each country, in accordance
with its chosen economic and social system and priorities,
to determine its objectives, to endeavour to fulfil its development plans, to strengthen the public and prívate sectors
of its economy and to promote the development of its human resources,
Recognizing the responsibility of the international community, in particular of the developed countries, to promote and endeavour to provide an equitable international
economic environment, supportive of the development of
developing countries, in the light of the goals and objectives of the International Development Strategy for the
Third United Nations Development Decade, 34
Recognizing a/so the role and responsibility of each Government to promote development and provide an environment conducive to it.

Reaffirming its resolution 34/137 of 14 December 1979
on the role of the public sector in promoting the economic
development of developing countries, as well as Economic
and Social Council resolutions 1985/10 of28 May l 985 on
public administration and finance for development and
1986/73 of 23 July 1986 on the development of human resources,
Noting that indigenous entrepreneurs can play a crucial
and positive role in mobilizing resources and promoting
economic growth and socio-economic development,
Aware that many countries are actively seeking to encourage, strengthen and improve the effectiveness of indigenous entrepreneurs in expanding and modernizing
productive capacities, particularly by increasing productivity and technological capabilities, and in contributing
generally to the development process,
Bearing in mind that the promotion and development of
indigenous entrepreneurs requires a dynamic capital formation process in developing countries, which is also related to financia) and technical resources and to broader
market opportunities available to these countries,
Recognizing that people are the mainspring and inspiration of social and economic progress,
l. Invites the Secretary-General and relevant organs,
organizations and bodies of the United Nations system,
such as the regional commissions, the United Nations Development Programme, the lnternational Labour Organisation, the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/
GATT, the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization and the World Bank, as well as regional development banks, within their existing mandates, programmes and priorities:
(a) To continue to support, through, inter afia, technical co-operation projects, the efforts ofStates in encouraging indigenous entrepreneurs in the prívate, public and/or
other sectors in accordance with national laws, priorities
and regulations;
(b) To facilitate the practica) exchange of information
and experience among all countries on the role of indigenous entrepreneurs in economic development;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to study measures
at the national and international levels to promote the
contribution of indigenous entrepreneurs in both prívate
and public sectors to the economic development of developing countries, drawing upon the work already in progress in the United Nations system and bearing in mind
the need to avoid duplication of effort and cost, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-third
session through the Economic and Social Council.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986

41/183.

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/218 of 19 December 1979 on
the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development,
Affirming resolution 6 (VIII) of 6 June 1986 of the lntergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology for
Development 3'\ and decision 86/38 of 27 June 1986 of the
JS Official

34 Resolution

35/56. annt'\.

United Nations Financing System for Science
and Technology for Development

Records of" thl! General A.,semblv. Forty-Jir.st Ses.,ion,
•

Supp/em('I/( No. 3' (A/41 /37), sed. 11.A
