208

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

view to determining whether the Office should be continued beyond 31 December 1988,
Recognizing the need for concerted international action
on behalf of the increasing numbers of refugees and displaced persons of concern to the High Commissioner,
Considering the outstanding work that has been performed by the Office of the High Commissioner in providing international protection and material assistance to refugees and displaced persons as well as in promoting
permanent solutions to their problems,
Noting with deep appreciation the etfective manner in
which the Office of the High Commissioner has been dealing with various essential humanitarian tasks entrusted to
it,
l. Decides to continue the Office ofthe United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees for a further period of
five years from 1 January 1989;
2. Decides to review, not later than at its forty-seventh
session, the arrangements for the Office of the High Commissioner with a view to determining whether the Office
should be continued beyond 31 December 1993.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/109.

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees on the activities of bis
Office, 109 as well as the report of the Executive Committee
of the Programme of the High Commissioner on the work
of its thirty-eighth session, tlo and having heard the statements made by the High Commissioner on 13 and 17
November 1987,111
Recalling its resolution 41/124 of 4 December 1986,
Reaffirming the purely humanitarian and non-political
character of the activities of the Office of the High Commissioner, which are undertaken in the common interest
of humanity,
Noting with satisfaction that, following recent accessions, at least one hundred States are now parties to the
1951 Convention 101 and the 1967 Protocol f02 relating to
the Status of Refugees,
Deeply concerned that refugees and displaced persons of
concern to the High Commissioner continue to face, in
certain situations, distressingly serious problems in various parts of the world,
Particular/y concerned that in various regions the safety
and welfare of refugees and asylum-seekers continue to be
seriously jeopardized on account of military or armed attacks and other forms of violence, and noting that further
etforts should be made in dealing with the problem of
rescuing asylum-seekers in distress at sea,
Stressing the fundamental importance of the High Commissioner's function to provide international protection,
particularly in the context of the increasing complexity of
the contemporary refugee problem, and the need for States

109 Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-second Session,
Suf~/ement No. 12 (A/42/12).
o lbid., Supplement No. 12A (A/42/12/Add.l).
111 Ibid., Forty-second Session, Third Committee, 45th and 50th
meetings, and corrigendum.

to co-operate with the High Commissioner in the exercise
of this essential function,
Noting the etforts of the High Commissioner to continue
to address the special problems and needs of refugee and
displaced women and children, who in many cases are exposed to a variety of difficult situations affecting their
physical and legal protection as well as their psychological
and material well-being,
Emphasizing the need for States to assist, on as wide a
basis as possible, the etforts of the High Commissioner to
promote speedy and durable solutions to the problems of
refugees,
Realizing in this context that voluntary repatriation or
return remains the most desirable solution to the problems
facing refugees and displaced persons of concern to the
High Commissioner, and welcoming the fact that in various parts of the world it has been possible for significant
numbers ofthem to return voluntarily to their countries of
origin,
Commending States that, despite severe economic and
development problems of their own, continue to admit
large numbers of refugees and displaced persons of concern to the Office of the High Commissioner into their territories, and emphasizing the need to share the burden of
these States to the maximum extent possible through international assistance in accordance with the conclusions
on refugee aid and development adopted by the Executive
Committee of the Programme of the High Commissioner
at its thirty-eighth session, 112
Stressing the need for the international community to
continue to provide adequate resettlement opportunities
for those refugees for whom no other durable solution may
be in sight, with particular attention given to refugees who
have already spent an inordinately long time in camps,
Welcoming the valuable support extended by Governments to the High Commissioner in carrying out his
humanitarian tasks, as well as the continuing and increasing co-operation between the Office of the High Commissioner and other bodies ofthe United Nations system and
intergovernmental and non-govemmental organizations,
Noting the High Commissioner's continuing etforts to
reorganize and improve the efficiency and etfectiveness of
the Office, particularly with respect to activities in the
field,
Commending the High Commissioner and his statf for
the dedicated manner in which they discharge their responsibilities, and paying tribute to those statf members
who lost their lives in the course of their duties,
1. Strongly reaffirms the fundamental nature of the
function of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees to provide intemational protection and the need
for Govemments to co-operate fully with his Office in order to facilitate the etfective exercise of this function, in
particular by acceding to and implementing the relevant
intemational and regional refugee instruments and by
scrupulously observing the principies of asylum and nonrefoulement;
2. Notes with particular concern the continued violation of the principie of non-refoulement in certain situations, and stresses the need to strengthen measures to protect refugees against such action;
3. Appeals to ali States that have not yet become parties to the 1951 Convention and the 1967 Protocol relating

112 [bid., Forty-second Session. Supp/ement No. 12A (A/42/12/
Add.1), para. 210, sect. C.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

to the Status of Refugees to consider acceding to these instruments in order to enhance their universal character;
4. Condemns ali violations of the rights and safety of
refugees and asylum-seekers, in particular those perpetrated by military or armed attacks against refugee camps
and settlements and other forms of violence;
5. Endorses the conclusions on military and armed attacks on refugee camps and settlements adopted by the
Executive Committee of the Programme of the High
Commissioner at its thirty-eighth session, 113 and calls
upon ali States to observe these principies;
6. Endorses the conclusions on refugee children
adopted by the Executive Committee ofthe Programme of
the High Commissioner at its thirty-eighth session, 114 and
urges States to extend their full co-operation to the High
Commissioner so as to ensure that the special needs of refugee children are met;
7. Urges the High Commissioner to continue bis efforts to identify and meet the special needs of refugee
women;
8. Recognizes the importance of fair and expeditious
procedures for determining refugee status and/or granting
asylum in order, inter alia, to protect refugees and asylumseekers from unjustified or unduly prolonged detention or
stay in camps, and urges States to establish such procedures;
9_. Recognizes the importance of achieving durable solutlons to refugee problems and in particular the need to
address in this process the causes that force refugees and
asylum-seekers to flee their countries of origin, in the light
of the report of the Group of Governmental Experts on
International Co-operation to A vert N ew Flows of Refugees; 115
10. Urges ali States to support the High Commissioner
in bis etforts to achieve durable solutions to the problem of
re~uge~ and displaced persons of concern to bis Office,
pnmanly through voluntary repatriation or return, including assistance to returnees as appropriate or, wherever
appropriate, through integration into countries of asylum
or through resettlement in third countries;
11. Expresses deep appreciation for the valuable
m~ter~al an~ humanitarian response of receiving countn~s, ~n particular those developing countries which, desptte hmtted resources, continue to admit, on a permanent
or temporary basis, large numbers ofrefugees and asylumseekers;
12. Urges the international community, in accordance
with the principie of international solidarity and burdensharing, to assist the above-mentioned countries in order
to enable them to cope with the additional burden that
care for refugees and asylum-seekers represents;
13. Recognizes with appreciation the work done by the
High Commissioner to put into practice the concept of devel_ol?1'!1ent-oriented assistance to refugees and returnees,
as tmtlated at the Second International Conference on Ass~stance to Refugees in Africa, 108 and urges him to contmue ~hat l?rocess, wherever appropriate, in full cooperat1on wtth appropriate international agencies, and
further urges Governments to support these etforts;
!4. Empha~ize~ the essential role of developmentonented orgamzattons and agencies in the implementation
of programmes that benefit refugees and returnees and
urges the High Commissioner and those organizations
113 !bid., para. 206.
114 !bid., para. 205.
115 A/41/324, annex.

209

and agencies, in accordance with their respective mandates, to strengthen their mutual co-operation towards the
attainment of durable solutions, and calls upon the High
Commissioner to continue to promote such co-operation;
15. Calls upon ali Governments to contribute, in a
spirit of international solidarity and burden-sharing and in
every way feasible, to the High Commissioner's programmes with the aim of ensuring that the needs of refugees, returnees and displaced persons of concern to the
High Commissioner are met.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 198 7

42/110.

Assistance to refugees, returnees and displaced
persons of Central Americe

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its resolution 42/1 of7 October 1987 on
the current peace initiatives undertaken in connection
with the agreement on "Procedures for the establishment
of a firm and lasting peace in Central America", 116 signed
at Guatemala City on 7 August 1987 by the Central
American Presidents, at the Esquipulas II summit meeting, and in particular point 8 thereof concerning refugees
and displaced persons in the region,
Taking note of the report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees 109 and the decision taken by
the Executive Committee of the Programme of the High
Commissioner at hs thirty-eighth session concerning refugees in Central America, 117 in which the Executive Committee, inter alia, reaffirmed the importance of continuing
to apply regional approaches for the consideration of this
problem and the initiative to organize a conference on this
question in 1988,
Bearing in mind further the principies contained in the
1984 Cartagena Declaration on refugees and the conclusions and recommendations of the colloquium held in
Mexico in 1981 on asylum and international protection of
refugees in Latín America,
Recognizing the generous etforts made by the countries
receiving Central American refugees despite the enormous
difficulties facing them, especially the present economic
crisis,
A ware of the complexity and seriousness of the situation
of the refugees and displaced persons in the Central
American region and its effects on the social and economic
development of the area,
Con_sidering t~at voluntary repatriation is the most approp~ta_te solut1on to the problem of refugees, provided
that 1t ts on the basis of individual volition and with the
collabo_ra~ion of the Office of the United Nations High
Comm1ss1oner for Refugees and that it is carried out under conditions of complete safety, preferably to the country of origin,
Bearing in mind the means of co-operation established
ii:t the region through the setting up of tripartite commiss1_ons, composed of representatives of the country of origm, the country of asylum and the Office of the High
Commissioner, to facilitate and co-ordinate activities
relating to the repatriation of refugees,

116 A/42/521-S/19085, annex. For the printed text, see Official
Records of the Security Counci/, Forty-second Year, Supplement far Ju/y,
Au~ust and September 1987, document S/19085, annex.
1 7 Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-second Session,
Supplement No. 12A (A/42/12/Add.l), para. 208.
