172

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

---------------------- ·--=--------------------and in promoting and encouraging respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
Mindful of the important contribution which the Division of Human Rights of the Secretariat has made to
United Nations activities for the promotion and
protection of human rights since the inception of
the Organization,
Believing, however, that the activities of the human
rights sector of the Secretariat should be enhanced so
as petter to enable it to meet the needs of the Organization and the international community, particularly after
the entry into force of the International Covenants on
Human Rights 46 and the International Convention on
the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid, 47 and bearing in mind policy-making decisions of
the General Assembly such as resolution 32/130 of 16
December 1977,
Recalling the report of the Secretary-General on organizational nomenclature in the Secretariat, 48 the general direction of which was endorsed by the General
Assembly in its resolution 32/204 of 21 December
1977,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to consider the
redesignation of the Division of Human Rights as a Centre for Human Rights, in the light of the views expressed
on the proposed redesignation at the thirty-fifth session
of the Commission on Human Rights;
2. Invites the Secretary-General to ensure that adequate financial and other resources are allocated to the
sector of the Secretariat concerned with human rights,
so as to enable it to discharge its functions, in the light
of the resu!ts. of the relevant study to be conducted by
the Comm1ss1on on Human Rights at its thirty-sixth
session in accordance with paragraph 9 of General Assembly resolution 34/ 46 of 23 November 1979;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session on the implementation of the present resolution.

76th plenary meeting
23 November 1979
34/ 48.

Alternative approaches and ways and means
within the United Nations system for the improvement of the effective enjoyment of human
rights and fundamental freedoms

The General Assembly,
Recalling that one of the purposes of the United
Nations under Article 1 of the Charter is to promote
and encourage respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms as embodied in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 10
Bearing in mind its resolution 33/105 of 16 December 1978, in which it requested the Commission on
Human Rights to take into account, in continuing its
work on the over-all analysis of the United Nations
approach to human rights, the views expressed on the
various proposals during the general debate on the item
at the thirty-second and thirty-third sessions of the General Assembly, including a post of United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights,
4 6 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
4 1 Resolution 3068 (XXVIII), annex.
48 A/C.5/32/17.
49

Resolution 217 A (Ill).

Considering that the Working Group of the Commission on Human Rights was nevertheless unable, in its
consideration of the over-all analysis/ 0 to make a thorough evaluation of the proposal to create a post of
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Decides to consider at its thirty-fifth session the question of the creation of a post of United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights under the item entitled "Alternative approaches and ways and means
within the United Nations system for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms".
76th plenary meeting
23 November 1979

34 / 49.

National institutions for the promotion and
protection of human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/ 123 of 16 December
1977 and 33/46 of 14 December 1978, as well as
Commission on Human Rights resolutions 23 (XXXIV)
of 8 March 1978 51 and 24 (XXXV) of 14 March
1979,°" concerning national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights,
Recalling also that, in its resolution 34/46 of 23
November 1979, it emphasized the need to create conditions at the national and international levels for the
full promotion and protection of the human rights of
individuals and peoples,
Mindful of the guidelines on the structure and functioning of national and local institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights adopted by the
Seminar on National and Local Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights, held at Geneva
from 18 to 29 September 1978, 53 and endorsed by the
General Assembly in its resolution 33/46,
Mindful also of the conclusions of the Seminar on
Recourse Procedures Available to Victims of Racial
Discrimination and Activities to be Undertaken at the
Regional Level, held at Geneva from 9 to 20 July 1979,54
I. Invites all Member States to take appropriate
steps for the establishment of national institutions for
the promotion and protection of human rights, bearing
in mind the guidelines referred to above;
. 2. Emphasizes the importance of the integrity and
mdependence of such national institutions, in accordance with national legislation;
3. Draws attention to the constructive role which
national non-governmental organizations can play in the
work of national institutions;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in submitting to
the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session the report requested in paragraph 6 of Commission on Human Rights resolution 24 (XXXV), to draw also upon
other relevant sources, such as the reports and documents of the Seminar on National and Local Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human
50 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
1979, Supplement No. 6 (E/1979/36), chap. IX, sect. A.
51 lbid., 1978, Supplement No. 4 (E/1978/34), chap. XXVI,
sect. A.
62 Ibid., 1979, Supplement No. 6 (E/1979/36), chap. XXIV,
sect. A.
53 See ST /HR/SER.A/2 and Add.1.
54 See ST/HR/SER.A/3.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Rights and the Seminar on Recourse Procedures Available to Victims of Racial Discrimination and Activities
to be Undertaken at the Regional Level, and, in presenting his report to the Assembly, to describe the various existing types of national institutions for the
promotion and protection of human rights reflected in
the documentation received by him and in the abovementioned sources;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-sixth session a subitem entitled "National institutions for the promotion and protection of human
rights";
6. Recommends that Member States should associate representatives of their national institutions with
the contents of the debate on the above-mentioned
subitem.
76th plenary meeting
23 November 1979
34/59.

Implementation of the Declaration on Social
Progress and Development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2542 (XXIV) of 11 December 1969, containing the Declaration on Social Progress
and Development, and 2543 (XXIV) of 11 December
1969 concerning the implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling also its resolutions 2626 (XXV) of 24 October 1970, containing the International Development
Strategy for the Second United Nations Development
Decade, 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974,
containing the Declaration and the Programme of
Action on the Establishment of a New International
Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974,
containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties
of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on
development and international economic co-operation,
Recalling further its resolution 33/48 of 14 December 1978 on world social development and Economic
and Social Council resolution 2072 (LXII) of 13 May
1977 on the co-ordination of the results of the world
conferences in the field of social development in the
1970s, as well as its resolution 33/193 of 29 January
1979 on the preparations for an international development strategy for the third United Nations development
decade,
Conscious of the fact that further social development
contributes to peaceful coexistence, detente and the
strengthening of international peace and security,
Conscious of the growing importance of the Declaration on Social Progress and Development for the formulation and implementation of national policies and
measures and for the undertaking of joint and individual
actions to promote higher and improved standards of
living, full employment and conditions conducive to
rapid economic and social progress,
Strongly desirous of achieving effective realization of
the provisions of the Declaration,
Noting the limited progress achieved in implementing
the Declaration since its adoption and taking into account the scope of still unexploited possibilities,
1. Recommends that all Governments should, in
their policies, plans, programmes and implementation
machinery, continuously take into consideration the
principles, objectives, means and methods of the Declaration on Social Progress and Development;

173

2. Decides that the Declaration shall be taken into
account in the formulation of the international development strategy for the third United Nations development
decade and in the implementation of programmes of
international action to be carried out during the decade;
3. invites all Governments to take into account the
provisions of the Declaration in their forthcoming bilateral and multilateral co-operation;
4. Recommends that international organizations
and agencies concerned with development should continue to utilize the provisions of the Declaration, as an
important international document, in the formulation of
strategies and programmes aimed at social progress and
development and that those provisions should be taken
into consideration in the drafting of instruments that
the United Nations may employ in the field of social
progress and development;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue, in
co-operation with Governments, to record, analyse and
disseminate as widely as possible significant national
and international progress made towards realizing the
commendable objectives contained in the universally
accepted Declaration;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue to inform the General Assembly, in summary form
in annexes to the reports on the world social situation,
of the measures adopted by Governments, which may
not be included in other reports provided on a regular
basis, and by the international organizations concerned
for the realization of the provisions of the Declaration
and for the implementation of the present resolution.
82nd plenary meeting
29 November 1979
34/60.

Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees on the activities of his
Office, 55 as well as the report of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the High Commissioner on
its thirtieth session,"; and having heard the High Commissioner's statement, 01
Recalling its resolution 33/26 of 29 November 1978,
Reaffirming the eminently humanitarian character of
the activities of the High Commissioner for the benefit
of an increasing number of refugees and displaced persons of concern to his Office,
Noting with deep concern the continued gravity of
the problems of refugees and displaced persons in various parts of the world,
Commending Governments for their humanitarian approach to refugee problems, for the spirit in which they
have received refugees and for their generous support of
the work of the High Commissioner,
Emphasizing the continuing need to ensure the basic
human rights, protection and safety of refugees, inter alia,
through the accession to and more effective implementation of relevant international instruments,
Noting that increased financial and other support
from Governments is urgently needed to assist the High
55 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/34/12).
56 Jbid., Supplement No. 12A (A/34/12/Add.1).
57
Ibid., Thirty-fourth Session, Third Committee, 42nd meeting, paras. 1-13.
