A /69/PV.36

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

36th plenary meeting

Friday, 31 October 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

In the absence of the President, Mrs. Baaro
(Kiribati), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 73 (continued)
Report of the International Criminal Court
Note by the Secretary-General (А/69/321)
Reports of the Secretary-General (А/69/324
and A/69/372)
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): As a responsible member
of the international community, Georgia is a firm
supporter of the view that there cannot be long-lasting
peace without justice. The International Criminal Court
(ICC) is one of the principal international organs tasked
with helping States ensure a durable peace that should
be built on justice.
In that respect, I must say that it is still sometimes
misperceived when a primarily international prosecutorial
body chooses to prosecute some crimes on its own and
leaves appeals to prosecute some others unanswered.
It is therefore essential to emphasize that the very idea
of the ICC is, above all, one of prevention and should
be put into effect by assisting national capacities in the
handling of situations that potentially fall within the
ICC’s jurisdiction.
The concept of positive complementarity is the best
reflection of this idea, and we believe that in addition to
supporting the Court in its immediate judicial activities,

all States should redouble their efforts to ensure the
better dissemination of this concept.
In that connection, we also must acknowledge
that in the case of some Member States, a partially
unsatisfactory situation still prevails in terms of the
national legislation implementing the Rome Statute.
We invite all the parties concerned to deal with this
situation for their own benefit.
It is positive complementarity that safeguards
countries from the need for the Court to interfere,
preserves the resources of the Court and obviates
the need for additional allocations from national
budgets — a win-win situation for all. We therefore invite
our colleagues to direct more of their efforts towards
promoting the concept of positive complementarity and
are ready to participate in such efforts.
As one of the countries under preliminary
examination by the ICC as a consequence of a foreign
military aggression, Georgia remains fully committed
to continuing effective cooperation with the Court and
dealing with our respective tasks domestically, to the
extent that the situation, involving an ongoing foreign
military occupation of the main areas affected by the
conflict, allows us to do so.
Georgia is among those countries that have already
ratified the Kampala amendment on the crime of
aggression and we would like to take this opportunity
to call on all those parties that have not done so to step
up the process.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

14-59895 (E)

*1459895*

A/69/PV.36

After years of operation, even a building designed
by brilliant architects often needs refurbishment, and
so does the ICC. After more than a decade since its
inception, today it needs to be rejuvenated so as to
adequately respond to the challenges of today and of
tomorrow.
Justice should not only be just but also be perceived
as such. Georgia stands committed to making this
change happen. Therefore, Georgia decided to nominate
a candidate, Judge Mindia Ugrekhelidze, for a judicial
vacancy at the Court to be filled during the election
of judges in December. His track record of judicial
experience in criminal law and human rights at both the
national and international levels is proven, as shown by
his service as Chief Justice and President of the Supreme
Court of Georgia, and Judge at the European Court of
Human Rights in Strasbourg. His tenure at each Court
lasted for about a decade. We believe that thanks to his
experience and competencies, the Georgian candidate
would represent an extraordinary addition to the ICC’s
judicial bench. If he is elected, it would be a first for
Georgia, a small developing State with a proven track
record of reforms and of overcoming the obstacles that
countries in many regions and on various continents
face today.
Let me also take this opportunity to also express
our support to Senegal in connection with the next
presidency of the Assembly of States Parties and assure
it of our cooperation.
Let me end by reiterating what I said at the outset,
but expressed through the words of Martin Luther King,
spoken in a somewhat different context but equally
relevant to what we are discussing today: “True peace
is not merely the absence of tension; it is the presence
of justice”.
We commend the International Criminal Court for
advocating this timeless idea and stand firm in support
of it.
Mr. Martín y Pérez de Nanclares (Spain) (spoke
in Spanish): I wish to begin by acknowledging the
very positive work done by Judge Song as President
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) at a very
complex juncture. His contribution has been decisive
in consolidating the role of the Court in fighting
impunity for the most serious international crimes. We
also thank him for his presentation of the tenth annual
report of the Court to the United Nations (see A/69/321)
(see A/69/PV.34).

2/10

31/10/2014

On 25 September, Spain deposited its instrument
of ratification of the Kampala amendments with the
United Nations Secretariat. This demonstrates my
country’s strong commitment to the work carried out
by the ICC since its inception, as an institution that
embodies the paradigm of universal criminal justice
and that is at the forefront of the fight against impunity
for the most serious crimes against humanity.
I should like in particular to make special mention
of the victims, as Spain believes that special attention
should be paid to them. That is why, among other
actions, my country has been contributing to the Trust
Fund for Victims.
There is no doubt that ICC is an independent judicial
institution. However, it is also quite clear that it has
a natural and very close relationship with the United
Nations. That is why it is crucial for the cooperation
mechanisms between the two bodies to be strengthened,
for example through cooperation between the Court
and peacekeeping operations and through interaction
between commissions of inquiry and the Office of the
Prosecutor, or by creating greater synergy between the
Security Council and the Court.
I would now like to comment on some issues set
out in the report of the Court 2013/2014, which was
presented yesterday by President Song. The report
underscores the importance of complementarity as
a basic instrument for achieving the goals of the
Rome Statute. Since it is States that bear the primary
responsibility for ensuring accountability for crimes
admissible before the Court, it is imperative that
the United Nations, its Member States and other
international and regional organizations assist States to
strengthen their capacities so as to be able to comply
with the objectives at the domestic level.
In recent years, the United Nations has given ever
greater importance to strengthening national capacities
to prosecute the crimes covered by the Rome Statute.
This is reflected in the 2013/2014 report, which
details the various technical assistance activities that
have been organized in the framework of the United
Nations. The report also notes the growth in recent
months of the Court’s cooperation with the countries
of Latin America ‑ organizing numerous seminars and
meetings of experts ‑ and with the European Union. It is
important to maintain that effort in the future.
Likewise, considering that the Office of Legal
Affairs is the focal point that assures cooperation

14-59895

31/10/2014

between the United Nations system and the Court, it
is important that all stakeholders in the Organization
systematize their cooperation with the Office. It is
essential that the Legal Counsel continue the practice
of informing, in advance, the ICC Prosecutor and the
President of the Assembly of States Parties of any
meeting with persons who may be under an arrest
warrant of the Court, pursuant to the United Nations
guidelines on non-essential contacts.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
Finally, the report highlights the sharp increase
in the Court’s activities over recent months. Bearing
in mind that its resources are limited and that it is
necessary to maintain strict control on spending,
cooperation with Member States and with the United
Nations in pursuit of the Court’s objectives is crucial if
we aspire to the ideals of peace and justice enshrined
in both the Rome Statute and the Charter of the United
Nations.
Spain promotes the universality and integrity of the
Rome Statute in its bilateral relations, in accordance with
the common position of the European Union. Moreover,
we included the commitment to support the work of the
International Criminal Court in Spain’s priorities for
the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly and
in the document “Transparency and Accountability”,
part of our efforts seeking a non-permanent seat on
the Security Council. I can assure the Assembly that,
during our upcoming two-year term as a non-permanent
member of the Council, Spain will support the work of
the International Criminal Court, as we always have
done, with responsibility and sensitivity.
Mr. Kolga (Estonia): Estonia aligns itself with the
statement delivered yesterday on behalf of the European
Union (see A/69/PV.34).
I thank President Song for his presentation
yesterday of the Court’s report (see A/69/321),
which illustrates the ever-increasing caseload of the
Court, which in turn reflects the demands for justice
worldwide. There are now nine active situations under
the Court’s consideration, of which a considerable
number were referred to the Court by States themselves.
In addition, the Prosecutor is seized with numerous
communications and preliminary analyses from all
over the world. My delegation hopes that States parties
will keep the growing workload of the Court in mind
when negotiating the Court’s budget at the upcoming

14-59895

A/69/PV.36

session of the Assembly of States Parties and will
provide the Court with the necessary resources to fulfil
its mandate.
President Song has made a compelling call for the
universal ratification of the Rome Statute. Although no
further States have ratified the Rome Statute in the past
year, Ukraine has accepted the Court’s jurisdiction,
under article 12 of the Rome Statute, over alleged crimes
committed on its territory from 21 November 2013 to
22 February 2014, and the Office of the Prosecutor has
opened a preliminary examination into the situation.
Estonia hopes that Ukraine will also promptly ratify
the Rome Statute so as to enjoy the full protection of
the Rome Statute system. We also call on all United
Nations Members that have not yet done so to ratify the
Rome Statute.
While the ICC is an independent judicial institution,
it is connected to the United Nations through its
genesis and shared values. This natural relationship
was institutionalized 10 years ago, in 2004, through an
agreement negotiated between the General Assembly
and the Court. The Relationship Agreement between
the United Nations and the International Criminal
Court provides a general framework for cooperation
between these two institutions. The continued
cooperation and crucial assistance the Court receives
from the United Nations, as evidenced in the report,
are much appreciated. However, I feel that it is time
for a new phase in the relationship, one in which the
cooperation and assistance are not provided solely on a
reimbursable basis.
Considering that the Office of Legal Affairs is the
focal point for ensuring cooperation within the entire
United Nations system on all aspects of the relationship
with the Court, Estonia encourages all United Nations
actors to systematize their cooperation with the Office
of Legal Affairs. It is also the Legal Counsel who
implements the practice of informing the Prosecutor
and the President of the Assembly of States Parties,
beforehand, of any meetings with persons who are
the subject of ICC arrest warrants that are considered
necessary for the performance of United Nationsmandated tasks, on the basis of the United Nations
guidelines on non-essential contacts with persons
subject to an ICC arrest warrant. Estonia welcomes the
guidelines and calls for the continuation of this practice.
The relationship between the Court and the Security
Council should also be strengthened — a position many

3/10

A/69/PV.36

Member States share, as evidenced during last week’s
Security Council open debate on working methods
(see S/PV.7285). Ideas on practical steps on how to
create greater synergies between the Council and the
Court can also be found in the Court’s report to the
Assembly of States Parties on the status of ongoing
cooperation between the ICC and the United Nations
(ICC-ASP/12/42).
The Security Council has authorized the missions
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Mali to
cooperate with and support the Court. Considering the
13 warrants of arrest issued by the Court that remain
outstanding and the common goal of the Council and the
Court — to prevent mass atrocities that constitute a threat
to international peace and security — we encourage the
Security Council to mandate peacekeeping missions
throughout to arrest ICC fugitives and to equip them
in such a manner that the missions are able to fulfil
their mandate. Estonia also calls on all Member States
to contribute to ending impunity by working together to
execute the pending arrest warrants.
To fail to bring to justice individuals responsible
for the most serious crimes under international law is
to fail the victims of those crimes. The victims are the
raison d’être of the Rome Statute system. The Court
has given hope to the victims of atrocity crimes, and
more than 200,000 victims have already benefitted
directly or indirectly from the concrete assistance
programmes of the ICC Trust Fund for Victims. Estonia
also contributed to the Trust Fund this year, and we call
upon others to do the same.
As the report highlights, the Court was never
intended to replace national courts, nor could it ever
do so. Given that States have the primary responsibility
to ensure accountability, it is of utmost importance
that States, the United Nations and other international,
regional and non-governmental organizations assist
States in building a national capacity to investigate
and prosecute Rome Statute crimes domestically. The
increasing attention that the United Nations has recently
given to strengthening domestic capacity to address
Rome Statute crimes is most welcome, and I hope those
efforts will continue. Estonia has allocated development
cooperation resources to promoting the strengthening
of national judicial capacity in that regard, working
closely with civil society organizations, which play
a crucial role in assisting States in incorporating the
Rome Statute into their domestic legislation, and we

4/10

31/10/2014

call upon all Member States in a position to do so to do
the same.
There are States parties to the ICC across all
regions of the world, and all States parties share
ownership of the Statute. The work of the Assembly of
States Parties conducted intersessionally is open to all
parties. It is indeed expected that all States parties will
engage actively in its work and its working groups at all
diplomatic levels.
As the mandates of the current President of the
Court and the President of the Assembly of States
Parties will come to an end soon, I would like to take
this opportunity to thank Judge Song and Ambassador
Intelmann — one of our own — for their tireless
efforts in enhancing States’ support for the Court and
cooperation between the Court and the United Nations.
Estonia will continue to be committed to the ICC.
We pledge to defend the independent mandate of the
Court and the election of the most qualified judges.
I will also extend the same level of support to the
candidate for the post of President of the Assembly,
His Excellency Mr. Sidiki Kaba, Minister of Justice of
Senegal.
Mr. Nyago (Uganda): Thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to address the General Assembly
on the work of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
I wish to start by thanking Judge Song, the President
of the International Criminal Court, for the report of
the Court (see A/69/321), as well as for his presentation
(see A/69/PV.34). This being his last such address to
the General Assembly in his capacity of President of
ICC, we congratulate him for his service and wish him
the very best in his future endeavours.
Uganda fully identifies with the concerns raised by
the African Union’s extraordinary summit that was held
specifically to discuss the politicization and selectivity
of the ICC, on 12 October 2013 in Addis Ababa. Uganda
further identifies with the well-articulated statements
made to the General Assembly by the representatives
of different African Member States on the issue of the
politicization and selectivity of the ICC’s methods.
Indeed, my Head of State, while marking our muchcherished 52 years of independence earlier this month,
focused on the issue of the ICC’s undermining the
African Union by summoning a sitting African Head
of State to The Hague earlier in October 2014. He said

14-59895

31/10/2014

“My view is that at the next African Union summit,
African countries should review their membership
to the ICC treaty. The ICC is turning out not to be
value addition product that we had expected it to
be. It is instead a biased instrument of post-colonial
hegemony.”
Africa’s legitimate concerns have to be genuinely
addressed if the ICC is to retain its relevance in Africa.
That said, I would like to reiterate Uganda’s
commitment to the fight against impunity for the
perpetrators of the most heinous crimes of concern to
the international community. Uganda has incorporated
the Rome Statute into our domestic law, followed by
the establishment of the War Crimes Division of its
High Court. The Division is seized with cases that
would otherwise be handled by the ICC. We commend
the Court for the assistance it has rendered by training
the judges and prosecutors of the International Crimes
Division. At the moment, the Division is seized with
the case Uganda v. Thomas Kwoyelo, a senior Lord’s
Resistance Army commander accused of Rome Statute
crimes.
Uganda was the first to make a State referral to the
ICC, which led to the indictment of Mr. Joseph Kony
and others from the Lord’s Resistance Army, who are
beyond our national jurisdiction. Unfortunately, not
only are the indictees at large, but they continue to
cause untold suffering wherever they operate. Under the
auspices of the African Union Regional Task Force, the
Uganda People’s Defence Forces are currently pursuing
Mr. Joseph Kony and his Lord’s Resistance Army in
the Central African Republic. Due to the asymmetrical
tactics and the nature of the terrain in which the
Lord’s Resistance Army operates, the maintenance
and sustainability of the African Union Regional Task
Force is very costly to individual troop-contributing
countries, and we would encourage further support for
it.
That notwithstanding, the Uganda People’s Defence
Forces observe high standards of discipline as outlined
in its operational code of conduct. It has a field court
martial that deals with cases of errant soldiers as soon
as they are detected. All reports indicate the least
incidence of crime in the eastern areas of the Central
African Republic where the Uganda People’s Defence
Forces are operating.
In paragraph 33 of the Court’s report, in which
the situation in Uganda is discussed, it is stated that

14-59895

A/69/PV.36

the Office of the Prosecutor continued to gather
and analyse information related to alleged crimes
committed by the Uganda People’s Defence Forces and
continues to encourage national proceedings in relation
to both parties to the conflict. That should not create
the impression that the Government is soft on Uganda
People’s Defence Forces members who are alleged to
have committed crimes in the course of pursuing the
Lord’s Resistance Army; far from it. The Ugandan
Government routinely investigates and conducts public
trials in a general court martial of any errant soldiers.
We would therefore welcome any further information
available to the Prosecutor of the ICC so as to assist
our national investigations and prosecutions. That kind
of collaboration would go a long way in enhancing our
common efforts in the fight against impunity.
Finally, I would like to end by addressing the issue
of unfunded mandates. I am talking about the referrals
by the Security Council, which are not funded from the
budget of the United Nations. By their nature, Security
Council referrals involve the most difficult cases. If
the referrals continue to be unfunded, the resources of
the International Criminal Court will be depleted with
nothing much to show for it in the end.
Mr. Šćepanović (Montenegro): Since this is the
first time I take the floor in the sixty-ninth session
of the General Assembly, I would like to offer my
congratulations to President Sam Kutesa on his election
to lead the General Assembly at this session. I assure
him and the Bureau of our strong support and full
cooperation.
Montenegro fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered yesterday by the observer of the European
Union (see A/69/PV.34). However, I would also like to
make a statement in my national capacity.
In contrast to previous human rights treaties, which
required only self-reporting, a State’s commitment to the
International Criminal Court (ICC) requires it to cede
to an independent prosecutor the power to investigate
and prosecute that State’s own nationals for mass
atrocities when the prosecutor determines that the State
is unwilling or unable to carry out such an investigation
domestically. The fact that almost two thirds of United
Nations Member States have embraced the jurisdiction
of an independent international institution on their own
territory is a remarkable development. Indeed, a decision
by national leaders to become party to the Statute of the
Court would appear to run against to their self-interest,
since it is widely assumed that the ICC will focus on
5/10

A/69/PV.36

prosecuting high-level figures in countries where mass
atrocities have occurred. Certainly there is no other
area of international law where we have delegated
so much unconditional authority to an international
institution over which national leaders have so little
control. All of that is proof of our commitment to
improving international law and independent judicial
mechanisms.
The international community should leave no space
for political calculation when it comes to ratifying the
Rome Statute of the ICC, since such practices could
result in serious harm to the lives and fundamental
human rights of civilian populations. We are aware that
the root causes of the problems facing international
criminal law lie mainly in political instability, or
sometimes in the poor education or economic conditions
that give rise to conflict. Such failures, however,
cannot serve as an excuse for violations of international
criminal law, particularly the Rome Statute.
The twentieth century witnessed a number of cases
of genocide, and we must do our best to prevent history
from repeating itself. However, the growing number
of conflicts and crises we are seeing today — some
of which, in the words of the Secretary-General, have
become among the greatest since the Second World
War — reminds us that we must pay great attention to
further improving international mechanisms to fight
impunity. While we should continue to strengthen the
International Criminal Court as the most important
of such mechanisms, we must also deliver tools for
prevention through concepts such as the responsibility
to protect and offices such as that of the Special Adviser
to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide.
I take this opportunity to reaffirm once again our
strong commitment to the principles of the Rome Statute
and the work of the International Criminal Court, as well
as to supporting all efforts aimed at achieving universal
jurisdiction for the Court. I would therefore like to
recall that over the past decade Montenegro has actively
cooperated with all international judicial institutions,
especially the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. We strongly support the rule of
law at the international level and its implementation
through the mechanisms established through the
United Nations. In that regard, we encourage all United
Nations actors to systematize their cooperation with the
Office of Legal Affairs, and we stress the importance
of the efforts the United Nations has made in that field.

6/10

31/10/2014

Without strong rule of law at the national level,
attempts to strengthen it at the international level
are significantly hampered. Montenegro is therefore
continuing to reform its criminal court procedures
by incorporating the principal international crimes
described in articles 6, 7 and 8 of the Rome Statute,
thereby aligning its domestic criminal code with the
Statute. We have also enacted a law on cooperation
with the International Criminal Court, proving once
again our full commitment to the further development
of international judicial mechanisms.
Through our activities in the Human Rights
Council we continue to stress the importance of
ratifying the Rome Statute, and we invite those States
that have not yet ratified it to do so. As a party to the
Statute, we once again express our strong political will
and determination to carry out further procedures in
the process of ratifying the Kampala amendments by
the end of 2016. In that regard, we have already made
adjustments amending our criminal code by stipulating
the crime of aggression.
I would like to conclude by saying that Montenegro
welcomes the General Assembly’s annual consideration
of the report of the ICC. We commend the role of its
outgoing President of the Assembly of States Parties.
At the same time, we stress the importance of the
complementarity of the ICC as a crucial tool to achieve
the common goals of peace and security.
Ms. Krasa (Cyprus): The Republic of Cyprus is
pleased to participate in today’s consideration of the
annual report of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
(see A/69/321) and would like to thank the President
of the Court, Judge Song, for his comprehensive
presentation of the report to the General Assembly
yesterday (see A/69/PV.34).
The Republic of Cyprus aligns itself the the
statement delivered yesterday by the observer of the
European Union (see A/69/PV.34).
Cyprus would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate the commitment and support that it has always
given to the Court since its inception, for the following
reasons. First, we consider it a moral obligation to
promote accountability for atrocities, regardless of
where they are committed. Secondly, we steadfastly
support strengthening international law as a means to a
more just and peaceful international order. Thirdly, the
fact that our country continues to experience the effects
of injustices committed over 40 years of aggression

14-59895

31/10/2014

and foreign occupation renders the Court’s mission
even more salient to us. Considering those reasons, it
is no coincidence that Cyprus has been a party to the
ICC since 2002 and was one of the first countries to
ratify the amendments to the Rome Statute adopted in
Kampala in 2010, including the amendment concerning
the crime of aggression.
My country is proud to be actively engaged in,
among other things, promoting the universality and
full implementation of the Rome Statute. Those issues
have been persistent challenges for the Court, and
overcoming them is vital for achievement of its mission.
In that regard, my country is honooured to be currently
serving as a focal point in the Assembly of States Parties
for promoting its plan of action for the universality and
full implementation of the Rome Statute.
My delegation believes that cooperation among all
stakeholders is key to overcoming current and future
challenges. In particular, States parties should continue
to promote the Court’s independence, credibility and
efficiency.
The Republic of Cyprus would like to reiterate
its conviction that the Court significantly contributes
to the overall goal of the United Nations in working
to consolidate peace and security. In that regard,
the relationship between the United Nations and
the Court, as formalized in their 2004 Relationship
Agreement, is significant, and we support further
strengthening the relationship through practical steps
such as those outlined in the report of the Court to the
Assembly of States Parties on the status of the ongoing
cooperation between the ICC and the United Nations,
which is contained in document ICC-ASP/12/42. As
we emphasize the importance of the relationship’s
complementarity, we also take this opportunity to
highlight the importance of efforts on the part of
the United Nations to strengthen the capacity of its
membership to address Rome Statute crimes.
Many thought the creation of the ICC was a mission
impossible. Yet for the last 12 years it has tangibly
contributed to advancing international justice. For
that reason, the Republic of Cyprus, in welcoming
the progress the ICC has made this year, would like to
reiterate its unwavering support for the Court.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
Several representatives have asked to speak in
exercise of the right of reply. May I remind members
14-59895

A/69/PV.36

that the statements in the exercise of the right of reply
are limited to ten minutes for the first intervention and
to five minutes for the second intervention. Statements
should be delivered by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Aldahhak (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation would like to exercise the right
to reply to certain statements that have been made
concerning the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic. In
that connection, my delegation would like to emphasize
the following points.
First, the major responsibility for accountability and
the administration of justice falls upon the shoulders of
the concerned countries themselves.
Secondly, the mandate of the International
Criminal Court is complementary to the various
national jurisdictions, and it cannot replace national
justice. It can be resorted to only in the framework of
certain specific conditions, which are not fulfilled in
the Syrian case.
Thirdly, the Syrian people are the main sovereign
decision-maker and the only entity capable of choosing
the justice system that it deems appropriate in order to
bring the perpetrators of crimes to account. No country
and no other party has the right to try to usurp the
rights of the Syrian people or their national decisions.
No party and no State has the right to speak on behalf
of the Syrian people.
Fourthly, justice is indivisible. It has to be
comprehensive. Justice has to be far removed from
politicization, selectivity and double standards. The
noble concept of justice should not be abused, nor
should it be used according to the various whims and
interests of certain influential parties and their allies.
One of the permanent members of the Security
Council has talked about the so-called harsh reality.
Unfortunately, that harsh reality is obviously before us.
It manifests itself when some countries behave in a way
that does not serve justice at all but rather undermines
its credibility. Such behaviour is used in order to adopt
an obviously arbitrary and politicized policy whereby
those countries insist on talking about the situation
in some countries while turning a blind eye to a lot of
blatant crimes and documented atrocities perpetrated
by other countries. We have listened to a number of
presentations and statements by those countries in
which no mention was made of the crimes committed
by the Israeli occupation against the people in the Arab
occupied territories, and that has been going on for
7/10

A/69/PV.36

many decades. The latest such crimes were the heinous
atrocities perpetrated by the occupation authorities
against the inhabitants of Gaza.
The delegations of those same countries have
also ignored the fact that some permanent members
of the Security Council have provided immunity and
impunity to the leaders of the Israeli occupation forces.
They have done so by using their right of veto dozens
of times in order to prevent the Security Council
from adopting resolutions that would condemn Israel
and make its Government accountable for war crimes
and crimes against humanity committed against the
countries in the region and the Arab inhabitants living
under occupation. Those countries are the ones that
have raised the slogan of international justice but ignore
what their allies are doing, which includes exacerbating
certain conflicts in various countries at the expense of
the people of those countries.
Who will talk about holding the Western former
colonial Powers accountable for inciting conflicts in
Africa? Have those countries forgotten the painful
events that occurred in Rwanda? Have they forgotten
what the commander of the United Nations peacekeeping
forces said at that time, namely, that a certain Western
country with a permanent seat on the Security Council
had itself supported the perpetrators of genocide?
Where do we stand today on the question of making
accountable all those who have committed war crimes
and major blatant violations of human rights against the
Iraqi people in Abu Ghraib or elsewhere?
Even if some have forgotten those events, the
people of the region will not forget the lies and
fabrications against Iraq and Libya. The photos of the
abused and raped in Abu Ghraib prison will forever be
imprinted in our memories, especially for proponents
of human rights and true international justice. Acts of
rape, beheading, terrorism, sexual abuse, torture and
other atrocious practices must be completely rejected,
whether they are acts practiced on the ground or in
mobile secret prisons.
My delegation reiterates its call for holding the
officials of Governments that support terrorism
responsible for the terrorist acts that the Syrian people
and others in the region and the world are experiencing
today. Behind the terrorist who is leading Daesh ‑ the
self-proclaimed Khalifa al-Baghdadi ‑ there are people
in the Governments of neighbouring countries who are
able on a daily basis to create hundreds of terrorists
like him. There is also the would-be sultanate-illusion
8/10

31/10/2014

pursuer who is seeking to make himself a new sultan at
the expense of many Arab countries and the blood of
their people. Another governor is financing terrorism
and investing in it in the same way that he would buy a
hotel in Paris, a store in London, or the right to host the
FIFA World Cup. And there are others like him in other
countries. Pure justice would require that we prosecute
those officials and make them accountable for crimes
committed against Syria, the Syrian people and peoples
of the world who are suffering from terrorism.
In conclusion, my delegation would like once again
to remind countries that allegedly care for Syria and
the Syrian people that the only way to help Syria is
clear and well known. The only way to help Syria is
to exert sincere efforts to combat terrorism, to support
a genuine political and peaceful solution based on a
national and comprehensive dialogue between and
among Syrians and under Syrian leadership, as well
as to support the efforts of the United Nations Special
Envoy, Mr. De Mistura, in that respect.
Ms. Özkan (Turkey): With regard to the baseless
allegations just made by the representative of one
delegation, I would like to stress that they will be duly
responded to by their counterpart, the Turkish Cypriots,
whose voice unfortunately cannot be heard in the Hall.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 73?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 11 (continued)
Sport for development and peace
Draft resolution (A/69/L.5)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly previously considered agenda
item 11 at its 28th plenary meeting, on 20 October.
I now give the floor to the representative of Tunisia
to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.5.
Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
allow me to commend the role played by the United
Nations and its specialized agencies and programmes
in the support of sport, especially the activities
conducted by the United Nations Office on Sport for
Development and Peace. I would like to reiterate our
appreciation of the great and sustained efforts deployed
by the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on

14-59895

31/10/2014

Sport for Development and Peace, Mr. Wilfried Lemke,
promoting the affinities relating sport to development
and peace.
Sport plays a major role, especially in developing
a relationship of cooperation among countries, nations
and individuals far from their geographic, social, racial
and cultural environment. That is what we clearly see
in the various sporting events and forums at the local
and international levels, where athletes quickly become
ambassadors of their countries, defending the values
of peace, friendship and just competition, which are
the principles enshrined in the international Olympic
Movement. Sport is also a means to support social
integration and human development, especially when
it develops awareness, confidence and the spirit of
leadership among groups and societies, which brings
with it a number of environmental, development,
economic, social and political benefits. In the light of
the important instrumental role played by sport at many
levels, sport has been included in the development
process as a major means for ensuring peace and
security.
Sport is also important for human fitness. That is
why we have seen a close link between sport on the
one hand and human rights and development on the
other. Allow me, Sir, to refer to the General Assembly’s
debate last week (see A/69/PV.28). That debate revealed
a major consensus on the importance of sport as a
means to promote human development.
Within that context and in order to use sport as an
engine for sustainable peace and development, I would
like to present today to the sixty-ninth session of the
General Assembly the draft resolution entitled “Sport as
a means to promote education, health, development and
peace” (A/69/L.5), on behalf of Tunisia and Monaco and
all the other countries sponsoring the draft resolution.
The draft resolution reiterates the commitment of the
international community to using sport as a tool for
conciliation and good cooperation among countries
without discrimination or exclusivity at the regional,
national and international levels, thereby further
promoting understanding, cultural diversity and human
rights.
The draft resolution calls upon Member States to
give priority to sport in national policies and to focus
on the international character of that activity as a tool
to promote peace, health, education and development.
The draft resolution welcomes the Olympic Games that
are scheduled to be held in Rio de Janeiro in 2016; in
14-59895

A/69/PV.36

Pyeongchang, Republic of Korea, in 2018; and in Tokyo
in 2020, as those occasions can be considered to be a
means to consecrate the culture of peace and amity and
unify all the various athletes and parties wherever they
come from and whatever their faiths or ethnicities.
Finally, allow me to extend my thanks to all
Member States for the laudable efforts they have
exerted in support of the draft resolution. I would now
like to call upon other Member States to support the
draft resolution in the General Assembly, as it will be a
significant message to all stakeholders that they should
promote and advance sports activities in a way that will
serve the cause of development and peace in the world.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/69/L.5,
entitled “Sport as a means to promote education, health,
development and peace”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that, since the submission of draft
resolution A/69/L.5, the following countries, in addition
to those delegations listed on the document, have
become sponsors: Andorra, the Bahamas, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Cameroon, China, the Congo, Croatia,
Cyprus, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Greece,
Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jordan, Kyrgyzstan,
Lebanon, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mongolia, the
Netherlands, Nicaragua, Poland, Romania, the Russian
Federation, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Uruguay and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/69/L.5?
Draft resolution A/69/L.5 was adopted (resolution
69/6).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
the speakers in explanations of vote, I would like to
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by the delegations
from their seats.
Mr. Sargsyan (Armenia): We would like to explain
our position on the adoption of resolution 69/6.
On behalf of my delegation, I would like to commend
the President’s leadership and professionalism in

9/10

A/69/PV.36

guiding the work of the General Assembly and to thank
him for providing us the opportunity to share our views
on the subject. Armenia understands the importance of
resolution 69/6, “Sport as a means to promote education,
health, development and peace”, and commends the
efforts of its main sponsors, Monaco and Tunisia, as
we share in the strong belief that sport promotes mutual
understanding and coexistence, peace and development
throughout the world. We are of the view that sport
should be kept out of politics, and we strongly condemn
xenophobia, racism and discrimination in sport in all
its forms and manifestations.
Having said that and in reference to the recognition
of the importance of international sporting events as
indicated in resolution 69/6, we would like to express

10/10

31/10/2014

our concern with regard to a certain sporting event
to be held next year. Considering the ongoing hatred
against Armenians and the Government-sponsored
Armenophobia in the host country of the inaugural
2015 European Games, we have well-grounded and
serious doubts about the ability of the latter to ensure
the safety and security of all athletes, provide fair and
equal conditions for participants and guarantee the
integrity of that international sporting competition.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 11?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 4 p.m.

14-59895
