UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1997/652
21 August 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 20 AUGUST 1997 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached letter, dated 18 August 1997,
which I have received from the Chairman of the International Monitoring
Committee established pursuant to the mandate of the Inter-African Mission to
Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB).
Attached to the letter is the first periodic report of the Member States
participating in MISAB, as requested by the Security Council in its resolution
1125 (1997) of 6 August 1997.
I should be grateful if you would bring the attached letter and its
enclosure to the attention of the members of the Security Council.

(Signed)

97-22225 (E)

220897

220897

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1997/652
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 18 August 1997 from the Chairman of the
International Monitoring Committee addressed to the
Secretary-General
[Original:

French]

I have the honour to transmit the first report, covering the period from
6 to 18 August 1997, requested by the Security Council in paragraph 6 of
resolution 1125 (1997) concerning the situation in the Central African Republic.

(Signed)

General Amadou Toumani TOURÉ
Chairman of the International
Monitoring Committee

/...

S/1997/652
English
Page 3

Enclosure
First report to the Security Council pursuant to
resolution 1125 (1997) concerning the situation
in the Central African Republic
(18 August 1997)

INTRODUCTION
1.
On 6 August 1997, the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution
1125 (1997), in which it approved the continued conduct by Member States
participating in the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the Implementation of the
Bangui Agreements (MISAB) of the operation to achieve its objective to
facilitate the return to peace and security by monitoring the implementation of
the Bangui Agreements. Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Council authorized the Member States participating in MISAB and
those States providing logistical support to ensure the security and freedom of
movement of their personnel. It decided that that authorization would be
limited to an initial period of three months, after which the Council would
assess the situation on the basis of the reports submitted to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations at least every two weeks by the Member States
participating in MISAB.
2.
This is the first such report, which the Security Council requested the
Member States participating in MISAB to provide within 14 days after the
adoption of resolution 1125 (1997). It was prepared by the International
Monitoring Committee to supervise the implementation of the Bangui Agreements,
which includes the representatives of the States members of the International
Mediation Committee (Gabon, Burkina Faso, Chad and Mali), in collaboration with
the MISAB Command, which consists of high-ranking officers representing all of
the Member States participating in MISAB, including Senegal and Togo.
3.
This report, in addition to providing a brief introduction to MISAB and its
operations, describes developments in the situation in the Central African
Republic from 6 August 1997, when resolution 1125 (1997) was adopted, to the
present.

POLITICAL LEADERSHIP
4.
Both the International Monitoring Committee to supervise the implementation
of the Bangui Agreements and the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the
Implementation of the Bangui Agreements are under the political authority of
General Amadou Toumani Touré, former President of the Republic of Mali, Chairman
of the International Monitoring Committee and personal representative of the
heads of State concerned.
5.
The International Monitoring Committee to supervise the implementation of
the Bangui Agreements, chaired by General Touré, includes one representative of
each of the four heads of State of the members of the International Mediation
/...

S/1997/652
English
Page 4

Committee, as well as a consultant from the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), who acts as a diplomatic adviser to the Committee.
6.
Thus, the International Monitoring Committee to supervise the
implementation of the Bangui Agreements is the body which directs the actions of
MISAB, since it receives the necessary political guidance directly from the
heads of State concerned, and especially from the President of the Gabonese
Republic, who is Chairman of the International Mediation Committee. As such, it
is the negotiating body among the various parties to the Central African crisis
(President of the Republic, Government, presidential majority, group of 11
opposition political parties, moderate opposition parties or CODEPO, centrists,
former rebels, loyalist members of the armed forces, trade unions, civil
society). As its name indicates, the International Monitoring Committee is
primarily responsible for the political monitoring of the Bangui Agreements.
7.
The International Monitoring Committee has adopted a plan of action which
reflects the gist of the main provisions of the Bangui Agreements in the form of
a timetable, which can be outlined as follows:
-

Formation of a government of national union;

-

Adoption of an amnesty law covering those who committed offences in
the context of the third rebellion;

-

Disarmament (surrender of weapons by the former rebels in honour and
dignity, and recovery of weapons by MISAB from militias and civilian
populations);

-

Implementation of the recommendations of the General Meeting on
National Defence;

-

Situation of former heads of State;

-

Suspension of the parliamentary audit;

-

Final phase of national reconciliation through a number of actions
aimed at consolidating peace and security (organization of regional
and sectoral awareness-raising seminars, organization of a National
Reconciliation Conference, elaboration of an electoral code, access by
political parties to the State media and other measures).

8.
MISAB is under the patronage of President El Hadj Omar Bongo of Gabon,
Senior Head of State of the International Mediation Committee. It is under the
political authority of General Amadou Toumani Touré, Chairman of the
International Monitoring Committee. While it was initially under the command of
Brigadier General Edjo Edouard Nkili of Gabon, since 2 August 1997 it has been
headed by General Augustin Mombo Moukagni of Gabon, assisted by a Chief of Staff
(Colonel Talla Niang of Senegal), a Legal Counsel (Colonel Sizing Walla of Togo)
and the heads of each of the six contingents.

/...

S/1997/652
English
Page 5

COOPERATION WITH THE CENTRAL AFRICAN AUTHORITIES
AND INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
9.
Since its arrival in Bangui in February 1997, MISAB, which is a neutral and
impartial force, has been of considerable help in creating the climate of
security which has emerged over a period of days, weeks and months. After many
operations designed to deter and respond to flagrant provocations, it has
managed to contain the organized crime, hold-ups and other armed robberies which
had sown terror in the city of Bangui and in the country's interior.
10. MISAB was deployed to complement the actions of the various security
services, which had been weakened by the rebellion.
11. Pursuant to its mandate, the International Monitoring Committee maintains
constant contact with the various Central African authorities to ensure the
implementation of the provisions of the Bangui Agreements. In this connection,
it is regularly consulted both by the President of the Republic and Head of
State and by the Prime Minister and Head of Government, as well as by the
National Assembly, on a considerable number of issues concerning the life of the
Central African nation.
12. The International Monitoring Committee to supervise the implementation of
the Bangui Agreements, acting on behalf of MISAB and/or on its own behalf,
maintains regular contacts with international organizations, including UNDP and
foreign diplomatic missions based in Bangui, with a view to requesting their
diplomatic, financial and material support for mediation initiatives in the
Central African Republic.

DEPLOYMENT OF THE FORCE
13. At the time of the Summit Meeting of Heads of State and Government of
France and Africa, held in Ouagadougou in December 1996, Bangui, the capital of
the Central African Republic, was in the throes of a fratricidal conflict. This
attracted the attention of the heads of State, who immediately delegated four of
their number in response to the request made at the Summit by the President of
the Central African Republic, Ange-Félix Patassé, through his Minister for
Foreign Affairs at the time, Michel Gbezera-Bria (currently Prime Minister).
14. The four heads of State delegated to Bangui (President El Hadj Omar Bongo
of Gabon, President Blaise Compaoré of Burkina Faso, President Idriss Deby of
Chad and President Alpha Oumar Konaré of Mali) succeeded, after difficult
negotiations, in obtaining a truce, and called on the loyalist forces and the
rebels, as a temporary measure, to maintain their respective positions as at the
date of signature of the truce.
15. At the request of the mediator, and with the agreement of the Conference on
Consensus-building and Dialogue, held in Bangui from 11 to 16 January 1997, the
above-mentioned four heads of State decided to send an inter-African force with
logistical support from France. This force, known as the Inter-African Mission
to Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements, includes, in addition to
troops from Gabon, Burkina Faso, Chad and Mali (the countries members of the
/...

S/1997/652
English
Page 6

International Mediation Committee), troops from Senegal and Togo, as a result of
the decision of President Abdou Diouf and President Gnassingbé Eyadema to
contribute to this gesture of African solidarity.
16. The activities of MISAB are governed by the mandate assigned to it by the
heads of State concerned (see document S/1997/561). These daily activities are
many and complex, and can be summed up as actions aimed at preventing
confrontation between the two main forces in question: the loyalists of the
Central African Armed Forces and the former rebels.
17. The MISAB force currently consists of six contingents with a strength of
796 soldiers (officers, non-commissioned officers and other ranks), distributed
as follows:
Burkina Faso
Mali
Senegal
Togo
Gabon
Chad

114
113
153
120
149
147

18. Owing to the development of organized crime, with the passive or active
complicity of the former rebels, the activities of MISAB have been extended,
with the agreement of the parties concerned, to operations to maintain security
in the various neighbourhoods. In a city divided into zones controlled by
either loyalists or former rebels, MISAB emerged, after the withdrawal of the
French operational assistance units, as the only force that could circulate
everywhere; thus, it was even called upon to perform social and humanitarian
functions.
19.

MISAB receives logistical support from the following sources:

(a) Participating States: Each State with troops in Bangui provides its
personnel (officers, non-commissioned officers and other ranks) with their
regular pay and supplies them with weapons;
(b) France: France, which was an observer of the Bangui Agreements,
agreed to provide logistical support to the various contingents as follows:
-

Payment of the soldiers' total food allowance and daily subsistence
allowance at the rates currently applicable to Central African
military personnel;

-

Payment of rents for the buildings used by military personnel and the
MISAB Command;

-

Provision of tactical and support vehicles for the force;

-

Supply of fuel and vehicle maintenance;

-

Supply of office equipment.

/...

S/1997/652
English
Page 7

An overall evaluation of the cost of deploying MISAB in Bangui cannot be
conducted until the end of the mission. However, taking all expenses into
account, the cost of the logistical support provided to MISAB by France amounts
to some 350 million CFA francs per month, or about $600,000;
(c)

Central African Government:

Vehicles for use by command personnel;

(d) Organization of African Unity (OAU): Special grant in the amount of
$40,000 in March 1997 to assist the various contingents. A second special grant
of $60,000 has been made jointly to the International Monitoring Committee and
MISAB.
20. Since the signing of the Truce Agreement of 28 June 1997 and the Ceasefire
Agreement of 2 July 1997, the following weapons have been deposited at the
residence of the Ambassador of France in Bangui for surrender to the
International Monitoring Committee and MISAB:
Heavy weapons:
120-mm mortars
81-mm mortars
60-mm mortars
14.5-mm machine-guns
12.7-mm machine-guns
75-mm recoilless guns
73-mm anti-tank rocket launchers
Rocket-propelled grenades
Total:

Surrendered:
Surrendered:
Surrendered:
Surrendered:
Surrendered:
Surrendered:
Surrendered:
Surrendered:

2 out of a total of 4
4 out of a total of 15
7 out of a total of 19
5 out of a total of 6
1 out of a total of 3
2 out of a total of 2
62 out of a total of 67
4 out of a total of 11

Surrendered:

87 out of a total of 107
(81.30 per cent)

Surrendered:
Surrendered:
Surrendered:
Surrendered:
Surrendered:
Surrendered:

2 out of a total of 96
209 out of a total of 456
150 out of a total of 552
349 out of a total of 1,133
38 out of a total of 67
13 out of a total of 17

Surrendered:

761 out of a total of 2,201
(34.43 per cent)

Light weapons:
Handguns
Sub-machine guns
Assault rifles
MAS 36 rifles
Light machine-guns
.30-calibre machine-guns
Total:

21. In the course of the various operations conducted by MISAB, and
particularly during the confrontations of 22 and 23 March and 20 to 26 June, the
force suffered the following losses:
-

6 dead (3 Chadian soldiers, 2 Gabonese soldiers and 1 Senegalese
soldier)

-

20 wounded (13 Chadian soldiers, 5 Senegalese soldiers, 1 Malian
soldier and 1 Gabonese soldier).

/...

S/1997/652
English
Page 8

22. Since the signing of the Ceasefire Agreement on 2 July 1997, MISAB has
participated, on the basis of a consensus, in joint security patrols consisting
of MISAB personnel, loyalists and rebels in all areas of the city of Bangui.
23. Moreover, the Technical Commission on Disarmament, presided over by
Lieutenant-Colonel Evariste Martial Konzzale, Minister to the Office of the
Minister for Territorial Administration, who is responsible for public security
and disarmament, has intensified his awareness-raising activities thorough a
methodically organized campaign to recover the rest of the weapons.
24. The Security Council's adoption of resolution 1125 (1997) had a catalytic
effect on developments in the situation in the Central African Republic. The
group of 11 opposition political parties, which had decided to suspend, as from
6 May 1997, the participation in the Government of the ministers belonging to
its ranks, met with the Prime Minister and Head of Government in the presence of
the Committee on 9 August 1997 and confirmed, in a joint communiqué, that it has
ended the suspension. This will allow the Government of Action in Defence of
Democracy, which is a type of government of national union, to be reconstituted.
25. In addition, President Patassé, in order to expedite the process of
national reconciliation, presided over an important meeting on Tuesday,
12 August 1997, which brought together the entire Central African political
community, the Government (with the participation of all members of the
International Monitoring Committee) and a delegation from the MISAB Command.
This meeting, which launched a new era in the country's political life (that of
a resolute march towards peace), will be followed by others after the Government
has been reconstituted.
Conclusions
26. The current experience with the Central African crisis is unique, and is
all the more stimulating in that it is unlike any previous experience. The
African mediation in Bangui, with its strengths and weaknesses, gives an idea of
what Africans can do to settle internal conflicts on their continent. However,
it is important to point out that, owing to the insufficiency of the African
countries' own resources, logistical support from the international community,
along the lines of the support which France has provided to MISAB and which
remains open to contributions from all other States, remains a necessity.
27. The adoption of resolution 1125 (1997), which was hailed by the entire
Central African political community, the whole of Africa and the international
community, is perceived as a recognition of the beneficial role being played by
MISAB in synergy with the International Monitoring Committee to supervise the
implementation of the Bangui Agreements.

-----
