S/2015/264

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 April 2015
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
This fourteenth report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of Security
Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of Security Council resolution 2165
(2014) and paragraph 5 of Security Council resolution 2191 (2014), in which the
Council requested the Secretary-General to report, every 30 days, on the
implementation of the resolutions by all parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab
Republic.
2.
The information contained in the report is based on the data available to
United Nations agencies on the ground and reports from open sources and from the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. Data from United Nations agencies on
their humanitarian deliveries have been reported for the period 1 to 31 March 2015.
More recent data have been included, when available.

II. Major developments
A.

Political/military
3.
Widespread conflict and high levels of violence continued throughout the
Syrian Arab Republic in March, particularly in the governorates of Idlib, Aleppo,
Rif Dimashq, Damascus, Dar`a, Homs, Hama, Deir ez-Zor, Ladhiqiyah and
Hasakeh. Indiscriminate aerial bombings, including the use of barrel bombs, by
Government forces and indiscriminate shelling by non-State armed groups and
extremist and listed terrorist groups 1 continued, resulting in deaths, injuries, the
destruction of homes and infrastructure and the displacement of civilians. Parties to
the conflict continue to disregard international humanitarian law and their
obligations to protect civilians.

__________________
1 On 30 May 2013, Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and the Nusra Front were

designated as terrorist groups by the Security Council under resolution 1267 (1999). The two
groups operate in the Syrian Arab Republic.

15-05996 (E)

200415

*1505996*

S/2015/264

4.
Heavy fighting in the governorate of Idlib, including in Idlib City, led to
dozens of deaths and injuries and displaced tens of thousands of people. After days
of escalating fighting, the newly formed Jaysh al-Fatah, comprised of the Nusra
Front, Ahrar al-Sham and six other non-State armed groups reportedly comprising
more than 4,000 fighters, launched an offensive against Government and
pro-government positions in and around Idlib city, taking control of the city at the
end of March. Government and pro-government forces withdrew to positions south
of the city and subsequently attacked the city with heavy shelling, including with
surface-to-surface rockets and aerial attacks, including reportedly with barrel
bombs. The United Nations Institute for Training and Research Operational Satellite
Application Programme analysis of satellite imagery collected on 6 April 2015
found that, compared to images collected in February 2014, 350 structures were
damaged, including more than 120 that were completely destroyed. Aerial
bombardment of the city and the nearby villages of Sarmin, Mantaf and Nayrab
between 29 and 31 March reportedly killed at least 49 civilians. Non-State armed
groups engaged in fighting against the two largely Shia majority villages of
Al Foh’a and Kafraya, where an estimated 20,000 people reside.
5.
The National Coalition of Syrian Revolution and Opposition Forces alleged
that Government forces used a chlorine agent during attacks in Idlib governorate in
March, a claim denied by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic.
6.
Fighting and shelling between Government forces and non-State armed groups
inside Aleppo city continued. On 6 March, at least 20 civilians were allegedly killed
as a result of barrel bombs dropped by Government helicopters on the
neighbourhood of Qadi Askar in eastern Aleppo city. Indiscriminate mortar attacks
by non-State armed groups led to dozens of civilian deaths and injuries. On
23 March, at least 13 civilians were killed and more than 30 injured as a result of
indiscriminate attacks on the neighbourhood of Jamiliya.
7.
Government forces continued the aerial bombardment of areas in Rif Dimashq,
resulting in the reported killing and injuring of hundreds of civilians. For example,
on 4 March, Government missiles struck a residential area in the heart of Deir
al-Asafeer, in eastern Ghouta, reportedly killing six civilians and injuring at least
15 others. Attacks on 8 March had a significant impact on civilians in Erbin, when
vacuum bombs were reportedly dropped on residential areas, killing at least
11 civilians and injuring more than 70. Air strikes near a primary school in Deir
al-Asafeer on 10 March reportedly killed 2 civilians and injured 50 others, including
children. The town of Douma was also affected by air strikes, with dozens of
civilians killed. Air strikes on 14 and 15 March hit the residential neighbourhoods of
Na’oura Garden and Masaken, reportedly killing 38 civilians and injuring at least
147 others. An air strike on a market in Harasta al-Qantara in eastern Ghouta on
27 March resulted in at least 30 injured. Civilians reportedly rushed out of a nearby
mosque to tend to the injured, and a second air strike in the vicinity of the mosque
reportedly killed 9 civilians and injured some 70 others.
8.
Government attacks on Moadamiyet, where humanitarian conditions continue
to deteriorate, were also reported. Humanitarian assistance continued to be
restricted, despite several requests being made by the United Nations to deliver aid;
however, reports indicate that it was still possible for specific groups of residents,
such as students and public servants, to enter and exit. Despite that, at the last
Government checkpoint before civilians are allowed to re-enter Moadamiyet they

2/13

15-05996

S/2015/264

are reportedly prevented from carrying in bread or other food products. The food
and medical situation is worsening at a time when the deaths of two children, with
10 more in critical condition, have been reported.
9.
Non-State armed groups continued to fire mortars and rockets on Damascus
city, hitting the areas of Bab Touma, Dwel’a, Al Kassa’, Abou Rummaneh and
Al Sha’la. On 8 and 11 March, non-State armed groups targeted several areas in
Damascus with mortar rounds and Katyusha missiles, some of which hit Umawyeen
Square in Damascus, injuring six civilians. On 30 March, several mortar rounds hit
Harika neighbourhood and the area near Tishreen Military Hospital in Barza
neighbourhood, with 2 civilians reported killed and at least 30 others injured.
10. Negotiations between the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and
Yarmouk camp delegations on a local agreement continued in March. Delegations
were due to meet again on 2 April, but on 1 April, ISIL and the Nusra Front
infiltrated the camp. Some 18,000 people, including 3,500 children, were trapped in
Yarmouk when heavy fighting erupted between ISIL, the Nusra Front, non-State
armed groups and Government forces, including aerial attacks and the reported use
of barrel bombs. Dozens of civilians were reportedly killed and hundreds wounded.
There were reports of abductions and executions carried out by ISIL fighters who
claimed control of most of the area. Snipers were said to be active in the area. While
it is still difficult to ascertain the number of people who have left the camp,
thousands have fled Yarmouk for neighbouring communities. The absence of
protection and the deteriorating humanitarian conditions are extremely worrying.
There were already severe shortages of food, water and health supplies and the
recent violence has exacerbated this situation.
11. Fighting continued in the south of the country, including in Dar`a governorate.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR)
received information indicating that Dar`a al-Balad has been under heavy
Government bombardment. On 26 March, Government jets bombed the city, while
helicopters dropped bombs on the vicinity of a market, killing at least 25 civilians
and injuring 45 others. Non-State armed groups reportedly launched more than
30 gas cylinders and rockets on Dar`a city, killing 4 people from the same family.
Heavy fighting also broke out in Bosra al-Sham 2 on 21 March. According to reports,
non-State armed groups seized full control of the town on 24 March. Sources state
that the archaeological citadel and residential areas were hit with a number of
explosive shells, leading to the destruction and burning of many traditional houses
and markets, as well as the Bosra al-Sham hotel. On 1 April, non-State armed
groups claimed control of the Naseeb border crossing with Jordan after fighting in
and around the area. The border has been closed, halting the movement of civilians
and goods, including humanitarian assistance.
12. Hostilities between Government forces and non-State armed groups continued
in Homs. According to reports received, on 17 March a Government air strike on a
populated neighbourhood killed 3 civilians and injured around 18 others. On the
same day, non-State armed groups shelled the Zahra residential area, reportedly
injuring at least nine civilians. Fighting in areas populated by civilians subsequently
decreased in intensity, until 12 April, when multiple explosions resulted in civilian
__________________
2 Bosra, which was once the capital of the Roman province of Arabia, was inscribed on the United

Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization World Heritage list in 1980, and
placed on the agency’s World Heritage in Danger list in 2013.

15-05996

3/13

S/2015/264

casualties, reports of a school being partially destroyed and large-scale damage to
houses.
13. In Waer, despite continued armed clashes, negotiations on a local agreement
continued between the Waer committee and the Government delegation. The
agreement presented to both sides, with implementation scheduled in three phases,
fell through.
14. On 30 March, ISIL fighters entered the village of Mab’ouja — which has a
mixed population of Sunnis, Alawites and Ismaili — east of Hama city, Hama
governorate. According to reports received by OHCHR, at least 30 civilians were
executed by ISIL. Government forces stationed in the adjacent village of Saboura
reportedly retaliated by attacking ISIL positions with heavy weapons leading to an
unspecified number of civilian deaths and injuries in addition to the destruction of a
number of residential buildings. Reports have been received that some 4,000 people
fled Mab’ouja for Saboura and Salamiyeh, some of whom have subsequently
returned.
15. In the Deir ez-Zor governorate, Government aerial bombardment of the ISILcontrolled city of Mayadin struck a residential home on 6 March, reportedly killing
at least five members of a family.
16. Non-State armed groups, particularly Jaish al-Islam, continued to attack
Government positions and areas populated by civilians in Ladhiqiyah governorate,
using homemade rockets.
17. The use of improvised explosive devices and vehicle-borne improvised
explosive devices continued. On 20 March, at least 45 civilians were killed and
70 injured in Hasakeh city when two car bombs targeted people celebrating Nowruz.
A statement attributed to ISIL was posted on the Internet the same day, claiming
responsibility for the detonation. On 10 March, a vehicle-borne improvised
explosive device detonated in the town of Tal, in eastern Ghouta, reportedly killing
1 civilian and injuring 25 others. The attack also destroyed four residential
apartments. On 30 March, a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device was
detonated in a market in the area of Jiza in rural Dar`a, held by a non-State armed
group, leading to the explosion of a gasoline store where the vehicle was parked,
killing at least 13 civilians, including 6 children, and critically injuring around 50.
The perpetrators of those attacks remain unknown.
18. Civilian infrastructure continued to be targeted, and basic services, including
electricity and water, continued to be cut. For example, the National Defense Force
continued to cut off water supply to some 45,000 people in areas between Homs and
Hama that are controlled by non-State armed groups opposed to the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic. On 24 March, ISIL deactivated the Tayem power plant,
cutting electricity to the 228,000 people living in besieged neighbourhoods of Deir
ez-Zor city. As a result, water supply has been dramatically reduced. Schools have
also been attacked. On 5 March, one teacher and two children were killed in an
attack in the town of Kanafez in Hama governorate. On the same day, a school in
Beret Armnaz village in Idlib governorate was damaged, with one teacher and six
students killed and three students injured.
19. ISIL has allegedly continued its trend of child recruitment, including enlisting
them in the so-called Ashbal al-Khilafa (Cubs of the Caliphate). Recruitment offices

4/13

15-05996

S/2015/264

are said to have opened in Mayadin and Bokamal for the purpose of motivating
young recruits before they undergo military courses and training.
20. Hundreds of thousands of people have been displaced by fighting. Multiple
sources estimate that at least 77,000 people have been displaced by fighting in Idlib
governorate. Another 75,000 people were displaced in Dar`a and Quneitra
governorates. Some 12,500 people were reported to have moved from Hole city to
Hasakeh city because of fears of an escalation of fighting between the Kurdish
People’s Protection Unit (Yekîneyên Parastina Gel) and ISIL and another
3,800 people have fled to Hasakeh city and Ras al-Ein due to fighting between the
groups north of Tal Tamer. Fighting between the same groups in Aleppo forced some
7,000 people to flee Lower Shyukh town, approximately 20 kilometres from Ain
al-Arab, and surrounding villages to Menbif and Aleppo city. Around 1,500 people
have been relocated from eastern Ghouta to the Dahiet Qudsaiya collective shelter
in Rif Dimashq, bringing the number to approximately 12,500 since January.
21. Non-State armed group alliances and formulations are in flux with new groups
being formed and others disbanding. Recently, and mainly in the northern part of the
country, a group of Free Syrian Army brigades and battalions in Idlib, Hama and
Ladhiqiyah countryside announced the formation of the Revolution Protectors
Group (Tajamou’a Homat al-Thawra). Twelve other non-State armed groups in
Hama and Idlib governorates formed Jabhat al-Sham. Suqour al-Sham has merged
with Ahrar al-Sham. In eastern Ghouta, officers who defected from the Syrian armed
forces established the Military Council for Damascus and Rif Dimashq and joined a
unified military command in eastern Ghouta. Kata’ib Ahl al-Sham in Rif Dimashq
(previously part of Ajnad al-Sham) announced its merger with Al Rahman Corps.
22. On 6 March, Jaish al-Islam allegedly negotiated a ceasefire between the Nusra
Front and Liwa Sham al-Rasoul, a local non-State armed group, in Beit Sahem in
Damascus, after two days of fighting between the two groups. The fighting was
believed to have begun after civilians demanded that the Nusra Front evacuate its
positions in the area. Four civilians died and six were injured when the Nusra Front
fired on protestors in front of its headquarters. The Nusra Front later evacuated the
area.
23. The presence of fighters with sectarian insignias was visible at different
checkpoints in the Syrian Arab Republic. In Damascus, the Zeinab Battalions
announced the formation of a new battalion as a response to the Zeinab shrine
bombing on 23 February, reportedly aimed at conducting military operations,
including suicide missions. Allegedly non-State armed groups either killed or
captured a number of Hizbullah, Caucasian and Iranian fighters in Aleppo and
Dar`a.
24. According to data released by United States Central Command on 6 April, the
international anti-ISIL coalition has conducted 1,333 air strikes in the Syrian Arab
Republic since September 2014. While the large majority of those killed in these
strikes were fighters from ISIL or the Nusra Front, monitoring groups have also
reported civilian casualties resulting from these strikes. For example, the Syrian
Observatory for Human Rights states that 70 out of the 1,953 deaths it has
documented during the campaign were civilians. On 6 January, United States
Central Command announced that it had opened investigations into 18 separate
allegations of coalition air strikes resulting in civilian casualties in Iraq and the
Syrian Arab Republic between 8 August and 30 December 2014. It added that it had

15-05996

5/13

S/2015/264

determined that 13 cases were not credible and 5 remained under investigation,
including 2 from late December 2014, which were said to be credible.
25. The United Nations Special Envoy for Syria remains committed to pursuing
opportunities to achieve a reduction of violence. Consultations with the Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic and with representatives of the opposition on the
implementation of the Aleppo freeze initiative are currently inconclusive. The
proposed freeze constitutes a straightforward effort to save lives and to respond to
the desire of many Syrians for a respite from the fighting.

B.

Human rights
26. OHCHR continued to receive allegations and document cases of arbitrary
detention, torture and death in custody inside Government detention centres run by
Syrian security forces mostly in Damascus, but also in Hama and Homs. Allegations
were received noting systematic torture, including by electric shock, beatings with
metal sticks, forced positions for prolonged hours and inhuman detention conditions
in Al Khatib State Security Branch (Damascus), the Criminal Security Branch
(Damascus), the Harasta Air Force Intelligence (Damascus), Military Intelligence
Branch 291 (Damascus), the Air Force Intelligence Branch (Homs) and the Political
Security Branch (Idlib). Allegations of death in detention as a result of torture were
also received from a number of detention centres, including Mezzeh Air Force
Intelligence Branch (Damascus), Al Fayhaa Political Security Branch (Damascus),
Military Intelligence Branch 215 (Damascus) and a detention centre run by the
National Defence Forces in Hama. According to information received by OHCHR,
Syrian Government personnel fleeing Idlib reportedly executed at least 15 detainees
held at the Military Intelligence Branch.
27. Following the public release of thousands of photos of detainees who allegedly
died in Syrian Government detention centres, OHCHR sources reported that over
600 families have identified their dead relatives, the majority of whom had been
detained since 2012 and 2013 by various Syrian Government security branches.
28. On 24 March 2015, the Government reportedly released approximately
700 inmates who were detained at different security branches in Damascus.
29. ISIL continued to execute civilians. For example, on 10 March in rural Aleppo,
ISIL reportedly publicly beheaded a man for “witchcraft”. In the eastern part of
Homs governorate, ISIL executed and beheaded five men near Sokhna town on
21 March, reportedly for spying for the Government. Another man was executed for
allegedly “insulting God”. On 27 March, ISIL beheaded three men in the village of
Hanota, who were reportedly sentenced by a self-proclaimed court for the
possession of unpermitted weapons.
30. In Raqqa governorate, ISIL continued to carry out executions and other
punishment for alleged violations of codes based on its own strict interpretation of
Islamic law. On 2 March, ISIL fighters reportedly threw a man off a building and
then stoned him to death in the city of Tabaqqa allegedly on the basis of his sexual
orientation. On 6 March, ISIL fighters reportedly executed two civilians in the city
of Raqqa on the pretext of “collaborating with the Government”. OHCHR is not
aware if any form of judicial process took place prior to the execution.

6/13

15-05996

S/2015/264

C.

Humanitarian access
31. Some 12.2 million people require humanitarian assistance in the Syrian Arab
Republic. About 7.6 million people are internally displaced, and more than 3.9 million
people have fled the Syrian Arab Republic to neighbouring countries and North Africa.
32. Despite the continued efforts of United Nations agencies and their partners, the
delivery of humanitarian assistance remained extremely challenging. A combination
of factors continued to impede access in some areas, including insecurity and
shifting conflict lines, deliberate interference, restrictions on access and onerous
administrative procedures that constrain the effective delivery of assistance.
33. For the tenth month in a row, the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
was unable to send water treatment materials to Deir ez-Zor and Raqqa governorates
owing to the difficulty of delivering humanitarian supplies through areas controlled
by ISIL. WFP continued to halt deliveries to areas controlled by ISIL, affecting
some 700,000 people in Raqqa, Deir ez-Zor, Hasakeh and Aleppo governorates.
34. No major changes in the administrative procedures required by the Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic were reported in March. Those procedures continued to
delay or limit the delivery of assistance. A recent expansion of the Government’s
“hazardous items” list resulted in delays in approvals for the importation of water
treatment materials during March. On 11 March, United Nations agencies and partners
with warehouses in Tartous were informed by the Syrian authorities that facilitation
letters to transport aid supplies to Idlib would be provided so long as the deliveries
were destined only for Idlib city, which is controlled by the Government. That resulted
in significant delays transporting much needed supplies into the governorate. There
were also delays in approval or non-response from the Government to requests to
access various locations, including hard-to-reach areas of Dar`a, Aleppo, Hasakeh, Rif
Dimashq, Idlib, Hama and Homs governorates.
35. On 9 March, the Governor of Homs sent a letter indicating that United Nations
agencies working in the health sector could liaise with national non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) only through the governorate health department. On
24 March the Governor clarified that United Nations agencies needed to coordinate
with the Ministry of Health, and should not halt direct communication with the
national NGOs. On 19 March, the Governor of Hasakeh reversed a decision to
change the areas of coverage for World Food Programme (WFP) implementing
partners after concerns were raised by WFP and partners about the possible negative
impact of the decision on food distribution.
36. The United Nations continued to face challenges with visas for international
staff members. As at 5 April 2015, a total of 317 visa applications (requests for new
visas or visa renewals) for United Nations staff had been submitted since 1 January
2015; 229 visas had been approved; and 22 visas had been rejected, including 6
since 15 March. In comparison, a total of 28 visas were rejected in 2014. As at
5 April, 66 visa requests remained pending: 30 within the limit of 15 working days
and 36 exceeding the limit.
37. The 16 Government-approved international NGOs continued to face a series of
administrative hurdles and restrictions that impact their ability to operate.
International NGOs remain restricted in their ability to partner with national
humanitarian organizations, open sub-offices, conduct missions, join inter-agency

15-05996

7/13

S/2015/264

convoys and conduct independent needs assessments. However, progress was
recorded in March with regard to the visa status of international NGO staff members
with the 10 pending visa applications approved during the month. Four additional
visa requests were submitted in the last week of March and remain pending.
38. The number of national NGOs authorized by the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic to partner with United Nations agencies increased during the
reporting period. In March, two new national NGOs were added to the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs list of authorized national NGOs: one in Homs governorate and one
in Damascus governorate. As at 31 March, 116 authorized national NGOs are
operating through 174 branches. Authorized national NGOs continue to operate
under complex procedures in partnering with United Nations agencies.
39. The level of funding for humanitarian activities continued to be outpaced by
the scale of needs. The 2015 Syria Response Plan was 16 per cent funded as at
14 April. Some $3.6 billion were pledged for humanitarian activities in the Syrian
Arab Republic and in the region at a conference hosted by the Amir and the
Government of Kuwait on 31 March.
40. The combination of these factors continues to make the delivery of assistance
in the Syrian Arab Republic ever more challenging. The delivery of assistance to the
4.8 million people in hard-to-reach areas continued to be particularly difficult.
During March, United Nations agencies and partners reached over 226,000 people
with food in hard-to-reach locations; almost 60,000 with core relief items; almost
113,000 with health supplies; almost 395,000 with water, sanitation and hygiene
supplies; and almost 12,000 with education supplies.
41. Two inter-agency cross-line convoys to hard-to-reach locations took place in
March. On 3 March, teams reached Talbiseh in Homs governorate, completing the
planned delivery of aid to 60,000 people. On 26 March, the first part of a convoy
reached Rastan, Homs governorate, providing assistance for 33,250 people. During
the passage of the convoy, members of the team were temporarily detained by a
non-State armed group. They were subsequently released and escorted to safety. The
other two parts of the convoy to Rastan were put on hold owing to the security
situation in the area. That meant that the remaining 48,150 individuals, who were
scheduled to receive assistance, received nothing.
42. The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic convened a Joint Committee
meeting on 9 April to discuss access to “hot spot areas” 3 and the 33 locations requested
by the United Nations for inter-agency convoys since December. The Joint Committee
approved convoys to 16 locations, 8 of which were on the list of 33 locations requested
by the United Nations for inter-agency convoys. It was agreed that 3 of the 33 locations
in Aleppo and Rif Dimashq are currently not accessible owing to the deteriorating
security situation, including changing front lines. The requests to access these locations
will be reactivated as soon as the situation permits. In the meeting, United Nations
representatives sought approval of all outstanding requests and for more systematic and
longer periods of access in order to respond to growing needs and monitor delivery.
__________________
3 The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic refers to “hot spots”. Clarification was requested

by the United Nations on 16 July 2014 for the definition and criteria of “hot spots” but has not
been received. For the purpose of the present report, they are referred to as hard-to-reach areas
until clarified because of the difficulty in reaching these locations.

8/13

15-05996

S/2015/264

43. Despite the extremely difficult operating environment, the United Nations and
partners continued to reach millions of people in need in March from within the
country and across borders pursuant to resolutions 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014).
WFP delivered food assistance for nearly 4.1 million people in 12 of the
14 governorates. WHO distributed medicines and supplies for 3.4 million treatments
in 10 governorates. UNICEF provided multisectoral assistance for over 1.1 million
people in eight governorates. In addition, deliveries of chlorine provided some
15.6 million people with access to safe water. UNHCR reached approximately
320,000 people with core relief items and protection services in 11 governorates.
The International Organization for Migration reached over 255,000 people with
multisectoral assistance in 11 governorates. The Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations (FAO) supported 32,000 people with agricultural support in
four governorates. The United Nations Population Fund supported its partners to
deliver reproductive health and gender-based violence services to 57,000 women in
eight governorates. UNRWA continues to provide support to up to 480,000 Palestine
refugees on a monthly basis.
44. Cross-border deliveries continued under the terms of resolutions 2165 (2014)
and 2191 (2014). As at 12 April, the United Nations and its partners had sent
97 shipments to the Syrian Arab Republic: 67 from Turkey and 30 from Jordan. The
shipments included food assistance for almost 1.9 million people; non-food items for
around 1.2 million people; water and sanitation supplies for over 430,000 people;
and medical supplies and treatments for over 930,000 people. In line with resolutions
2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014), the United Nations notified the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic in advance of each shipment, including details of content,
destination district and number of beneficiaries. The United Nations monitoring
mechanism continued its operations in Jordan and Turkey. Its operations in Iraq
remain pending owing to continued insecurity. The mechanism continued to benefit
from excellent cooperation with the Governments of Jordan and Turkey.
45. United Nations agencies continued to use the Nusaybin/Qamishli crossing with
the consent of the Governments of Turkey and the Syrian Arab Republic. WFP
transported 46,000 food rations through the border in March. However, owing to
delays at the crossing and to transport approvals, WFP dispatched only 30,000 food
rations during March, including 5,700 rations in areas under the control of non-State
armed groups in the governorate. UNICEF also received approval in March to
import water, sanitation and hygiene and non-food items through the
Nusaybin/Qamishli crossing, with the first shipments completed in early April.
46. Both international and Syrian NGOs continued to deliver multisector
assistance in the Syrian Arab Republic in March, including through the provision of
ongoing services. NGOs reached nearly 1.6 million people during the month,
including aid delivery to nearly 785,000 people in Aleppo, over 286,000 in Dar`a
and more than 280,000 people in Idlib. However, the escalating conflict in Idlib
hampered programme operations.
Besieged areas
47. Of the 4.8 million people in hard-to-reach areas, some 440,000 people remain
besieged in the Syrian Arab Republic. This includes 167,500 people besieged by
Government forces in eastern Ghouta and Darayya; 26,500 people besieged by
non-State armed groups in Nubul and Zahra; 228,000 people besieged by ISIL in the

15-05996

9/13

S/2015/264

Government-controlled western neighbourhoods
18,000 people besieged in Yarmouk.

of

Deir

ez-Zor

city;

and

48. The parties to the conflict continued to restrict access to besieged areas during
March. United Nations agencies reached a total of 18,000 people (4 per cent) with
food assistance and 1,198 people (0.3 per cent) with health assistance. No core relief
items were dispatched during the reporting period.
49. In eastern Ghouta, some 163,500 people remain besieged by Government
forces. No United Nations assistance reached eastern Ghouta during March, with the
exception of a limited amount of water support to 300 people in Harasta. The last
United Nations assistance to reach eastern Ghouta was in January 2015.
50. In Darayya, Rif Dimashq, about 4,000 people remain besieged by Government
forces. No United Nations assistance reached Darayya during March. People in the
area have not been assisted by the United Nations since October 2012.
51. In Yarmouk, about 18,000 people were besieged. The conditions inside the
camp worsened following the ISIL attacks. There are further shortages of food,
water and medical supplies compounding the already dire situation. On 5 March,
Syrian authorities granted the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) permission to distribute food parcels to
civilians in Yarmouk after a break of nearly three months. Through a new
distribution point established to the east of Yarmouk, UNRWA distributed a food
parcel sufficient for approximately 10 days to almost 18,000 people in the month of
March. The food deliveries were accompanied by WFP-supplied nutritional supplies
for 1,197 children. Some 1,198 people were also offered a basic medical
consultation. With UNRWA support, approximately 1,512 children also continue to
receive informal primary education lessons in Yarmouk. UNRWA has been unable to
access Yarmouk since 28 March, following the severe escalation of fighting inside
the camp area. UNRWA has provided assistance to people who have managed to flee
Yarmouk to the neighbouring areas of Tadamoun and Yalda. Those civilians who
remain must be protected and must have access to assistance.
52. In Nubul and Zahra, about 26,500 people remain besieged by opposition
forces. No United Nations assistance reached the two areas during March. United
Nations agencies have not been able to deliver humanitarian assistance to the
villages since 8 May 2014.
53. In the Government-controlled western neighbourhoods of Deir ez-Zor city,
some 228,000 people are besieged by ISIL. Through FAO partners, 140 sheep were
delivered. No other United Nations assistance reached the area in March. People in
Deir ez-Zor city were last reached by the United Nations in May 2014, although
other humanitarian and commercial goods reached the city prior to the siege. Access
to food is a serious concern as the pre-existing food supplies dwindle and the prices
rise.
Free passage of medical supplies, personnel and equipment
54. During March, WHO and its implementing partners dispatched medicines and
medical supplies for nearly 3.4 million treatments 4 to local health authorities, NGOs
__________________
4 One standard treatment course is considered as treatment for one person. Treatment courses are

determined for each medicine distribution on the basis of international WHO standard.

10/13

15-05996

S/2015/264

and private medical facilities in 10 governorates from within the Syrian Arab
Republic. Approximately 100,000 treatments were delivered through cross-line
deliveries in Aleppo, Deir ez-Zor, Homs and Rif Dimashq governorates. This
included the cross-line mission, led by UNHCR, to eastern Aleppo city using the
Bustan al-Qasr crossing. Following a negotiated six-hour humanitarian ceasefire,
medical supplies for 5,000 people were delivered by pull-cart to a hospital in Bustan
al-Qasr. United Nations agencies working in the health sector provided medical
supplies and treatments through cross-border operations for more than
60,000 people in March, including surgical kits.
55. Access to medical supplies and equipment continued to be restricted by
insecurity and constraints imposed on humanitarian operations by parties to the
conflict. For example, WHO has supplies in warehouses in Aleppo ready to be
delivered to Nubul and Zahra, but ongoing fighting did not allow access. In total,
nine WHO requests to deliver assistance to various locations in Aleppo, Dar`a, Rif
Dimashq, Idlib, Hasakeh and Deir ez-Zor governorates have gone unanswered,
including three submitted during the reporting period. In addition, despite receiving
the approval of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, WHO shipments of medical
assistance to the besieged town of Douma, in eastern Ghouta, and Madaya, in Rif
Dimashq, through the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, remain pending with the Ministry
of Health.
56. The second national polio immunization campaign in 2015 was carried out
from 22 to 26 March, by the Ministry of Health, with support from UNICEF and
WHO, targeting some 2.9 million children under the age of five. Preliminary results
revealed that the campaign reached over 2 million children under the age of five in
12 governorates. The vaccination campaign could not be implemented in Raqqa
governorate, as ISIL did not permit vaccinations at health centres and mobile teams
to proceed. Low coverage rates were also recorded in Deir ez-Zor owing to
restrictions imposed by ISIL. Fighting in Idlib also inhibited the vaccination
campaign. Some 682,000 children could not be vaccinated in the three governorates
as a result. A separate cross-border vaccination campaign was organized from
southern Turkey targeting children under the age of five. Some 1.3 million children
under the age of five were vaccinated for polio in eight governorates.
57. Attacks on medical facilities, ambulances and medical personnel continued
during the reporting period. In March, Physicians for Human Rights documented
nine attacks on medical facilities. Eight were by Government forces and one by
international coalition forces. Three attacks occurred in Idlib, two in Dar`a, two in
Deir ez-Zor and two in Hama governorates. Five attacks were with missiles and
rockets and four with barrel bombs. Physicians for Human Rights also documented
the deaths of five medical personnel, two of whom were targeted or killed. Two
personnel were tortured to death by Government forces and three were shot by
unknown forces. Two deaths were in Damascus, and one each in Rif Dimashq and
Aleppo governorates.
Safety and security of staff and premises
58. On 2 April, two Syrian Arab Red Crescent volunteers were killed in two
separate incidents while on duty in Idlib governorate. Four other Syrian Arab Red
Crescent volunteers were injured in one of the incidents.

15-05996

11/13

S/2015/264

59. Five Palestinian Red Crescent Society staff members were injured when the
Palestine Hospital in Yarmouk was hit by mortar shells on 1 April.
60. On 30 March, a Palestinian Red Crescent Society staff member was shot and
killed by unidentified assailants while on his way to perform his duties at the
Palestine Hospital in Yarmouk camp.
61. On 26 March, a team of United Nations staff members and Syrian Arab Red
Crescent volunteers were temporarily detained by a non-State armed group during
an inter-agency convoy to Rastan city in Homs governorate. All participants were
subsequently released and escorted to safety.
62. On 26 March, the office of a UNHCR NGO partner was hit by a rocket,
causing structural damage in the Shmal al-Khat neighbourhood of Dar`a city. No
injuries were reported. As a result of the attack, the distribution of UNHCR core
relief items to 2,500 individuals could not take place.
63. On 23 March, an UNRWA vehicle sustained damage as a result of mortar fire
in the al- Jamiliya area of Aleppo.
64. Clashes in the vicinity of the distribution point at Yarmouk camp were reported
several times during the reporting period. On 19 March, the distribution of
humanitarian assistance in the camp was disrupted when a civilian was seriously
wounded while approaching the distribution area. She later died from her injuries.
65. On 8 March the roof of the refugee waiting area in the UNHCR Qamishli field
office was hit by gunfire, with a bullet landing close to a group of refugees. No
injuries were reported.
66. A total of 30 United Nations staff members, 26 of whom are UNRWA staff,
continue to be detained or missing. The total number of humanitarian workers killed
in the conflict since March 2011 is 73. That included 17 staff members of the United
Nations, 42 staff members and volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent,
8 volunteers and staff members of the Palestinian Red Crescent Society and 6 staff
members of international NGOs. Of the 73, 6 have been killed since 1 January 2015.

III. Observations
67. The situation in the Syrian Arab Republic continues to deteriorate rapidly. Day
after day we see more men, women and children killed, with the parties to the
conflict failing to uphold the most basic tenets of international law. Instead of
reducing, the violence has escalated in many parts of the country.
68. The disastrous effect of the widespread use of explosive weapons in populated
areas continued to devastate large parts of the country. Innocent people were killed
and maimed, some deliberately, and forced to flee as a result of the use of heavy
weaponry in populated areas. All parties to the conflict must realize the toll this
conflict continues to take on ordinary civilians. Yet they persist. Their actions raise
serious moral and legal questions, which the international community, including the
Security Council, must address. Those responsible for violations of international
humanitarian law must be held accountable.
69. I again remind the parties to the conflict that the perpetration of violations by
one does not exempt others from their obligations to protect civilians. These are

12/13

15-05996

S/2015/264

basic, minimum, international legal standards that must be upheld irrespective of the
conduct of others. The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, as a government,
has a particular responsibility in this regard. Direct attacks against civilians in
retaliation for another party’s unlawful actions are strictly prohibited and constitute
serious violations of international humanitarian law.
70. I am also appalled at the collective punishment being meted out to people in
the Syrian Arab Republic. People are being purposefully denied water, electricity
and basic services. The tightening of siege tactics continues to inflict wanton
suffering. It is abhorrent and must be ended.
71. I would like to make a special plea to the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic for protection and assistance to the especially vulnerable Palestinian
refugee population in the Yarmouk camp in Damascus. Caught between the Syrian
armed forces and the worst of the extremist groups, they have little way out — and
aid can find little way in. Their suffering has been largely out of the spotlight. In a
single lifetime, many have suffered displacement twice. Since the conflict in the
Syrian Arab Republic began, their plight has been particularly acute.
72. Despite the significant challenges, humanitarian actors — themselves often at
grave risk — continue to deliver aid to millions of people in need. I salute their
courage and selflessness in the service of the people of the Syrian Arab Republic. As
needs continue to grow, it is all the more urgent that their work is facilitated. They
must be allowed to get on with the job of saving lives. Delays, obstruction and
interference with their work is wholly unacceptable. Attacks on aid workers are
prohibited under international humanitarian law and can constitute a war crime.
73. I am grateful for the generosity that Governments and people from around the
world have shown, in particular through the pledging conference hosted by the Amir
of Kuwait on 31 March. It is crucial that the pledges made be urgently disbursed to
humanitarian organizations working on the ground so that the basic aid upon which
millions of Syrians inside their country and those who have sought refuge outside
the country depend can be delivered without interruption.
74. On 12 March I marked the fourth anniversary of the Syrian conflict by calling
upon the international community to fulfil its collective responsibility to the Syrian
people. Ordinary Syrians feel increasingly alone, as they and their neighbours
continue to suffer under the eyes of an international community that is divided.
Speaking at the League of Arab States summit at the end of March, I expressed anger
and shame at the situation and asked my Special Envoy, Staffan de Mistura, to
intensify the United Nations political efforts to end the conflict. Specifically, I asked
him to consult widely with Security Council members and throughout the region,
including with the Syrian parties themselves, on how to operationalize and flesh out
the core elements of the Geneva communiqué.
75. I count on your full and urgent support to this effort as a step towards forging
an inclusive, Syrian-led political transition based on the Geneva communiqué,
which meets the aspirations of the Syrian people for freedom, dignity and justice. It
is also incumbent upon the Syrian parties themselves, especially President Bashar
al-Assad, to take decisive steps to end the bloodshed and to start a political process.
Governments or movements that aspire to legitimacy do not massacre their own
people.

15-05996

13/13
