S/2001/758

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 August 2001
Original: English

Letter dated 1 August 2001 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to inform you and, through you, the members of the Security
Council, that, pursuant to paragraph 8 (a) (ii) of Security Council resolution 986
(1995), the Government of Iraq has submitted to me its distribution plan for the
purchase of humanitarian supplies during the new period specified in paragraph 1 of
resolution 1360 (2001). The Government of Iraq was informed today that I have
approved the plan on the understanding that its implementation would be governed
by resolutions 986 (1995), 1281 (1999), 1284 (1999), 1302 (2000), 1330 (2000),
1360 (2001) and the memorandum of understanding concluded on 20 May 1996
between the United Nations Secretariat and the Government of Iraq (S/1996/356),
without prejudice to the procedures followed by the Security Council Committee
established by resolution 661 (1990).
A copy of the list of supplies and goods accompanying the distribution plan
will be made available to the Security Council Committee. The list has been
reviewed by experts of the joint unit established by resolution 1051 (1996), who
have concluded that, on the basis of the information given in the annexes, no items
have been identified which would be prohibited under the plans for ongoing
monitoring and verification, or under Security Council resolution 707 (1991). They
have also concluded that the necessarily general nature of the description of many
items in the annexes to the plan renders it impossible to determine definitively
whether or not an item is notifiable under the provisions of resolution 1051 (1996).
They will keep the matter under review and provide a further assessment in the light
of additional information that may become available in applications submitted to the
Security Council Committee.
The distribution plan (see annexes II and III) and the letter dated 31 July 2001
from the Executive Director of the Iraq Programme addressed to the Permanent
Representative of Iraq to the United Nations, conveying my acceptance of the plan
(see annex I), are attached.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

01-49104 (E) 030801 030801

*0149104*

S/2001/758

Annex I
Letter dated 31 July 2001 from the Executive Director of the Iraq
Programme addressed to the Permanent Representative of Iraq
to the United Nations
[Original: English]
On behalf of the Secretary-General, I have the honour to acknowledge receipt,
under cover of your letter dated 23 July 2001 addressed to the Secretary-General
(see annex II), of the distribution plan (see annex III) submitted by your
Government for the new period specified in paragraph 1 of Security Council
resolution 1360 (2001) of 3 July 2001, together with the annexes to the distribution
plan received from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Iraq, through
the Office of the United Nations Humanitarian Coordinator in Iraq, and would like
to inform you that I have been authorized by the Secretary-General to convey in this
respect the following.
In resolutions 986 (1995) of 14 April 1995 and 1360 (2001), the Security
Council requires that the Government of Iraq ensure, on the basis of a plan to be
submitted to and approved by the Secretary-General, equitable distribution of
medicine, health supplies, foodstuffs, and materials and supplies for essential
civilian needs (humanitarian supplies) exported to Iraq under the conditions defined
by those resolutions. The memorandum of understanding concluded on 20 May 1996
between the United Nations Secretariat and the Government of Iraq (S/1996/356)
provides that the Government of Iraq shall prepare a distribution plan describing in
detail the procedures to be followed by the competent authorities with a view to
ensuring the equitable distribution of humanitarian supplies and submit the plan to
the Secretary-General for approval. The memorandum states in this regard that if the
Secretary-General is satisfied that the plan adequately ensures equitable distribution
of humanitarian supplies to the Iraqi population throughout the country, he will so
inform the Government of Iraq.
I have the honour to inform the Government of Iraq through you that, having
examined the distribution plan, the Secretary-General has come to the conclusion
that the plan, if properly implemented, should meet the requirements of equitable
distribution of humanitarian goods to the Iraqi population throughout the country.
The plan is, therefore, approved with the following understandings.
By paragraph 15 of Security Council resolution 1284 (1999) of 17 December
1999, the Government of Iraq has been authorized to export unlimited amounts of
oil and to import, under relevant resolutions of the Council, a wide range of goods to
meet the humanitarian needs of its population and to rehabilitate its civilian
infrastructure. As stated by the Secretary-General, now that increased revenues are
available for the implementation of the programme, the Government of Iraq is in a
position to reduce current malnutrition levels and improve the health status of the
Iraqi people (S/2000/520, para. 96). This can be achieved by allocating the
necessary funding level in the food and health sectors as well as by ensuring the
timely contracting of all supplies in quantities sufficient to meet the requirements
and targets set forth in the distribution plan, in particular those contained in the
supplementary report of the Secretary-General (S/1998/90). It is also necessary to
improve distribution systems in the food, nutrition and health sectors.

1

S/2001/758

I should like to reiterate that the Secretariat is fully committed to expediting
the processing and “notification” of applications as well as approval of applications
by the Security Council Committee established by resolution 661 (1990). I should
also like to reiterate that the Secretary-General is gravely concerned with the
unacceptably high volume of applications that have been placed on hold by
members of the Security Council Committee and has appealed to the members of the
Committee to review further their positions in that regard. On its part, as directed by
the Secretary-General, the Office of the Iraq Programme has been doing its utmost
in providing the necessary information and briefings to the Committee in order to
expedite the lifting of holds placed on applications. I should like to emphasize,
however, that, irrespective of the tireless efforts by the Secretary-General and the
Secretariat, decisions regarding holds on applications remain within the purview of
the Security Council Committee in accordance with established rules and
procedures.
In order to improve most expeditiously the nutritional status of children, the
Secretary-General has repeatedly recommended that the implementation of the
targeted nutrition programme should be expedited urgently and the funding level
should be kept under constant review in order to ensure the availability of adequate
supplies, warehousing, transportation and related infrastructure. I take note of the
relatively modest increase, from $6 million allocated in the distribution plan for
phase IX (S/2001/134) to $10 million in the distribution plan for phase X, allocated
for the targeted nutrition programme, which is intended to improve the nutritional
status of Iraqi children, an issue on which both the Government of Iraq as well as
the Secretary-General have expressed their deep concern. While it is acknowledged
that in the proposed distribution plan, in addition to the $10 million allocated, there
are a number of allocations made for certain items, under different sectors, which
are interrelated and have a direct bearing on the implementation of the targeted
nutrition programme, given the magnitude of the problems faced, the Government
may wish to consider further increasing the allocation to the targeted nutrition
programme in order to ensure that it reaches the full caseload. More specifically, the
Government may wish to give urgent and favourable consideration to a series of
costed proposals to ensure greater impact of the targeted nutrition programme,
which were included in the paper submitted by the United Nations Humanitarian
Coordinator in Iraq to the Minister of Health of the Republic of Iraq in May 2001.
It may be recalled that, in paragraph 9 of its resolution 1360 (2001), the
Security Council decided, inter alia, that the funds deposited in the escrow account
established by resolution 986 (1995) to be transferred to the Compensation Fund in
phase X shall be 25 per cent and that “the additional funds resulting from this
decision will be deposited into the account established under paragraph 8 (a) of
resolution 986 (1995) to be used for strictly humanitarian projects to address the
needs of the most vulnerable groups in Iraq as referred to in paragraph 126 of the
report of the Secretary-General of 29 November 2000 (S/2000/1132)”. Accordingly,
the inclusion of part ten (Special allocation requirements) in the distribution plan, in
response to paragraph 9 of resolution 1360 (2001) is welcome, particularly in
respect of the allocation to the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs. It is
recommended that a greater range of the Ministry’s humanitarian projects aimed at
vulnerable groups be provided with resources under the distribution plan and that its
allocation be expanded accordingly.

2

S/2001/758

The continuing incidence of ordnance and mine-related accidents throughout
Iraq remains an issue of deep humanitarian concern. The inclusion by the
Government of Iraq of equipment for mine and bomb clearance equipment in the
distribution plan is, therefore, most welcome.
It is a matter of grave concern, however, that the demining programme being
implemented by the United Nations in the three northern governorates has seriously
suffered owing to the inordinate delays in and or refusal of granting the visas
required for United Nations personnel associated with the demining programme. The
demining programme has also suffered from the long delays and or refusal to allow
the import of the essential equipment and supplies required for the implementation
of that programme. In view of the delays and uncertainties regarding the granting of
the required visas and allowing for the import of equipment and supplies, the United
Nations recently had to cancel a number of contracts and withdraw a request for 75
visas for personnel to be associated with that programme. Similar difficulties are
also being experienced with regard to the electricity programme undertaken by the
United Nations in the three northern governorates.
Accordingly, I should like to reiterate the appeal of the Secretary-General to
the Government of Iraq to expedite the granting of the required visas and allowing
for the import of supplies and equipment, in full conformity with the provisions of
paragraphs 46 and 47 of the memorandum of understanding.
A copy of the list of supplies and goods accompanying the distribution plan
will be made available to the Security Council Committee. The list will also be
posted on the web site of the Office of the Iraq Programme, together with the
distribution plan, in order to provide information to all concerned, including
potential suppliers. I should like to inform you, however, that the SecretaryGeneral’s approval of the plan does not constitute an endorsement of the specific
items for equipment and supplies contained in the annexes to the plan.
Amendments to the plan, where appropriate, should meet the requirements
outlined in paragraph 5 of resolution 1153 (1998). It is recognized that in certain
sectors not all the information required under paragraph 5 of that resolution could be
provided in the plan at this stage because of the complexity of the activities and the
range of items to be procured. Accordingly, the Government of Iraq and the United
Nations agencies and programmes should take all necessary steps to ensure that
applications submitted to the United Nations Secretariat will indicate priority and
complementarity in compliance with paragraph 5 of resolution 1153 (1998).
The approval of the distribution plan is subject to the condition that its
implementation is governed by the relevant provisions of Security Council
resolutions 986 (1995), 1281 (1999), 1284 (1999), 1302 (2000), 1330 (2000) and
1360 (2001) and the memorandum of understanding (S/1996/356) and that, in case
of inconsistency between the particular provisions of the plan on the one hand and
the resolutions and the memorandum of understanding on the other, the provisions
of the latter documents shall prevail.
Furthermore, the approval of the plan is without prejudice to actions that might
be taken by the Security Council Committee regarding applications for export of
particular items contained in the list submitted for the Committee’s consideration in
accordance with its procedures.

3

S/2001/758

The joint unit established by resolution 1051 (1996) will continue to review
the categorized list in the light of additional information that may become available
for the purposes of identifying items that are covered under the relevant provisions
of that resolution, because of their possible dual use for civilian and prohibited
purposes under resolution 687 (1991) of 3 April 1991 and other relevant resolutions.
In conclusion, I should like to welcome the improved consultations on the
distribution plan, both at the bilateral level between the United Nations agencies and
programmes with their respective technical counterparts in the relevant ministries of
the Government of Iraq as well as at the level of the Joint Consultative Committee. I
also welcome the decision to schedule a meeting of the Joint Consultative
Committee on a regular basis, every two months, to review the implementation of
the programme.
(Signed) Benon V. Sevan
Under-Secretary-General

4

S/2001/758

Annex II
Letter dated 23 July 2001 from the Permanent Representative
of Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
[Original: Arabic]
On instructions from my Government, I have the honour to transmit to you the
procurement and distribution plan for phase X submitted by the Government of Iraq
in accordance with the memorandum of understanding dated 20 May 1996 and
Security Council resolution 1360 (2001) (see annex III). My Government hopes that
the plan will be promptly adopted. The annexes to the plan will be submitted during
the next two days.
(Signed) Mohammed A. Al-Douri
Ambassador
Permanent Representative

1

S/2001/758

Annex III
Distribution plan for phase X submitted by the Government
of Iraq to the Secretary-General in accordance with the
memorandum of understanding of 20 May 1996 and Security
Council resolution 1360 (2001)
[Original: English]

1
