A/69/801*–S/2015/151*

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
27 February 2015
Original: English

General Assembly
Sixty-ninth session
Agenda item 37
The situation in Afghanistan

Security Council
Seventieth year

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 68/11
and Security Council resolution 2145 (2014), in which I was requested to report
every three months on developments in Afghanistan.
2.
The report provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in
Afghanistan, including significant humanitarian, development and human rights
efforts, since the issuance of my previous report of 9 December 2014 ( A/69/647S/2014/876). It also provides a summary of key political and security developments
and regional and international events related to Afghanistan. The annex contains an
assessment of progress made towards benchmarks and indicators since the issuance
of my report of 7 March 2014 (A/68/789-S/2014/163), in line with Security Council
resolution 1868 (2009).

II. Relevant developments
3.
Following the agreement of 21 September 2014 to establish a national unity
Government by President Ashraf Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah,
new Ministers assumed the roles of Foreign Affairs, Interior Affairs and Finance,
among others, while discussions continued on remaining appointments. The
discussions on the reform agenda outlined at the London Conference on 4 December
continued between the Government and its international partners. The passage of the
national budget provided the framework for promoting socioeconomic st ability.
Increased emphasis on regional dialogue resulted in a series of developments in the
areas of trade and security cooperation. Efforts by the Government of Afghanistan
* Reissued for technical reasons on 10 March 2015.

15-02628* (E)

100315

*1502628*

A/69/801
S/2015/151

to initiate a sustainable dialogue on peace and reconciliation were stepped up, a lbeit
with limited progress. The security transition to Afghan forces formally concluded
on 31 December 2014 at the end of the mandate of the International Security
Assistance Force led by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). The
volatility of the security situation continued to be reflected in the growing human
cost of the conflict in terms of civilian casualties and population displacements
throughout the year.

A.

Political developments
4.
The formation process of the national unity Government dominated the
reporting period. President Ghani introduced a number of interim measures to
ensure continuity in governance until appointments were finalized. On 1 December
2014, a presidential decree was issued stating that Provincial Governors and
Provincial Chiefs of Police retained their posts in an “acting” capacity while all
sitting Ministers were removed and Deputy Ministers temporarily assumed those
positions. On 13 December, a presidential decree was issued that set forth the duties
and authorities of the Chief Executive, including chairing the Council of Ministers,
following up on resolutions of the Cabinet, providing policy and reform advice to
the President and proposing appointments and dismissals of high -level officials. On
20 January 2015, a presidential decree specified the committees and institutions that
the President, First Vice-President, Second Vice-President and Special
Representative of the President on Reforms and Good Governance would each
oversee. During the reporting period, President Ghani visited all provinces to review
the situation first-hand, and reshuffled leadership positions in a number of
provinces, including Farah, Herat and Kunduz.
5.
On 20 January, President Ghani introduced 25 nominees to the lower house of
the National Assembly for ministerial positions and candidates to head the Central
Bank and the National Directorate of Security. Of the former, 13 were nominated by
the President and 12 by the Chief Executive, among them three women. President
Ghani had previously announced that no former Ministers or current Members of
Parliament would be considered, meaning that the nominees consisted of a number
of new political faces. A total of nine candidates either withdrew or were rejected by
the lower house during the review process. On 28 January, 19 nominees, including 2
replacement nominees, were put to a vote. As a result, the following nine
appointments were confirmed: the head of the National Directorate of Security and
eight Ministers (Foreign Affairs, Interior Affairs, Finance, Public Health, Refugee
and Repatriation, Mines and Petroleum, Rural Rehabilitation and Development and
Haj and Awqaf). The remaining 10 were rejected, including the only woman
candidate. As a consequence, Acting Ministers continued in 17 roles and an acting
governor stayed on at the Central Bank.
6.
The potential date for Parliamentary and District Council elections, as well as
electoral reform, have yet to be determined. According to the Constitution,
Parliamentary elections are mandated from 30 to 60 days before 21 June 2015.
District Council elections have never been held. On 27 January, the Chair of the
Independent Election Commission publicly proposed 3 October 2015 to hold both
sets of elections. The lower house of the National Assembly di scussed amendments
to the Law on Structure, Duties and Authorities of the Independent Election
Commission and the Independent Electoral Complaints Commission, but did not

2/39

15-02628

A/69/801
S/2015/151

vote on the matter prior to its winter recess on 28 January. The proposed
amendments included the appointments mechanism for electoral management
bodies, the terms of commissioners and key secretariat positions, the duration of the
Independent Electoral Complaints Commission and the lines of accountability for
those institutions. On 5 February, President Ghani released a press statement
reiterating his commitment to electoral reform and tasked Second Vice -President
Mohammad Sarwar Danish to identify areas for improvement with the Commission
and civil society. Two days later, Vice-President Danish told election observation
groups that the Electoral Reform Commission would soon be formed in accordance
with the agreement to form a national unity Government.
7.
Under the Constitution, the upper house of the National Assembly consists of
one third who are nominees of the President, one third who are elected by Provincial
Councils from among their own membership and one third who are members of
District Councils. On 10 January, President Ghani swore in 32 new Senators to the
upper house from their respective Provincial Councils, with the exception of Khost
and Uruzgan, who had not selected their representatives at that time. On the same
day, Provincial Council representatives who had been temporarily serving in the
vacant District Council seats in the upper house were requested to vacate the seats
until such time that District Council elections take place. The 34 nominees
appointed to the upper house during President Hamid Karzai’s tenure remain in
place.
8.
On 28 January, the lower house of the National Assembly passed an
amendment to the Provincial Councils Law, removing oversight powers of the
Councils over the local Government departments. In protest, 32 of the 34 Provincial
Councils closed their offices. President Ghani has since met with the C hairpersons
of the Provincial Councils and has tasked the Independent Directorate for Local
Governance to recommend new amendments to be introduced to the National
Assembly that create mutual accountability between the Provincial Councils and the
local authorities.
9.
President Ghani has placed considerable emphasis on achieving national
reconciliation through a formal Afghan-led process in which he foresees a role for
the traditional jirgas. He has welcomed and stressed the potential role of China in
support of the Afghan peace process. In reaction, a 14 January statement published
on the Taliban’s website stated that the movement “wanted peace” provided its
preconditions are met. Those include the end of the foreign military presence, the
establishment of an Islamic government and the implementation of Sharia law. On
27 January, the Taliban issued a statement clarifying that a recent visit by its
representatives to Beijing was not an effort to seek a mediation role for China.
10. In promoting a rights-based approach to a durable peace process, the Afghan
People’s Dialogue on Peace held a national conference in Kabul on 15 January. That
marked the completion of the second phase of the Dialogue, an inclusive civil
society-led peace initiative conducted over the past three years with the facilitation
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) that engaged
6,000 Afghans in identifying local drivers of conflict and developing local road
maps for peace. On 26 January, the head of the joint secretariat of the High Peace
Council met women members of Provincial Peace Committees from 15 provinces to
discuss means of accelerating peace efforts in their respective provinces. The joint

15-02628

3/39

A/69/801
S/2015/151

secretariat of the Afghan Peace and Reintegration Programme report ed that a total
of 1,716 individuals had joined the Programme in 2014.

B.

Security
11. The security transition was formally completed on 31 December 2014. On
28 December, in Kabul, a ceremony was held to mark the conclusion of
International Security Assistance Force operations. Afghan forces assumed full
responsibility for security and the new NATO-led Resolute Support Mission
commenced. As set forth in Security Council resolution 2189 (2014), the new NATO
non-combat, training, advisory and assistance operation will work in close
coordination with the Government of Afghanistan and will initially operate from
Kabul and four regional locations: Kandahar, Herat, Mazar-e-Sharif and Jalalabad.
12. The security situation in Afghanistan remained volatile. The United Nations
continued to monitor security-related events relevant to the work, mobility and
safety of civilians across the country and having an impact on the delivery of United
Nations-mandated activities and programmes. In 2014 there were 22,051 recor ded
incidents, which surpassed those of 2013 by 10 per cent. In terms of incidents
recorded over the past 13 years, 2014 was the second -highest, after 2011. Of those
incidents, 68 per cent were recorded in southern, south-eastern and eastern regions,
with Nangarhar Province being the most volatile and recording 13 per cent of the
incidents. Armed clashes and improvised explosive devices accounted for 76 per
cent of total incidents, an increase of 11 per cent from 2013. The use of suicide
attacks accounted for fewer than 1 per cent of all incidents recorded, though the 158
recorded attacks in 2014 represented a 47 per cent increase compared with 2013;
31 were in Kabul, compared with 18 in 2013. The Afghan National Security Forces
took countermeasures to thwart the efforts of anti-Government elements to
challenge control of a number of key districts and significantly disrupt the elections
held in April and June 2014. However, the rise in the overall number of security
incidents recorded indicates a mounting challenge to the Afghan security forces
from insurgent groups. Unconfirmed reports of significant casualties among
anti-Government elements and Afghan forces points to the increasingly attritional
nature of the conflict. That has been particularly evident in areas such as
Badakhshan, Kunduz, Hilmand, Nangarhar, Kunar and Nuristan Provinces, which
are also closely associated with illicit economic activity, notably illegal narcotics
production and trafficking.
13. Between 16 November 2014 and 15 February 2015, 5,075 security-related
incidents were recorded across the country by the United Nations. That represented
a 10.6 per cent increase against the same period in 2013/2014 and a 33.2 per cent
increase against the same period in 2012/2013. The continuing high le vel of security
incidents is partially attributed to an increase in anti -Government element activities,
especially during the November and December 2014 period. The months of
December 2014 and January 2015 also witnessed the highest number of security
incidents when compared with the same period each year since 2001. That is
attributed in part to a relatively mild winter that has allowed all parties in the
conflict to continue to conduct operations. The Afghan security forces initiated
extensive clearance operations in Kunduz and Hilmand over the winter to respond to
insurgent activity. Afghan security forces also continued operations in Faryab,
Herat, Kandahar, Nangarhar and Kunar Provinces to counter insurgent groups who

4/39

15-02628

A/69/801
S/2015/151

continued to contest control of the areas over the winter rather than withdraw until
the spring offensive commences. Following the spike in insurgent activity in Kabul
during October and November 2014, operations by the Afghan security forces
supported by the international military contributed to reducing the number of highprofile insurgent operations in the capital, resulting in a decrease of suicide attacks
from 10 during October and November to 5 during December and January.
Decreases were also recorded in Kabul for the improvised explos ive device attacks,
from 18 in the October to November period to 5 in December and 2 in January.
14. During the reporting period there were also more than 50 demonstrations
country-wide, nearly all of which were peaceful, in response to the publication of
cartoons considered to be blasphemous to Islam. Consistent with previous trends,
armed clashes continued to account for the majority of security incidents at 46.8 per
cent, followed by improvised explosive devices at 30.9 per cent. Targeted killings
continued at a high level. From 16 November 2014 to 15 February 2015, 191
assassinations and 40 attempted assassinations were recorded, representing 26.4 per
cent and 29.0 per cent increases respectively against the same period in 2013/2014.
A major spike in suicide attacks was also recorded: a total of 40 suicide attacks,
compared with 35 in the same three-month period in 2013/2014. On 29 January, an
improvised explosive device killed an Afghan local police commander in Laghman
Province and a follow-up suicide attack on the commander’s funeral held on the
same day resulted in the death of 15 people, including a number of senior local
Afghan security force personnel, and 34 reported casualties. On 12 February, a
member of the High Peace Council, Haji Sherin Agha, was assassinated by unknown
gunmen as he attended prayers in a mosque in Kandahar.
15. During the reporting period, there was speculation in the media about the
presence of groups linked to the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). A
handful of Afghan and Pakistani Taliban commanders are confirmed to have
declared allegiance to ISIL and an increasing number of commanders are reportedly
seeking funding from and considering cooperation with ISIL. There is no indication
of widespread or systematic support for or accommodation of ISIL in Afghanistan.
The Government of Afghanistan has indicated the seriousness with which the threat
of ISIL is being taken and its intent to curb the growth of the group in the country.
The principal security challenges from insurgent groups remain the Afghan Taliban
and other experienced insurgent entities, notably the Haqqani Network, the armed
faction of Hezb-e Islami Gulbuddin, Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan affiliates and the
Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan, particularly in the east of the country.
16. During the reporting period, 25 incidents recorded were either directly or
indirectly against the United Nations. The majority of incidents were criminal acts
directed towards national staff, including six cases of intimidation a nd one case of
abduction. Seven United Nations road missions came under attack during the period
in Khost, Laghman and Jalalabad Provinces on 3 and 17 December and 14 January
respectively and in Herat Province on 11, 18 and 29 January and 2 February. No
United Nations casualties were reported in any of the incidents.

C.

Regional cooperation
17. The new administration continued to actively work to enhance regional
engagement. That was manifest in a series of visits to and from neighbouring

15-02628

5/39

A/69/801
S/2015/151

countries and establishing cooperation agreements, such as the one signed during
President Ghani’s January visit to the United Arab Emirates in mid -January, when
the Enduring Strategic Partnership Agreement was concluded between the two
nations. On 20 January 2015, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Islamic
Republic of Iran visited Kabul. Among other issues, the Afghan leadership
discussed security cooperation and a proposed bilateral strategic cooperation
agreement. That visit was preceded by the 15 December 2014 signing in Tehran of a
Memorandum of Understanding by the commander of the Iranian Border Guards
and his Afghan counterpart to enhance cooperation in countering terrorism and drug
trafficking. During President Ghani’s visit to Turkmenistan in late January he
discussed with President Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedov the Turkmenistan Afghanistan-Pakistan-India gas pipeline and the creation of the AfghanistanTurkmenistan-Azerbaijan-Georgia-Turkey “Lapis Lazuli” transport corridor, and
concluded a Memorandum of Understanding on the further development of
cooperation in the area of electric power, a programme of cooperation between their
respective Ministries of Foreign Affairs and supplementary agreements on several
electricity supply contracts.
18. Afghanistan and Pakistan continued to intensify efforts to improve security
cooperation. On 17 December, the Chief of Army Staff of Pakistan visited Kabul to
discuss security coordination. That was followed by a tripartite meeting in Pakistan
on 23 December of the Army Chief of Afghanistan, the commander of the
International Security Assistance Force and the Pakistani Chief of Army Staff. On
11 January 2015, the Pakistani Inter-Services Intelligence Chief met with President
Ghani in Kabul. Outcomes included agreements to reopen the Joint Border
Coordination Centres at the Torkham and Spin Boldak crossing points and for
coordinated counter-terrorism operations along the shared frontier. Exchanges also
took place between legislators, with an Afghan delegation participating in the
31 December 2014 Afghanistan-Pakistan parliamentary security dialogue in
Islamabad. In turn, on 9 January 2015 a delegation of Pakistani political party
officials discussed counter-terrorism cooperation and border security with senior
officials in Kabul. On the economic front, in early January the Afghanistan-Pakistan
Transit Trade Coordination Authority met in Islamabad to review the status of the
Afghanistan-Pakistan Transit Trade Agreement and discussed its expansion to form
a Pakistan-Afghanistan-Tajikistan Trilateral Transit Trade Agreement.
19. On 9 February, the first round of China-Afghanistan-Pakistan Trilateral
Strategic Dialogue was held in Kabul. The parties discussed the peace and security
situation in the region, as well as the need to deep en trilateral cooperation in
counter-terrorism and security. Both China and Pakistan pledged to support the
Afghan-owned and Afghan-led peace process. In support of multilateral
engagement, Chief Executive Abdullah represented Afghanistan at the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization’s Thirteenth Meeting of the Council of Heads of
Government in Astana on 14 and 15 December 2014. The meeting’s joint
communiqué stressed the importance of regional cooperation in the areas of trade,
transport and energy, including with observer States. On 29 January 2015, Kabul
hosted a seminar entitled “Regional Radicalization, Causes and Solutions”, an
activity of the counter-terrorism confidence-building measure of the Heart of AsiaIstanbul Process.
20. On 29 January, the International Contact Group on Afghanistan met in Abu
Dhabi to consider economic, security and political events in Afghanistan. As part of
continued regional engagement, from 8 to 10 February, my Special Representative

6/39

15-02628

A/69/801
S/2015/151

visited Uzbekistan and held discussions with senior Uzbek officials that included
the regional dimensions of counter-narcotics and broader issues of regional security
and stability.

III. Human rights
21. On 18 February 2015, UNAMA released its annual report for 2014 on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. The report documented 10,548 civilian
casualties (3,699 killed and 6,849 injured) in 2014, the highest number since
UNAMA began documenting civilian casualties in 2009 and marking a 22 per cent
increase in civilian casualties compared with 2013. Some 72 per cent of civilian
casualties were attributed to anti-Government elements, 14 per cent to
pro-Government forces (12 per cent to Afghan National Security Forces and 2 per
cent to international military forces) and 10 per cent to unat tributed cross-fire
between pro-Government forces and anti-Government elements. Explosive remnants
of war accounted for 3 per cent of civilian casualties (422 casualties, 124 killed and
298 injured), a 20 per cent increase compared with 2013. Ground engage ments
between pro-Government forces and anti-Government elements remained the
leading cause of civilian casualties, accounting for 3,605 civilian casualties (1,092
killed and 2,513 injured), followed by improvised explosive devices, accounting for
2,978 civilian casualties (925 killed and 2,053 injured).
22. Between 16 November 2014 and 14 February 2015, UNAMA documented
2,068 civilian casualties (730 killed and 1,338 injured), reflecting a sharp increase
of 25 per cent from the same period in 2013/2014. So me 71 per cent of civilian
casualties were attributed to anti-Government elements, 16 per cent to
pro-Government forces (15 per cent to Afghan National Security Forces and 1 per
cent to international military forces) and 7 per cent to unattributed cross -fire
between pro-Government forces and anti-Government elements. Approximately
5 per cent of civilian casualties, resulting mostly from explosive remnants of war,
could not be attributed. Ground engagements continued to be the leading cause of
civilian casualties, accounting for 556 civilian casualties (174 deaths and 382
injured), followed by improvised explosive devices. On 13 December 2014,
anti-Government elements killed 11 de-miners and injured 6 others in Wa Sher
District, Hilmand Province. Civilian casualties by pro-Government forces included
an incident on 31 December in Sangin District, Hilmand Province, in which the
Afghan National Army fired three mortar rounds from a check post that impacted on
a civilian house where a wedding was under way, causing 83 civilian casualties
(29 killed and 54 injured). The Government announced an investigation with the
results pending at the time of reporting.
23. The United Nations-led country task force on monitoring and reporting on
children and armed conflict documented 514 child casualties (155 killed and 359
injured) in 204 incidents between 16 November 2014 and 14 February 2015. Most
child casualties were caused during ground engagements between pro -Government
forces and anti-Government elements (185 casualties), followed by explosive
remnants of war (99 casualties) and improvised explosive devices attacks
(95 casualties). Children were especially vulnerable in the southern region of the
country, which witnessed 28 per cent of the total child casualties reported.
Anti-Government elements were responsible for 51 per cent of the total child
casualties, while pro-Government forces were responsible for 24 per cent and

15-02628

7/39

A/69/801
S/2015/151

unattributed incidents were the cause of 25 per cent of casualties. Child casualties
decreased by 19 per cent compared with the previous reporting period.
24. The Government made significant progress in implementing its “road map
towards compliance”, a 15-point targeted plan aimed at expediting implementation
of the Action plan for the prevention of underage recruitment of 2011. On
13 December 2014, the upper house of the National Assembly approved a draft
presidential decree criminalizing underage recruitment by Afghan security forces,
which President Ghani endorsed on 2 February 2015. United Nations advo cacy with
legislators and Ministry of Justice representatives contributed to the approval of the
decree.
25. To mark the annual 16-day campaign of global activism to end gender
violence, held from 25 November to 10 December 2014, the United Nations
supported outreach activities across the country, hosting debates, radio programmes
and workshops that raised awareness of the urgent need to address violence against
Afghan women and girls. UNAMA organized events in 13 provinces that engaged
more than 400 Afghans, including 190 women, aimed at promoting greater
understanding of legal guarantees that protect women from violence. To coincide
with the launch of the campaign, on 25 November, the Government published its
second report on the status of the implementation of the Elimination of Violence
Against Women law. The report’s findings were based on 5,406 cases of violence
against women registered by the Government and noted a 20 per cent increase in the
overall registration of cases of violence against women comp ared with the previous
report. Of the 5,406 cases, 3,715 were registered under the Elimination of Violence
Against Women law, with battery and laceration remaining the most prevalent
registered acts of violence against women. The report noted a significant increase in
registered cases of murder and underage marriage, and that mediation remained the
most common method of settling cases of violence against women.
26. Following issuance of Presidential Decree No. 39 of 2 January 2015 on the
commutation and amnesty of the punishment of juveniles and prisoners, the
Government released at least 144 women and girls detained for moral crimes. The
United Nations has repeatedly raised concerns over the illegal practice of arresting
and prosecuting women who leave their homes for what are termed moral crimes,
including charging them with the intention to commit adultery, which is not a crime
under Afghan law.
27. On 25 February 2015, UNAMA released its third major report on the treatment
of conflict-related detainees in Afghan custody. The report found that despite
Government efforts in 2013 and 2014 to address torture and ill -treatment of
conflict-related detainees by officials of the National Directorate of Security, the
Afghan National Police and the Afghan National Army, particularly through
implementation of a February 2013 presidential decree, torture and ill -treatment of
detainees persisted. UNAMA found that one third (278) of the 790 detainees it
interviewed across the country experienced torture or ill-treatment on arrest or in
numerous detention facilities of the Afghan security forces. While the incidence of
torture and ill-treatment among detainees interviewed decreased by 14 per cent
compared with the findings of the January 2013 report by UNAMA, the February
2015 report stressed that increased efforts were needed to end and prevent torture by
Afghan officials in compliance with the Government’s obligations under Afghan
and international law. The report found a pervasive lack of accountability for

8/39

15-02628

A/69/801
S/2015/151

perpetrators of torture and observed that continuing impunity for torture enabled
torture to continue. UNAMA called on the Government to establish a national
preventive mechanism on torture that would include independent inspectors, civilian
oversight and the referral of perpetrators for prosecution and disciplinary action. In
response to the report, the Government announced a national action plan to
eliminate torture that includes regulatory reforms, deterrence measures and
comprehensive training programmes.

IV. Implementation of the Kabul Process and the coordination
of development assistance
28. On 4 December 2014, Afghanistan and the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland co-chaired the London Conference on Afghanistan, at which
partner countries, international financial institutions and multilateral and
non-governmental organizations renewed commitments to support the country’s
progress towards security and stability in the “Transformation Decade”, and the new
administration presented its reform plans. Conference participants welcomed the
reform plan to address corruption, governance and human rights concerns, and it
was agreed to update the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework accordingly at a
Senior Officials Meeting to be held later in 2015. In that regard, the Government is
preparing an action plan for implementing the priorities outlined in its conference
paper.
29. The London Conference on Afghanistan commitments to reducing the
country’s dependence on external support were made in a context o f limited
economic growth. At the conference, the World Bank reported that economic growth
had declined sharply from the average annual rate of 9.4 per cent from 2003 to
2012, to 3.7 per cent in 2013 and 1.5 per cent in 2014. The economic slowdown
contributed to an overall decline in Government revenues, constraining operations
and potentially exacerbating future fiscal gaps, which are projected to persist into
the Transformation Decade. The International Monetary Fund continued to
encourage reforms, including in the banking sector, to increase the country’s
prospects for promoting trade and commerce, which are priorities of the new
administration. Despite those challenges, the Government ended the 1393 (2014)
fiscal year with a positive cash balance, which the Ministry of Finance attributed to
donor contributions following the Government’s October 2014 request for
assistance to close the fiscal gap. Following discussions with the International
Monetary Fund, the Government revised its initial draft of the 13 94 (2015) fiscal
year budget, making adjustments that included lowering revenue projections. The
lower house of the National Assembly approved the document on 28 January 2015.
The enacted budget allows ongoing Government-funded development projects to
continue, but approved no new discretionary initiatives for 2015. As a result, some
donor contributions made in response to the October 2014 request by the
Government included funds that had previously been budgeted for development
initiatives. Operating expenditures, including security costs, are budgeted to
increase this year.
30. The Government continued to prioritize efforts to address corruption,
including the follow-up on the collapse of the Kabul Bank to improve recovery of
the Bank’s assets and clarifying the division of labour among the anti-corruption

15-02628

9/39

A/69/801
S/2015/151

institutions. In support of improved anti-corruption activities, the Government
issued an administrative order to remove the duplication of functions among key
State anti-corruption institutions, including the High Office of Oversight, the
Supreme Audit Office and the Attorney General’s Office, and to separate policy
support functions from monitoring and oversight responsibilities. In addition, the
Government continued the oversight role of the Independent Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Committee, including the latter’s monitoring of anti -corruption measures
in government institutions. During the reporting period, the Government initiated
new reform processes in the Customs and Revenue Departments to impro ve the
efficiency and effectiveness of the revenue collection process and to reduce
corruption in the system. Afghanistan also continued its progress through the review
process of the implementation of the United Nations Convention against Corruption,
led by the High Office of Oversight.
31. The new Government has prioritized the strengthening of its partnership with
civil society. In that context, civil society has, since the London Conference on
Afghanistan, continued to organize to engage more effectivel y with the Government
and key stakeholders on issues of national development. The Afghan Institute for
Civil Society was established in mid-January 2015 to certify Afghan civil society
organizations that have received requisite standardized capacity-building training
that adheres to internationally accepted standards and locally appropriate values and
principles in their work.
32. At the London Conference, Afghanistan included the restoration of public
confidence in justice institutions and ensuring the rule of law among its priority
areas. Supreme Court Chief Justice Rasheed Rashid has commenced steps to
reinforce the Government’s commitment to reform, including a comprehensive
review of the credentials of all judicial staff with the purpose of ensuring th at the
staff are qualified. The Supreme Court has also established the Special Court for
Ministers as required by the Constitution, to review indictments of seven former
ministers for corruption and financial crimes submitted by the Attorney General’s
Office.
33. On 9 December 2014, the Ministry of Interior Affairs approved the formal
establishment of the Police Women Councils following its initial pilot phase. A code
of conduct for the Councils was formulated by the Ministry’s Department of
Gender, Human Rights and Children with technical support from the United
Nations. Following the approval, country-wide expansion of the initiative took place
with the establishment of eight new councils, with the initiative now established in
17 provinces. In addition, efforts to promote community-based policing practices in
line with the Ministry’s 10-year vision continued. Formal consultations between the
Afghan National Police and communities, supported by the United Nations, resulted
in agreements being signed by police and community representatives in 19 districts
across five provinces to implement community-based policing approaches.
34. On 13 January 2015, the Central Statistics Organization launched a report on
the first sociodemographic and economic survey results for Kabul Province. The
survey is supported with technical assistance by the United Nations and is being
expanded across the provinces to provide more reliable population and
socioeconomic data to guide policy and planning activities in lieu of a nationwi de
census.

10/39

15-02628

A/69/801
S/2015/151

35. On 18 January, the Ministry of Youth Affairs, together with the United
Nations, launched the first ever National Youth Policy for Afghanistan, which was
developed with United Nations support. Prior to this, on 9 December 2014, the
“State of Afghanistan Youth Report” was launched by the Ministry of Youth Affairs.
The report focused on the country’s demographic youth bulge and strategic areas for
investment in order for the country to benefit from its growing population.
36. During the reporting period, the United Nations country team embarked on a
series of measures to reinforce the coherence and effectiveness of the United
Nations Development Assistance Framework 2015-2019 and strengthen their
commitments to the “United Nations working together” approach. Foremost among
the changes adopted in December were measures to harmonize and streamline
procurement procedures and set up a cash transfer system. Integrated annual work
plans detailing the United Nations programmes and budgets will form the b asis for a
comprehensive portfolio review of all United Nations activities undertaken since
2012. In addition, during the reporting period both the United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF) and United Nations Population Fund country programmes for
2015-2019, which are aligned to the priorities of the Government of Afghanistan
and the United Nations Development Assistance Framework, were agreed with the
Government.

V. Humanitarian assistance
37. A sharp increase in voluntary returns to Afghanistan has be en reported since
the start of 2015. As at 31 January, 22,309 individuals spontaneously returned to
Afghanistan from Pakistan, including registered refugees and undocumented
Afghans. That is the highest figure recorded for the month of January since 2003
and is approximately equivalent to the total for the whole of 2014. The majority of
families are returning from the Kashmir, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and Punjab areas and
have resided there for an average of 15 to 25 years. Returning families have
reported incidences of coercion and harassment, as well as home and workplace
raids, with many of those interviewed stating that returning to Afghanistan was the
only viable option. As at 31 January, 1,472 Afghans were also deported in that
month, compared with 3,754 in 2014. The return of registered Afghan refugees
declined by 56 per cent, to 16,957 persons returning in 2014. The decrease in 2014
was attributed in part to uncertainty regarding the elections and concerns about
security in the transition period, but primarily concerns about limited employment
opportunities in Afghanistan. However, the declining trend has been reversed since
the start of 2015. During the month of January 2015, 3,317 Afghan refugees were
assisted in returning to Afghanistan, representing a 90 per cent increase in
comparison with January 2014. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has intensified its advocacy for the respect
of asylum space and the voluntary character of return.
38. Large-scale cross-border population movements continue as a result of
military operations in the North Waziristan Agency of Pakistan. As at 31 January
2015, UNHCR had assessed 42,008 refugee families in Khost and Paktika Provinces
since mid-June 2014. The majority are living with host families, with 8,065 families
living in the Gulan camp in Khost Province. In Paktika, additional displacement was
reported at the end of January. The figures indicate a continuing influx of refugees
and as a result humanitarian agencies will need to continue to respond to both

15-02628

11/39

A/69/801
S/2015/151

emergency needs for new arrivals as well as longer term protection, social and
economic concerns.
39. As at 31 January, the Task Force on Internally Displaced Persons, co -chaired
by the Ministry of Refugees and Repatriation and UNHC R, recorded 12,754 persons
displaced in Afghanistan owing to conflict since the start of 2015. Overall, 156,193
conflict-displaced individuals were recorded in Afghanistan in 2014, representing an
8 per cent increase compared with 2013 and bringing the tot al number of internally
displaced persons profiled in Afghanistan to 805,409 at the end of 2014. During
January 2015, around 3,000 individuals were displaced in the southern region,
largely from Hilmand and Uruzgan Provinces to Kandahar Province and Kandah ar
urban areas. Increased displacement was also recorded in the northern region, where
around 3,500 individuals were displaced, particularly in the Kunduz area, and in the
central region, where around 3,500 individuals were displaced. Displacements
continue to be attributed to ongoing conflict between the Afghan National Army and
armed non-state actors, harassment by armed non-state actors and general
insecurity. The Government of Afghanistan showed a renewed commitment towards
finding solutions to the long-standing internal displacement, in line with its
internally displaced persons policy adopted in November 2013.
40. During the reporting period, the United Nations, non-governmental
organizations with the National Disaster Management Committee and the
Afghanistan National Disaster Management Authority continued to provide
assistance to vulnerable communities across the country following the onset of the
winter period. In the north and north-east, an estimated 12,300 people were assisted
with children’s clothing, blankets and tarpaulins. Prior to the onset of winter, the
shelter cluster reported that, as at 31 December, 83 per cent of shelters funded as
part of the response to severe flooding in the north of the country in the first half of
the year were completed. Assistance to informal settlements in Kabul by
humanitarian agencies to date includes support to 7,904 families with two months of
emergency food rations and to 6,617 families with fuel assistance. In Khost and
Paktika Provinces, a total of 23,326 refugee families have received winter assistance
packages. The food cluster will continue distributions of wheat, flour, vegetable oil,
pulses, salt and high-energy biscuits throughout the winter. Nearly 340,000
beneficiaries have received assistance to date, despite only 35 per cent of the
planned pre-positioned supplies being available owing to a funding shortfall. The
health cluster pre-positioned basic medical supplies and medicines to support an
estimated 1.9 million people in 116 districts living in 24 provinces. In addition, with
support from the Common Humanitarian Fund, temporary health clinics have been
established for communities that are isolated during the winter period.
41. In 2014, mine action partners, coordinated by the United Nations, cleare d
1,015 minefields and 63 battlefields in 392 communities, resulting in 117 districts
being declared mine-free. Despite those significant gains, limited funding meant
that the sector did not meet its 2014 target for clearance operations, as set out in the
10-year workplan of the Anti-Personnel Mine Ban Convention. It is estimated that
3,912 minefields and 248 battlefields remain, affecting 1,596 communities across
258 districts and 33 provinces. The remaining ordnance hampers freedom of
movement, curtails agricultural activity and slows economic growth. The United
Nations is also addressing contamination resulting from International Security
Assistance Force operations by working with the NATO-led Resolute Support
Mission to coordinate the clearance of former international military bases and firing

12/39

15-02628

A/69/801
S/2015/151

ranges. As at the end of January 2015, 324.6 km 2 of firing ranges had been cleared
and approximately 67,400 explosive items and 14,150 items of small arms
ammunition removed or destroyed. Of the 102 former International Security
Assistance Force ranges to be cleared, the United States of America is responsible
for 84 and is ahead of schedule for clearing them by December 2015. Progress has
also been made on the issue of unrecorded, post-2001 contamination, with dialogue
between stakeholders initiated and funds raised for surveys that will help address
the problem.
42. During the reporting period, the Government of Afghanistan and UNICEF
signed the largest ever country programme plan of action for 2015 -2019 for a total
of $665 million. It is to provide children, especially those in hard -to-reach areas,
with greater access to services, including health, nutrition, child protection,
education and water, sanitation and hygiene.
43. Humanitarian access constraints continued to be recorded under the United
Nations global monitoring framework. In total, 294 incidents were recorded in
2014, including attacks against personnel, assets and facilities and the violation of
health facilities. Of the total number of incidents, 223 a ffected non-governmental
organizations. Overall, 57 aid workers were killed and 47 were injured, 182 were
abducted and 11 were arrested or detained. There were 64 incidents recorded against
health workers, 13 against de-mining sites and 7 against educational institutions. A
temporary ban on the polio vaccination campaign that limited access to 650,000
unvaccinated children was imposed in Hilmand Province by armed non -state actors
in mid-December and, after United Nations engagement with all parties, was lif ted
in early February. Disruptions to the vaccination campaigns are of particular
concern, as Afghanistan has reported 28 cases of polio in 2014 compared with
14 cases in 2013.
44. As at 31 December, humanitarian funding for Afghanistan reached
$439 million, of which $268 million (66 per cent) is designated for the United
Nations Common Humanitarian Action Plan. Of the remaining balance, $67 million
was reported for the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement and the
remainder is not allocated to a specific agency or programme. Of the funds
designated for the Common Humanitarian Action Plan, 67 per cent is allocated to
United Nations agencies and programmes and 33 per cent to non -governmental
organizations.

VI. Counter-narcotics
45. On 17 December 2014, the Ministry of Counter-Narcotics, with technical
support from the United Nations, released the Afghanistan Drug Report 2013, which
presented an overview of progress on aspects of the national drug -control strategy.
It highlighted that the net export value of opiates was estimated at $2.90 billion
which, combined with the value of the domestic market of $0.12 billion, is
equivalent to 15 per cent of the country’s gross domestic product. The report also
noted that although the average price of opium fell, the price remains relatively high
at more than $160 per kg compared with the 2009 level of $75 per kg, and therefore
opium continues to retain its value. Illicit drug use remained prevalent within the
country with an estimated 1.3 to 1.6 million illicit drug users. The report noted that
while treatment capacity was increasing, it must be scaled up and sustained in order

15-02628

13/39

A/69/801
S/2015/151

to counter the harmful effects of illicit drug use. The report also includes the first
situation analysis of counter-narcotics prisoners, and provides data on their
socioeconomic background and reasons for involvement in narcotics. The report
concludes with a set of policy recommendations to refocus Government counter narcotic efforts that address its assessment of progress made and the current
challenges.
46. Between 1 November 2014 and 31 January 2015, Afghan law enforcement
authorities conducted a total of 713 counter-narcotics operations, which resulted in
the seizure of 1,700 kg of heroin, 6,325 kg of morphine, 15,012 kg of opi um, 39,299
kg of cannabis, 317 kg of solid precursor chemicals and 3,621 l of liquid precursor
chemicals. In addition, a total of nine heroin laboratories were dismantled and 182
vehicles and 127 weapons seized. A total of 827 suspects were arrested, with one
member of the Afghan security forces killed and four counter-narcotics police
officers wounded. The increase in seizures is attributed to a combination of the
improved capability of the counter-narcotics police to launch intelligence-led
operations and the improved coordination of efforts within Afghan law enforcement
agencies and the law enforcement agencies of neighbouring countries.

VII. Mission support
47. UNAMA continued efforts to align resources to ensure cost -efficient
operations to enable mandated activities across the country. The Mission has
reduced operational costs through efficiencies achieved in the contracting out of the
Mission’s air operation assets and also in part to the successful roll -out of the
Umoja enterprise resource planning project. The Mission also continued to explore
further cost-sharing options with United Nations partners to enhance common
services, most notably in the provision of emergency medical care.

VIII. Observations
48. At the close of 2014, the overall Kabul process of transition covering political,
security and socioeconomic dimensions was completed, as outlined in major
international conferences on Afghanistan in Kabul (2010); Bonn, Germany (2011);
and Tokyo (2012). Afghanistan has now entered the Transformation Decade as of
1 January 2015, having assumed full leadership and ownership in its national
affairs. At December’s London Conference, President Ghani and Chief Executive
Abdullah put forward a far-reaching reform agenda entitled “Realizing Selfreliance” which was widely welcomed in Afghanistan and by international partners.
Addressing the country’s many challenges in a sustainable, strategic and cohesive
manner will require strong direction and a whole-of-government approach.
49. The reporting period has been marked by ongoing work to form and finalize
the composition of the national unity Government. The prolonged appointment
process for Ministers and other senior officials has resulted in understandable
frustration on the part of many Afghans who were hoping for more rapid progress.
At the same time, the fact that the potentially contentious negotiations have been
undertaken in a mutually respectful manner between the two leaders and their teams
is encouraging. I call on the executive and legislature to work together closely in

14/39

15-02628

A/69/801
S/2015/151

finalizing a diverse
representation.

and

professional

administration

with

strong

female

50. The political agreement of 21 September 2014, which set forth a commitment
to a national unity Government, also contained an ambitious schedule of elections
and reforms, reiterated at the London Conference, to culminate in a Loya Jirga
which will address fundamental issues of governance. The deeply held interest in
electoral issues, including future Parliamentary and District Council polls, is
reflected in the different initiatives which emerged during the reporting period.
Broad agreement is urgently required on a cohesive approach. That would involve
developing realistic timelines, parameters and sequencing in approaching legal and
institutional changes; a robust system of voter identification; and operationalizing
preparations for elections. I urge the rapid formation of the agreed Electoral Reform
Commission as provided for in the political agreement and support efforts to ensure
transparent and inclusive engagement with all stakeholders, including donors, on the
way forward.
51. As economic challenges continue to mount, the continued decline in the
growth rate of Afghanistan is cause for grave concern. The negative impact on
Government revenues has already affected its capacity to deliver administrative
functions and services. The relatively mild winter being experienced in Afghanistan
could damage the country’s largest economic sector, agriculture, owing to the
potential for drought. The new administration has made a priority of implementing
measures for revenue mobilization, as outlined by the Government’s London
Conference reform agenda. I welcome the successful adoption of the 2015 budget
and its focus on fiscal discipline. As Afghanistan transitions to a more normalized
economy, sustained and predictable levels of donor support will remain critical.
Member States have a vital role to play in meeting their commitments for financial
and security assistance through the Transformation Decade in a manner consistent
with strengthening Afghan institutions and processes.
52. Encouraging investor and donor confidence will also entail comprehensive
Government efforts to tackle corruption. I welcome the new administration’s early
attention to accountability and the return of assets over the collapse of Kabul Bank,
clarifying the roles and responsibilities of different anti -corruption institutions and
fulfilling constitutional requirements for senior officials to declare their assets.
Sustained attention will be required, including Government commitment to
addressing the recommendations of the Independent Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Committee.
53. Amidst economic slowdown, the illicit economy will likely grow
proportionally. It risks further entrenching the illegal drug trade. As it is, a criminal
nexus fuels insecurity, undermines the rule of law and threatens the health and well being of Afghanistan, the region and the wider international community. The only
sustainable solutions are comprehensive ones in which counter-narcotic efforts are
truly mainstreamed into all development planning and strong political will is
demonstrated. Enabling the growth of the licit private sector will require continued
progress in implementing laws and regulations, including to effectively tackle
money-laundering and the financing of terrorism.
54. Peace remains the fundamental pre-condition to durable and sustained political
and economic progress in Afghanistan. An alignment of factors offer new
possibilities at this critical juncture, including the drawdown of international

15-02628

15/39

A/69/801
S/2015/151

military forces; a new administration in Kabul; increased regional engagement,
including by China; and improved bilateral relations with Pakistan. Concrete steps
are now required, and strong, visionary leadership will be necessary to overcome
entrenched interests amidst self-generating cycles of conflict stretching back
decades. I welcome President Ghani’s public calls for Afghan-to-Afghan dialogue
and outreach to Islamabad, and I urge all parties to seize this opportunity and work
towards agreeing on the necessary mechanisms to formalize and sustain progress.
The United Nations in Afghanistan maintains contacts with all parties in accordance
with its mandate and continues to use its good offices for this purpose, standing
ready to assist as requested. There is added impetus to such efforts in view of more
extremist and brutal groups now active in the broader region and with an
expansionist agenda.
55. Regional support is a crucial element in reinforcing the likelihood of success
of Afghan-led reconciliation efforts and sustainable economic development. The
Beijing Declaration at the Istanbul Process Ministerial Conference demonstrated the
unanimous backing of the neighbours and regional stake holders for rapid progress,
and I welcome the continued efforts of China to ensure momentum. I continue to
urge attention to the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, including lead countries
convening regional technical group meetings on the confidence -building measures
in accordance with the agreed timeline. I am also encouraged by the strengthened
bilateral engagement between Afghanistan and Pakistan, and I urge commitment and
patience in building the necessary trust. Central to increasing confidence through
common interests will be regional trade and strengthened interconnectivity, and I
welcome consultations on, inter alia, the formation of the Pakistan -AfghanistanTajikistan Trilateral Transit Trade Agreement.
56. In 2014, the number of civilians killed and injured in the conflict in
Afghanistan topped 10,000 for the first time since the United Nations began
systematically documenting civilian casualties in 2009. Nearly three quarters of all
civilian casualties continue to be attributed to the Taliban and affiliated groups.
Ground engagements were the leading annual cause of civilian casualties for the
first time. I urge all parties to respect the laws of war, including the distinction
between civilians and combatants, and to avoid using heavy weapons in civi lianpopulated areas. Afghan security forces are now in the lead in securing the country
and its population. I commend the resolve and bravery its personnel have
demonstrated in the face of rising attacks and welcome continued international
support including through the Resolute Support Mission. Strengthening civilian
casualty mitigation mechanisms and accountability in the conduct of combat and the
treatment of conflict-related detainees must be a priority in the institutional
development of Afghan security agencies. The new National Action Plan on the
Elimination of Torture is an important step. I look forward to its implementation.
57. The coming summer season will likely see an intensification of the armed
conflict. Even amidst the new opportunities for dialogue outlined above, there
remain hard-line elements of the insurgency which will want to test the resolve of
Afghan security forces. There must be realism about the timelines for a peace
process and commitment to the ultimate goal of peace, while rec ognizing that the
path will not be fast and is unlikely to be smooth. The human cost of conflict -related
violence goes far beyond immediate casualties. The Mission’s annual protection of
civilians report for 2014 highlights the plight of widows and their c hildren, who
lose not only a breadwinner but a source of social protection when their husbands

16/39

15-02628

A/69/801
S/2015/151

have been killed or injured in the conflict. The conflict also continues to adversely
affect the capacity of Government, humanitarian actors and communities to r espond
to crises. Each of the growing number of polio cases in Afghanistan is a personal,
and preventable, tragedy, and I note with grave concern that polio vaccination in
Hilmand Province was once again disrupted during the reporting period. I welcome
its resumption and call on all parties to respect obligations to humanitarian access.
To be effective, the immunization campaigns must be sustained and cannot be
subject to disputes between parties.
58. The sharp increase in displaced and undocumented individuals returning from
Pakistan will require close cooperation in ensuring sustainable solutions, including
reintegration into the Afghan economy. Growing internal displacement underscores
the importance of continued progress in implementing the national pol icy on
internally displaced persons. I welcome the President’s particular interest in and
commitment to meeting the needs of this vulnerable population.
59. Noting the continued importance of supporting political stabilization in
Afghanistan and monitoring a security situation which gives indications of
worsening in the short term, I would request the Security Council to extend the
mandate of UNAMA, set to expire on 17 March 2015, for a further 12 months. In so
doing, I reiterate the commitment of the United Nations to a sustained partnership
with Afghanistan and note the effective manner in which the existing mandate has
been utilized throughout 2014, in particular its good offices functions and
engagement on critical human rights issues and donor coherenc e. I call upon
Member States to continue to provide the resources required to maintain our
engagement and activities across the country.
60. I would like to express my gratitude to all United Nations personnel in
Afghanistan and to my Special Representative, Nicholas Haysom, for continued
dedication, often under challenging conditions, to fulfilling our commitments in
support of the people of Afghanistan.

15-02628

17/39

A/69/801
S/2015/151

Annex
Progress achieved against benchmarks
I. Security
Benchmark: sustainable Afghan security institutions and processes capable of
ensuring peace and stability and protecting the people of Afghanistan
Indicators of progress

Increase in the number of
national police and national
army personnel mentored,
trained and operational
according to an agreed
structure

Metrics

• As at 1 January 2015, there were 164,161 personnel serving
in the Afghan National Army and 6,208 personnel serving in
the Afghan Air Force, for a total of 170,369 personnel, which
is 24,631 below the end-state objective for January 2015. Also
as at 1 January, there were 156,751 personnel serving in the
Afghan National Police, which is 246 below the end -state
objective.
• At the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) summit
held in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland on 4 and 5 September 2014, NATO allies and partners
pledged their continued support to the Afghan National
Security Forces until the end of 2017, with assistance of
approximately $5.1 billion per year and continued dialogue
under the NATO-Afghanistan Enduring Partnership.

Development of and progress
in a plan for a phased and
conditions-based transition to
Afghan security lead

• On 31 December 2014, the Inteqal/security transition process
was completed as Afghan forces assumed full responsibility
for security as the International Security Assistance Force
finalized its mission in Afghanistan, and on 1 January 2015
the Resolute Support Mission commenced in the country.
• On 30 September 2014, the Government signed the Bilateral
Security Agreement with the United States of America and
the status-of-forces agreement with NATO. On 12 December,
the Security Council adopted resolution 2189 (2014),
welcoming the agreement between NATO and the
Government of Afghanistan to establish the NATO Resolute
Support Mission, which will provide training, advice and
assistance to the Afghan security forces.

18/39

15-02628

A/69/801
S/2015/151

II. Peace, reintegration and reconciliation
Benchmark: national dialogue and regional engagement to pursue constructive
and inclusive processes to foster a political environment conducive to peace
Indicators of progress

Development and
implementation of inclusive
national and regional
processes to enhance peace,
reintegration and
reconciliation efforts

Metrics

• In 2014, a total of 1,716 anti-Government element
individuals were enrolled in the Afghanistan Peace and
Reintegration Programme. The Provincial Joint Secretariat
Teams demonstrated enhanced ability to develop community
recovery projects with the Programme’s support, as
demonstrated by the development of approximately
2,200 projects in conjunction with line Ministries.
• A High Peace Council delegation visited Saudi Arabia
between 28 December 2013 and 2 January 2014 to attend a
meeting of religious scholars hosted by the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation. The High Peace Council’s proposal to
form a working group of international ulama to counter
religious narratives which fuel violence was positively
received.
• On 16 February 2014, the trilateral Pakistan-TurkeyAfghanistan summit in Ankara called on the Afghan Taliban
to join the peace process and the international community to
contribute to efforts aimed at supporting an Afghan -led and
Afghan-owned peace process.
• On 29 September, in his inauguration speech, Presid ent
Ghani pledged to focus his efforts on establishing peace and
stability in Afghanistan. To that end, he announced that he
would be open to talks with the Taliban.
• On 31 October, at the fourth Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process
Ministerial Conference, President Ghani reiterated his
invitation to the “political opposition, particularly the
Taliban, to join an inter-Afghan dialogue” and requested
international partners to support the Afghan-owned and
Afghan-led peace process.
• During President Ghani’s visit to Islamabad on 14 and
15 November, the Pakistani leadership pledged support to
Afghanistan in bringing the Taliban to the negotiating table.
The parties also agreed on joint efforts to curb extremism and
terrorism in both countries.
• In December, Chief Executive Abdullah met with the heads
of the Provincial Peace Committees and encouraged greater
participation of women in the peace process.

15-02628

19/39

A/69/801
S/2015/151

Indicators of progress

Metrics

Increased ability by Afghan
authorities to gather and
provide substantiated, updated
and accurate information to
the Security Council
Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011)

• In 2014, the Government of Afghanistan provided
substantiated, updated and accurate information to the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011).

Increased public support for
the peace process through
engagement at the community
level and with civil society

• In February 2014, the High Peace Council, with the support
of women’s non-governmental organizations, launched a
women’s peace campaign that collected 250,000 women’s
signatures on a petition calling for peace and a ceasefire. The
message urged the Government, armed opposition and the
international community to make serious efforts to ensure
peace in the country.

• In 2014, the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) enacted 15 amendments to
its List (the 1988 List) of individuals and entities subject to
the assets freeze, travel ban and arms embargo set out in
paragraph 1 of Security Council resolution 2082 (2012),
adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations.

• In September, the Peace Day celebrations supported by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and provincial peace committees across Afghanistan
expressed public support for peace and stressed that a
meaningful political dialogue with anti-Government elements
is the only solution to the protracted conflict.
• On 8 October, an event marking the Global Open Day on
Women, Peace and Security, organized by the United
Nations, local authorities and civil society, stressed the
importance of women’s participation in peace efforts in the
country.
• On 7 November, President Ghani met with the ulama and
religious scholars urging them to play a proactive ro le in
bringing lasting peace to the country. The ulama and religious
scholars assured the President of their full support.

20/39

15-02628

A/69/801
S/2015/151

III. Governance and institution-building
Benchmark: extension of Government authority throughout the country through
the establishment of democratic, legitimate, accountable institutions, down to the
local level, with the capacity to implement policies and to be increasingly capable
of sustaining themselves
Indicators of progress

Increased ability by Afghan
authorities and independent
electoral institutions to
manage and conduct genuine
and periodic elections, with
due regard to women’s
participation and
constitutionally guaranteed
quotas

Metrics

• On 1 April 2014, in preparation for the 2014 elections, the
Independent Election Commission completed a top-up
registration exercise that distributed 3,819,346 additional
voter cards to people who had reached 18 years of age,
changed their place of residence or lost their voter cards.
• In 2014, the Independent Election Complaints Commission
improved its infrastructure and operational capacity and
established 34 provincial offices. The Complaints
Commission presented an interim strategic and operational
plan and published procedures for the registration, filing and
adjudication of electoral challenges and complaints.
• Throughout 2014, 102 provincial complaints commissioners
for the Independent Election Complaints Commission were
appointed in 34 provincial offices.
• The Media Commission, a temporary entity created with the
aim of supervising the conduct of the media during the
electoral period, developed guidelines to govern the conduct
of media outlets, held a series of workshops across the
country to explain media regulations, issued statements
calling for respect of the rules and adjudicated complaints
filed against media outlets.
• On 5 April 2014, presidential and provincial council elections
took place in Afghanistan. In total, 6,082 polling centres and
19,784 polling stations were operational on election day. As
no presidential candidate received an absolute majority in the
first election, a second round of elections for President took
place on 14 June between the two leading candidates,
Abdullah Abdullah and Mohammad Ashraf Ghani. On
election run-off day, 6,225 polling centres were reported to
be operational.
• Based on the assessment of the first round of elections, the
Independent Election Commission made changes to improve
the process in the second round. These changes included
improved pre-positioning of contingency materials to
facilitate the response in cases of ballot shortages and the
addition of about 2,000 polling stations in polling centres to
improve voter accessibility.

15-02628

21/39

A/69/801
S/2015/151

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• The electoral process relied on national and international
observers, as well as party agents, to oversee the conduct of
the polls. In the first round of elections 67 national
organizations with a total of 14,585 observers participated
across the country. That rose to 40,743 observers for the
second round. Candidates and political parties registered
362,780 agents during the first round and 70,041 agents for
the second round.
• UNAMA worked closely with the Independent Election
Commission and donor community to ensure the integration
of gender concerns in the 2014 election process. UNAMA
monitoring of measures related to women’s participation,
awareness-raising activities and advocacy contributed to
increased participation of voters and election workers in the
elections. The 20 per cent quota for Provincial Council
representation of women set by the electoral legislation was
achieved.
Establishment of a monitoring
and evaluation committee and
the development of
anti-corruption benchmarks

• On 2 October 2014, the Independent Joint Anti-Corruption
Monitoring and Evaluation Committee released the Kabul
Bank follow-up report, which provided an update on
recoveries, criminal proceedings, financial regulation and the
privatization of New Kabul Bank. On the same day, a
presidential decree was issued reopening the Kabul Bank
fraud case, and on 11 November, the Court of Appeal tripled
the sentences of two former Bank heads from 5 to 15 years.
The Court also endorsed the court order to freeze the assets
of Mahmood Karzai, the brother of former President Karzai,
along with the assets of other senior former Bank officials,
until all funds are recovered.
• On 19 November, the Committee released its report on the
usurpation of State and private land, which noted that more
than 240,000 hectares of land have been usurped in the past
decade, largely through the forgery of official deeds by court
officials and the forgery and falsification of documents
relating to land transfers in Kabul Municipality. The report
also indicated that less than 34 per cent of the country’s land
has been surveyed and legally registered, leaving the rest
vulnerable to usurpation.

22/39

15-02628

A/69/801
S/2015/151

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• The Committee released its sixth Vulnerability to Corruption
Assessment report on the pharmaceutical importation process
on 19 November. The report indicated that 50 per cent of the
country’s pharmaceutical imports are of low quality, which
the Committee attributed to the absence of strong drug
procurement laws, weak procedures and licensing
requirements and irregularities in the selection, importation
and distribution of drugs. The report also noted that the
Ministry of Public Health lacks the capacity to effectively
monitor drug importation, which is largely controlled by
foreign pharmaceutical suppliers.

15-02628

Empowerment of
anti-corruption institutions
to oversee a whole-ofGovernment approach to
anti-corruption

• On 8 November 2014, the President’s Office issued an
administrative order to revise the anti-corruption functions of
the High Office of Oversight and Anti-Corruption, the
Supreme Audit Office and the Attorney General’s Office to
reduce duplication and ensure complementarity. In addition,
in October 2014, the Government upheld the oversight role of
the Independent Joint Anti-Corruption Monitoring and
Evaluation Committee, including its monitoring of
anti-corruption measures in government institutions.

Annual publication of asset
declarations of public officials

• In 2014, the High Office of Oversight and Anti-Corruption
registered the assets of 5,525 government officials in Kabul
and some provinces, bringing the total number of asset
registrations to approximately 8,500 by the end of the year.
The Office also published information on the asset
verifications of 167 high-ranking government officials,
including former President Karzai, his vice-presidents and
some senior members of his Government, which brings the
total number of asset verifications of high-ranking officials to
200.

Increased capacity of civil
servants at the central,
provincial and district levels
to discharge functions and
deliver services

• In 2014, the Civil Service Training Institute delivered
training on management, computer skills, English-language
proficiency, planning and finance/accounting to 4,974 civil
servants at the national level and 9,826 at the subnational
level. In addition, 1,867 senior and mid-level civil servants
received training on local governance and public financial
management in India, Japan, Malaysia, Singapore and
Thailand.

Increased transparency and
effectiveness of civil service
appointments

• Merit-based recruitment of District Governors continued in
2014, with a further 90 District Governors appointed through
that process, bringing the total number of District Governors
recruited through a merit-based process to 321. In addition,
2 more Deputy Provincial Governors were appointed, for a
total of 34 Deputy Provincial Governors recruited under the
system.

23/39

A/69/801
S/2015/151

Indicators of progress

Metrics

Strengthened civil service
reform supported by a
comprehensive approach to
capacity-building and donorfunded technical assistance

• In 2014, the Capacity-building for Results Programme
managed by the World Bank approved proposals from the
Ministry of Public Health, the Ministry of Communication
and Information Technology, the Ministry of Commerce and
Industries, the Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and
Development, the Ministry of Labour, Social Affairs, Martyrs
and Disabled and the Ministry of Mines and Petroleum.

Implementation of the
subnational governance policy
and the development of
subnational regulatory,
financing and budgetary
frameworks

• The delay in the formation of the Government hindered
finalization of the municipality law. The draft law is currently
awaiting endorsement by the President before submission to
the Parliament for passage of the law.
• In January 2014, the provincial budgeting policy was drafted
by the Ministry of Finance and submitted to the Cabinet for
approval. In October, the President instructed the
Independent Directorate of Local Governance and the
Ministry of Finance to develop a mechanism to increase
budget allocations to the provinces.
• In April, the Independent Directorate of Local Governance
approved the new Monitoring and Evaluation Framework to
track progress of programmes and activities at the
subnational level.
• In May, the draft Local Administration Law was discussed in
all committees of the lower house of Parliament and is
currently waiting to be tabled in the Plenary Session of the
Parliament for approval.
• In October, the amended Provincial Council Law was
approved by both houses of Parliament and submitted to the
President in November. In January 2015, the President
returned the law to the lower house to clarify the roles of the
Provincial Councils. On 28 January, Parliament amended the
law, removing the Provincial Councils’ oversight role. That
decision was refuted by Provincial Council members
throughout the country, who closed their offices in protest.
They have requested that the President not endorse the
amendment. In response, the President has tasked the
Independent Directorate of Local Governance to resolve the
issue.

Development and publication
of criteria for administrative
boundaries

24/39

• National and international institutions continue to use the
2009 internal boundary data set as stipulated by the
Independent Directorate of Local Governance and the
Geodesy and Cartography Head Office.

15-02628

A/69/801
S/2015/151

Indicators of progress

Metrics

Establishment of adequate
infrastructure for functioning
Government institutions,
especially at the subnational
level

• The Independent Directorate of Local Governance partially
completed the construction of 5 provincial administrative
buildings and 18 district administrative buildings. In
addition, the Directorate completed construction work on one
provincial council building and partially completed three
others.

Establishment of credible and
accessible judicial and penal
systems that respect and
uphold the human rights of all
citizens

• In 2014, the Criminal Law Reform Working Group, chaired
by the Ministry of Justice, continued work on the process of
revising and consolidating all criminal laws, including the
1976 Penal Code, into a new penal code, with 350 articles
now revised. The revised penal code is expected to be
finalized by the Ministry by the end of 2015, and then must
be approved by the President and the National Assembly. As
supported by UNAMA, the new penal code will include, for
the first time, all anti-corruption provisions mandated by the
United Nations Convention against Corruption, crimes
required by the protocols on trafficking in humans and
smuggling persons of the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the definitions of war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide consistent with
the Rome Statute.
• Following the ratification of the Criminal Procedure Code in
February 2014, the Ministry of Justice commenced efforts to
implement the new code across the legal system and
UNAMA continued to provide support to assist the
coordination of international support and advice to assist the
Ministry.
• In 2014, the Policy Advisory Group on Land was established
to improve international stakeholders’ coherence in providing
expert technical advice to support policy discussions with
Government counterparts on effective and transparent land
administration and management systems. The Group
identified several focus areas for policy development and
implementation to strengthen land administration and
management, including the role of courts and the Afghanistan
Land Authority (Arazi) in issuing and registering titles, the
role of informal land dispute resolution mechanisms and
linkages with the formal legal system, usurped Government
land recovery and restitution and enforcement of women’s
inheritance and Mahr rights.

15-02628

25/39

A/69/801
S/2015/151

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• In 2014, UNAMA issued a thematic report on land usurpation
which identified a number of deficiencies in the legal
framework surrounding land management and recommended
the establishment of a national civil law reform group to
develop an integrated framework that includes criminal
penalties.
• In 2014, the Central Department of Prisons drafted its two year strategic plan, which was approved by the Ministry of
Interior Affairs in June. To address continued issues of
overcrowding, in 2014 the Ministry of Interior Affairs funded
the construction of two prisons at Kapisa and Badakhshan,
which will increase the prison holding capacity by 850 beds.
The Ministry of Justice also funded the building of juvenile
rehabilitation centres in Nangarhar, Farah and Balkh to
improve the living conditions and facilitate juvenile justice
programmes.
• In 2014, the Ministry of Public Health completed a r eview of
the 2009 prison health services package with UNAMA
support. As a result, the Ministry of Public Health is
redrafting their memorandum of understanding with the
Ministry of Interior Affairs to improve service delivery.

IV. Human rights
Benchmark: improved respect for the human rights of Afghans, in line with the
Afghan Constitution and international law, with particular emphasis on the
protection of civilians, the situation of women and girls, freedom of expression
and accountability based on the rule of law
Indicators of progress

Reduction in the number of
incidents of unlawful use of
force and intimidation of
civilians, through compliance
by relevant actors with
international law

26/39

Metrics

• In 2014, UNAMA documented 10,548 civilian casualties
(3,699 killed and 6,849 injured), a 22 per cent increase in
total civilian casualties compared with 2013. Some 72 per
cent of civilian casualties were attributed to anti-Government
elements, 14 per cent to pro-Government forces (12 per cent
to Afghan National Security Forces and 2 per cent to
international military forces) and 10 per cent to unattributed
cross-fire between pro-Government forces and
anti-Government elements. Ground engagements between
anti-Government elements and pro-Government forces
remained the leading cause of civilian casualties, accounting
for 3,605 civilian casualties (1,092 killed and 2,513 injured);
followed by improvised explosive devices, accounting for
2,978 civilian casualties (925 killed and 2,053 injured).

15-02628

A/69/801
S/2015/151

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• In 2014, the United Nations-led country task force on
monitoring and reporting on children and armed conflict
documented 2,502 child casualties (710 killed and
1,792 injured), an increase of 48 per cent compared with
2013.
• The Government made significant progress in implementing
its “road map towards compliance”, a 15-point targeted plan
aimed at expediting the implementation of the 2011 Action
plan to prevent and end underage recruitment. On
13 December 2014, the upper house of the National
Assembly approved a draft presidential decree criminalizing
underage recruitment by the Afghan National Security
Forces, which President Ghani endorsed on 2 February 2015.
United Nations advocacy with legislators and Ministry of
Justice representatives contributed to the Senate’s approval of
the decree.
• In September 2014, a national birth registration strategy was
endorsed by the Ministry of Interior Affairs with support
from the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), an
initiative that will strengthen protection against underage
recruitment.
• In November, Afghan security forces, with the support of the
United Nations, conducted a workshop on age assessment
procedures for recruitment for the Afghan security forces and
stakeholders, which resulted in a revised set of guidelines to
improve and standardize age verification procedures across
the security sector.
• In 2014, the Government continued the tracking of civilian
casualties through the civilian casualties tracking cell in the
Presidential Information Coordination Centre.
• United Nations advocacy contributed to increased
accountability of Afghan Local Police members, including
the investigation of 68 accounts of Afghan Local Police related human rights violations by the Monitoring and
Investigations section of the Afghan Local Police Directorate.
Officials in the Directorate reported that the investigations
led to 64 arrests and four convictions.
• In 2014, the International Security Assistance Forces made
significant progress in marking and surface clearance of
high-explosive firing ranges no longer in use to reduce
civilian casualties from explosive remnants of war.

15-02628

27/39

A/69/801
S/2015/151

Indicators of progress

Improved awareness by
Afghans of their rights and by
the Government of its
obligations

Metrics

• UNAMA continued to monitor the treatment of conflictrelated detainees in Afghan custody and the implementation
of Presidential Decree no. 129 issued in February 2013 aimed
at ending and preventing torture and ill-treatment. The
country’s new Criminal Procedure Code entered into force on
5 June 2014 and strengthened due process and fair trial
guarantees. UNAMA advocated for the creation of a national
preventive mechanism to address torture and ill-treatment in
line with international best practices.
• In 2014, UNAMA published two reports on the protection of
civilians and carried out advocacy activities with
stakeholders and the media to raise awareness among the
population of the findings and recommendations. On 13 May,
UNAMA launched a booklet on the obligations of all parties
to the armed conflict to respect and promote the rights of
children guaranteed under Afghan law, the fundamental
teachings of Islam and Sharia law and international law,
supported by more than 50 workshops with stakeholders and
distribution of 7,700 copies of the booklet.
• On 8 October 2014, the United Nations organized the “Global
Open Day on Women, Peace and Security”, under Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), with events in Kabul and in
12 provinces across the country, involving more than
200 women, including from remote districts; the theme was
“Women’s Participation in Political and Peace Processes —
Achievements, Gaps and Way Forward”.
• In 2014, UNICEF, the Afghanistan Independent Human
Rights Commission and other partners sensitized more than
600 participants, including security personnel, provincial and
district authorities, religious and tribal leaders, civil society,
education personnel, health workers and members of the
Child Protection Action Network, on grave violations against
children in armed conflict and reporting on and prevention of
those violations.
• The Ministry of Women’s Affairs, with support from the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) conducted a series of
awareness-raising activities in 16 provinces on the legal
framework addressing the protection needs of women and
girls. During the activities, around 1,440 attendees, including
police, religious scholars, community leaders and women’s
groups, received training on the content of the Eliminati on of
Violence against Women law and the legal framework of
Afghanistan.

28/39

15-02628

A/69/801
S/2015/151

Indicators of progress

Improved impact of, and
support for, legal and policy
measures to combat violence
against women and girls

Metrics

• On 1 March and 24 November 2014, the Government,
supported by the United Nations, launched two reports on the
status of its implementation of the Elimination of Violence
against Women law, in line with its commitments under the
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework. The reports
reviewed progress to date on the implementation of the law
and proposed a range of remedial actions, including
establishing a comprehensive database, strengthening
national and provincial commissions on elimination of
violence against women, and increasing awareness of the law,
which were consistent with United Nations
recommendations.
• The number of prosecution units established for the
elimination of violence against women under the Attorney
General’s Office increased from 8 to 18 provinces in 2014.
The United Nations provided technical support to
commissions for the elimination of violence against women
in 32 provinces.
• The Ministry of Women’s Affairs and the Ministry of
Finance, with technical support from the United Nations, held
a national conference on 16 September 2014, which
established a drafting committee charged with developing
detailed guidelines to regulate the use of mediation for cases
of violence against women.
• In January, the Ministry of Interior Affairs endorsed a
strategy for the integration and protection of women in the
Afghan National Police. On 10 March, an inter-ministerial
commission was established and tasked with drafting an
action plan to implement the strategy, to which UNAMA
provided technical support. The Ministry of Interior Affairs
adopted the final plan on 13 August, which outlines measures
to improve the participation, protection and
professionalization of women in the police. In November, at
the request of the Government, UNAMA provided policy
advice on steps the Government could take to prohibit sexual
harassment in public life.
• The lower house of the National Assembly amended article
26 of the Criminal Procedure Code to reinstate previous legal
provisions enabling women to continue to testify against
relatives, facilitating the prosecution of suspects in cases of
domestic violence. The United Nations and partners’
advocacy contributed to the process.

15-02628

29/39

A/69/801
S/2015/151

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• Beginning on 25 November 2014, as part of the global
campaign of 16 days of activism against gender violence, the
United Nations supported outreach activities across the
country, hosting debates, radio programmes and workshops
that raised awareness of the urgent need to address violence
against Afghan women and girls and relevant legal
protections under Afghan and international law for women
and girls.
• On 16 November, the Ministry of Public Health launched
Afghanistan’s first Gender-based Violence Treatment
Protocol for Health-care Providers, developed together with
the United Nations.
Improved awareness of, and
support for, legal and policy
measures related to combating
impunity and furthering
transitional justice

• In 2014, the second phase of the Afghan People’s Dialogue
neared completion. The People’s Dialogue, an inclusive civil
society-led peace initiative conducted over the past three
years with UNAMA facilitation, engaged 6,000 Afghans in
identifying local drivers of conflict and developing local road
maps for peace. Participants developed 34 provincial road
maps for peace with 12 of them launched at a national
conference in January 2015. On 10 June 2014, the People’s
Dialogue launched its report on national findings, which
articulated a 10-point national road map for peace with
33 recommendations, including tackling corruption,
disempowering and disarming militias, promoting human
rights and equitable development and access to services and
making the peace process more inclusive.
• The Government underscored its commitment to the
participation of women in political, peace and security
processes by endorsing the National Action Plan on the
Implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)
at a steering committee meeting in October 2014.

Government fulfilment of
reporting requirements on
international human rights
covenants and conventions
and implementation of the
recommendations from the
Human Rights Council
universal periodic review of
Afghanistan

30/39

• In January 2014, Afghanistan underwent its second universal
periodic review by the Human Rights Council. During the
review, 89 States made 224 recommendations to Afghanistan.
Afghanistan accepted 189, rejected 12 and undertook to
consider the remaining 23 recommendations.

15-02628

A/69/801
S/2015/151

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• On 4 August, the Council of Ministers passed the “Regulation
on Support of Human Rights in Government
Administrations”, which clarified the role of the Ministry of
Justice’s Human Rights Support Unit, mandating it to ensure
compliance of national legislation with the country’s
international human rights commitments and monitor its
implementation of United Nations human rights treaties and
universal periodic review recommendations.
• In 2014, the Human Rights Support Unit of the Ministry of
Justice, with United Nations support, continued consultations
with Government ministries and institutions to prioritize the
implementation of its commitments under the Convention on
the Rights of the Child.
• The Government continued preparation of its State party
report to the Committee against Torture, holding three
conferences in 2014 to engage Government officials, the
judiciary and civil society in the reporting process.
Increased capacity and
commitment of the
Government of Afghanistan
and the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights
Commission, as the Afghan
national human rights
institution, to respect, protect,
fulfil and promote human
rights

• In 2014, the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights
Commission made significant efforts to address concerns
over its independence, gender-staffing ratio and financing,
issues that were raised in its 2013 accreditation review by the
Sub-Committee on Accreditation of the International
Coordinating Committee of National Human Rights
Institutions. In October, the Commission was reviewed for
reaccreditation and in December, following the Committee’s
recommendation, the International Coordinating Committee
Bureau made a final decision that the Commission was in
compliance with the Paris Principles and retained its “A”
status.
• On 10 December 2014, the Afghanistan Independent Human
Rights Commission published its five-year strategic plan for
2014-2018, developed with support from the United Nations.
The plan outlines five strategic objectives for the
Commission: to promote and protect human rights, to lead
the Afghan human rights movement and advocate for change,
to monitor the Government’s compliance with national and
international human rights obligations, to protect the rights of
victims and to ensure the Commission’s effectiveness.

15-02628

31/39

A/69/801
S/2015/151

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• On 20 August, the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights
Commission released a report on the causes and
consequences of Bacha Bazi (“playing with boys”), a practice
that involves the sexual exploitation of boys by men in
positions of power in Afghanistan. The Commission called on
the Government to end this serious human rights abuse by
criminalizing the practice, prosecuting perpetrators and
identifying and protecting victims. The report attributed the
abusive practice on factors such as weak rule of law,
corruption, poverty and the presence of illegal armed groups
in the country.
• UNICEF continued to support national organizations in the
provision of psychosocial support for children in detention in
Kabul and Kandahar juvenile rehabilitation centres. In total,
338 children, 328 boys and 10 girls, many of whom were
detained on national security related charges, were provided
with psychosocial support in 2014.

V. Economic and social development
Benchmark: Government policies supported by the international community that
promote sustainable economic growth and contribute to overall stability
Indicators of progress

National priority programmes
are designed and implemented
with international support and
endorsement

Metrics

• In June 2014, the Ministry of Economy released the
completion report for the five-year Afghanistan National
Development Strategy, which concluded in 2013 and was the
basis for the national priority programmes. The report
assessed progress in eight sectors against development
indicators, identifying the health sector as the strongest
performing, with 88 per cent of indicators achieved, and
private sector development and social protection as the
weakest sectors, with 45 and 46 per cent of indicators
achieved respectively.
• In 2014, the 21 endorsed national priority programmes
continued to serve as the Government’s plan for national
development and the de facto guidance for donors seeking to
align programming with Government priorities.
• In its paper entitled “Realizing Self-Reliance —
Commitments to Reforms and Renewed Partnership”, the
Government expressed the intent to consolidate national
priority programmes, with the aim of reducing the total from
21 to 12 or fewer.

32/39

15-02628

A/69/801
S/2015/151

Indicators of progress

Metrics

More equitable distribution of
development assistance and
Government expenditure
throughout Afghanistan

• In October 2014, President Ghani instructed the Ministry of
Finance and the Independent Directorate of Local
Governance to formulate a proposal for increased budget
allocation to the provinces of up to 40 per cent. In 2014, all
34 provinces were engaged in the Pilot Provincial Budgeting
Programme, with the 12 least-developed provinces receiving
$3 million each and the remaining provinces receiving
$1 million each.

Increased revenue collection
and sustainable growth based
on Afghan resources

• The World Bank’s Global Economic Prospects report of
January 2015 continues to show a slowdown of the country’s
growth in gross domestic product, from 3.7 per cent in 2013
to 1.5 per cent in 2014. The report projects increasing growth
rates from 2015-2017.
• In 2014, Government revenue collection fell short, with
revenues of $1.8 billion against a target of $2.2 billion.
Delays in introducing new tax measures, in particular a
value-added tax; weak customs and tax compliance; and
uncertainties arising from the political and security
transitions contributed to the decline in revenues, which led
to an unfinanced fiscal gap.
• In October 2014, the Government wrote to donors requesting
funding to close the fiscal gap. Several donors responded
with funding over the following months, in some cases
shifting funds previously intended for development initiatives
to help fill the gap. The Government also shifted funds away
from development initiatives to fill the gap; the 2015 budget,
approved by the National Assembly on 28 January 2015,
allows ongoing Government-funded development projects to
continue, but approved no new discretionary initiatives for
2015.

VI. Regional cooperation
Benchmark: sustained and effective regional coordination in support of
prosperity, peace and stability
Indicators of progress

Improved coordination of
regional bodies and increased
regional investments

15-02628

Metrics

• From 2 to 11 February 2014, a delegation of
13 representatives from the Afghan National Disaster
Management Agency visited Japan as part of activities
supported by Japan under the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process
confidence-building measures.

33/39

A/69/801
S/2015/151

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• On 13 February, the eighth Trilateral Pakistan-AfghanistanTurkey Summit was held in Ankara and focused on the theme
“Sustainable peace in the Heart of Asia”. The joint statement
emphasized the importance of a political settleme nt within
the framework of the Afghan Constitution and called upon
the Afghan Taliban to join the peace process.
• On 16 February, Afghanistan and Kyrgyzstan signed three
Memorandums of Understanding to strengthen ties on
political, economic and security issues.
• On 26 and 27 February, Afghanistan hosted a workshop on
countering terrorism financing, as part of the Heart of Asia Istanbul Process counter-terrorism confidence-building
measures.
• On 3 March, the Foreign Ministries of Afghanistan and
Turkmenistan signed a programme of cooperation for 2014 2015.
• On 5 March, in Moscow, an anti-cannabis seminar was held
as an activity under the counter-narcotics confidence-building
measures of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process. On 8 and
9 March, a counter-improvised explosive device workshop
under the counter-terrorism confidence-building measures of
the Process took place in Kabul.
• On 26 March, five new bilateral agreements were signed
between Afghanistan and Tajikistan, including a Joint
Declaration on the Expansion and Strengthening of Bilateral
Relations, and a cooperation agreement between their Interior
Ministries.
• On 27 March, the Presidents of Afghanistan, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Pakistan and Tajikistan held a quadrilateral
summit. Their joint statement reiterated their support to the
Afghan-led regional efforts within the framework of the
Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process; emphasized the need for joint
efforts, through enhanced security cooperation, to combat the
financing and support of terrorism; and underscored the
importance of supporting and facilitating direct dialogue and
reconciliation.
• On 27 March, the World Bank Board of Directors approved
$526.5 million in grant and credit financing for the Central
Asia South Asia Electricity Transmission and Trade Project
for Afghanistan, Kyrgyzstan, Pakistan and Tajikistan. On
2 December, in Istanbul, Turkey, the four countries signed a
pricing and quantities agreement on the project.

34/39

15-02628

A/69/801
S/2015/151

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• On 15 May, the fourth Regional Technical Group meeting of
the Trade, Commerce and Investment Opportunity
confidence-building measure of the Istanbul Process was held
in New Delhi, India, where the confidence-building measures
activity plan for 2014-2015 was developed.
• On 2 July, in Kabul, President Karzai met with the Iranian
Deputy Foreign Minister for Asia and Pacific Affairs,
Ebrahim Rahimpour, to discuss how to develop bilateral
relationships in all fields.
• On 8 July, Afghanistan, India, Pakistan and Turkmenistan
signed the operational plan for the TurkmenistanAfghanistan-Pakistan-India gas pipeline.
• On 10 July, a second Senior Officials Meeting of the Heart of
Asia-Istanbul Process took place in Beijing. The meeting was
to provide comments on the draft declaration of the fourth
Ministerial Conference of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process
and review progress on the six confidence-building measures.
• The 2014 Shanghai Cooperation Organization Summit took
place in Dushanbe on 11 and 12 September. The Summit
Declaration expressed support for Afghanistan as an
independent, peaceful, neutral and prosperous State, and for
strengthening the central coordinating role of the United
Nations in international efforts to an Afghan settlement.
• On 18 October, President Ghani and President Erdogan of
Turkey signed a Strategic Partnership and Friendship
Agreement on security, reconstruction, trade and investment
cooperation.
• On 28 October, during President Ghani’s official visit to
China, the two countries signed four agreements addressing
trade, bilateral economic ties, humanitarian aid and travel
permits for public servants.
• On 30 and 31 October, the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process
Senior Officials Meeting and Ministerial Conference were
held in Beijing. The Ministerial Conference concluded with
the Declaration entitled “Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process:
Deepening Cooperation for Sustainable Security and
Prosperity of the Heart of Asia Region”.
• On 15 December, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
Summit took place in Kazakhstan. Chief Executive Abdullah
represented Afghanistan.

15-02628

35/39

A/69/801
S/2015/151

VII. Partnership between the Government of Afghanistan and
the international community
Benchmark: coherent support by the international community for Afghan
priorities within an Afghan-led coordination framework
Indicators of progress

Increased percentage of aid
aligned with the Afghanistan
National Development
Strategy and Government
priorities

Metrics

• On 24 July 2014, the Government began its annual
Development Cooperation Dialogues, which are high-level
meetings between the Ministry of Finance and major donors
that aim to improve aid coordination. For the first time, the
2014 Dialogues included United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes.
• In October, the Ministry of Finance updated its aid
management policy guidance note on aligning donor funding
with national priority programmes.
• In the fourth quarter of 2014 and first quarter of 2015, a
number of donors provided funding in response to the
Government’s October 2014 request for assistance to fill the
2014 fiscal gap. The contributions allowed the Government
to address urgent priorities, including salary payments and
payment of arrears, and were largely delivered through
on-budget mechanisms.
• In January 2015, the President’s Office contacted a number of
major donors, as well as United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes, to request reviews of aid and assistance
portfolios, including programme performance and alignment
with the Government’s reform plans.
• On 6 May 2014, the Government endorsed in principle the
United Nations Development Assistance Framework for
2015-2019, which, it recognized, was aligned with
Government programmes and development plans. The
Framework supports key areas of the Afghan development
agenda focused on the licit economy, basic services, social
equity, the rule of law and governance.

Improved accountability of
procurement and contracting
on behalf of the Government
and the international
community

36/39

• The Incentive Programme of the World Bank-administered
Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund encourages ministries
to develop procurement capacity that can be certified by the
Ministry of Finance Procurement Policy Unit. The
Programme set targets of three new certifications for each of
the years from 2012 to 2014. In 2012 and 2013, the
Government achieved that target. In 2014, the Ministry of
Finance reported one certification for the Office of the State
Minister for Parliamentary Affairs.

15-02628

A/69/801
S/2015/151

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• The Government’s paper, entitled “Realizing Self-reliance —
Commitments to Reforms and Renewed Partnership”,
announced its intention to reduce collusive procurement
practices, described as a key driver of corruption, by forming
a national procurement board to manage high-value contracts
using internationally recognized standards and procedures.
Strengthening of the Joint
Coordination Monitoring
Board in support of the Kabul
process and as a means of
regular review of progress on
Afghan priorities and mutual
commitments

• On 27 November 2014, at the request of the Government, a
special meeting of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board was convened, with UNAMA as co-chair. During the
meeting, the Government gave a preliminary presentation of
its reform plans developed for the London Conference on
Afghanistan and outlined in the paper entitled “Realizing
Self-reliance — Commitments to Reforms and Renewed
Partnership”.
• Throughout 2014, the aid coordination group of the heads of
donor agencies continued to meet regularly, alternating
between donor-only meetings hosted by UNAMA and joint
donor-Government meetings hosted by the Ministry of
Finance. The regular meetings, accompanied by working
meetings of a subset of major donors, supported the ongoing
review of development progress and Government and donor
mutual commitments.

VIII. Counter-narcotics
Benchmark: sustained trend in the reduction of poppy cultivation, narcotics
production and drug addiction
Indicators of progress

Decrease in poppy cultivation,
narcotics production and
addiction rates

15-02628

Metrics

• Opium poppy cultivation in Afghanistan increased again in
2014, with the total area under cultivation estimated at
224,000 hectares, a 7 per cent increase over the 209,000
hectares cultivated in 2013. Opium production in 2014 is
estimated at 6,400 tons, which represents a 17 per cent
increase over the 5,500 tons in 2013 and is the second highest level of opium production since 1994. The increase
was accompanied by a decrease in prices, leading to an
overall fall in the value of the country’s opium economy. The
overall number of poppy-free provinces in Afghanistan
remained the same in 2014, with 98 per cent of total opium
cultivation in the southern, eastern and western regions of the
country.

37/39

A/69/801
S/2015/151

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• In 2014, the capacity of drug treatment facilities increased to
a total of 39,200 beds in 123 treatment facilities in
28 provinces of Afghanistan.
• In 2014, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) worked closely with the Government and donor
community to develop a transition plan for the transitioning
of drug treatment centres to the Ministry of Public Health. In
line with the first phase of the plan, 13 drug treatment centres
were handed over to the Government in 2014.
Increase in effective
interdiction and countertrafficking efforts

• In 2014, counter-narcotics police conducted 2,734 operations,
seizing 4,146 kg of heroin, 6,361 kg of morphine, 69,169 kg
of opium, 44,583 kg of hashish, 3 kg of methamphetamine,
39,608 kg of solid precursor chemicals, and 48,851 l of liquid
precursor chemicals. In addition, a total of 45 heroin
manufacturing laboratories were dismantled in 2014. The
operations led to the arrest of 2,803 suspects, the deaths of
five Afghan National Security Forces personnel and two
counter-narcotics police, and the wounding of nine counternarcotics police.
• The National Intelligence Working Group on Precursors
continued to support inter-agency cooperation in
strengthening precursor control and information sharing in
Afghanistan. In 2014, the Working Group reviewed results of
backtracking investigations into 11 seizures, involving over
5 tons of acetic anhydride, 4 tons of hydrochloric acid and
16 tons of ammonium chloride.
• In May, a ministerial-level meeting within the framework of
the Afghanistan-Kyrgyzstan-Tajikistan Initiative was
convened to review progress made and endorse a road map of
joint activities, which enabled law enforcement agencies
from the three countries to conduct joint operations, resulting
in the seizure of 137 kg of hashish and 11 kg of opium and
the arrest of two suspects.
• In 2014, within the framework of the Triangular Initiative
between Afghanistan, the Islamic Republic of Iran and
Pakistan, a number of joint operations were conducted, which
resulted in the seizure of 243 kg of opium and 1,020 kg of
hashish and the arrest of 10 suspects.

38/39

15-02628

A/69/801
S/2015/151

Indicators of progress

Increase in licit agriculture
and related private capital
investment in areas previously
used for poppy cultivation

Metrics

• Despite the increase in opium poppy cultivation in 2013 and
2014, there have also been significant increases in
agricultural production and productivity, primarily in areas
which are relatively poppy-free. The average increase in the
export of agricultural and non-agricultural commodities was
33.3 per cent in 2014. According to the Afghan Chamber of
Commerce and Industries, exports of dried fruits and
medicinal plants increased by 27.8 and 20.5 per cent
respectively in 2014, totalling $234.7 million. In addition,
carpet exports increased by 149.0 per cent in 2014 and
exports of cereal crops increased by 10.0 per cent.
• To support regional cooperation on alternative livelihoods
initiatives, from 9 to 12 November 2014 UNODC facilitated
engagements with experts from the Islamic Republic of Iran
and Tajikistan in an effort to develop the vegetable oil
industry in Afghanistan and establish links between Afghan
cotton traders and the textile industry in China.

15-02628

39/39
