4

General Assemhly-l<'ort}'-second Session

co-ordination with the Governments of Central America and
in consultation with donors, to use his best efforts in the
promotion, co-ordination, monitoring and follow-up of the
Special Plan and to make, as soon as possible, institutional
arrangements in order to facilitate the fulfilment of the
commitments of the international community;
4. Emphasizes the urgent need to provide the Central
American countries with financia! resources on concessional and favourable terms. in addition to those they are already
receiving from the international community;
5. Requests ali bodies, organs and organizations of the
United Nations system, taking into account the emergency
situation faced by the Central American countries, to take
immediate steps to mobilize additional financia! resources
and to participate actively in the implementation of the
activities supporting the goals and objectives of the Special
Plan;
6. Urges the organs and specialized agencies of the
United Nations system, in particular the United Nations
Development Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United
Nations Children's Fund, the International Fund for Agricultura! Development, the United Nations Population
Fund, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund,
to continue and expand, to the extent possible, their
assistance programmes on a priority basis, and to co-operate
with the Secretary-General in the implementation of the
activities supporting the goals and objectives of the Special
Plan;
7. Urges the international community and international
organizations to increase their technical, economic and
financia! co-operation with the Central American countries
for the implementation of the activities supporting the goals
and objectives of the Special Plan, as a way of contributing
to the efforts being made under the agreement concluded at
the Esquipulas II summit meetingº to attain peace and
development;
8. Recognizes the vital importance of the Central
American economic integration process as a fundamental
element for the economic and social development of the
region and urges ali Governments and international organizations to contribute to the strengthening of this process;
9. Decides to review and evaluate the progress in the
implementation of the Special Plan of Economic Cooperation for Central America at its forty-fourth session and
requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the
implementation of the present resolution with whatever
recommendations are deemed appropriate.

Justice regarding the applicability of the obligation to
arbitrate under section 21 of the Agreement between the
United Nations and the United States of America regarding
the Headquarters of the United Nations. dated 26 June
1947,-'
Having noted that. in its advisory opinion of 26 April
l 988," the Court was unanimously of the opinion that "the
United States of America, as a party to the Agreement
between the United Nations and the United States of
America regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations
of 26 June l 947, is under an obligation, in accordance with
section 21 of that Agreement. to enter into arbitration for
the settlement of the dispute between itself and the United
Nations",''
Having noted a/so that the Court pointed out that "the
purpose of the arbitration procedure envisaged by that
Agreement is precisely the settlement of such disputes as
may arise between the Organization and the host country
without any prior recourse to municipal courts, and it would
be against both the letter and the spirit of the Agreement for
the implementation of that procedure to be subjected to such
prior recourse". '"
Having noted a/so that the Court recalled '"the fundamental principle of international law that international law
prevails over domestic law","

1. Expresses its appreciation to the International Court
of Justice for having ••found that an early answer to the
request" submitted by the General Assembly on 2 March
1988 ''for advisory opinion would be desirable". and for
hav ing accelerated its procedure on the said request:
2. Takes note of and endorses the advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice of 26 April 1988,"
concerning the applicability of the obligation to arbitrate
under section 21 of thc Agreement between the United
Nations and the United States of America regarding the
Headquarters of the United Nations, dated 26 June 194 7;
3. Urges the host country to abide by its international
legal obligations and to act consistently with the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice of 26 April
1988, and accordingly to name its arbitrator to the arbitral
tribunal provided for under section 21 of the Agreement;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to ensure the constitution of the arbitral tribunal
provided for under section 21 of the Agreement;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly without delay on developments in
this matter;
6

Decides to kecp thc matter under active review.

112th p/enary meeting
/2 May 19?.R

42/232.

113th plenary meetinx
13 Mar 1988

Report of the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country

The General Assembly,
Having requested, in its resolution 42/229 B of 2 March
1988, an advisory opinion from the lnternational Court of

,•• A/421952, annex.
, • lhid .. para 58.
" lhid .. para -H
' //,id. para ,7
