Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

1. Welcomes Economic and Social Council resolution 1068 E (XXXIX) of 16 July 1965, in which the
Council recommended to Member States, and especially
to those making use of technical assistance, that they
give greater priority to projects and programmes directed towards the advancement of women, and invites
the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
executive heads of the specialized agencies to encourage
the participation of women in projects submitted by
Member States;
2. Welcomes Economic and Social Council resolution 1068 C (XXXIX) of 16 July 1965, in which the
Council emphasized the importance of training appropriate cadres, especially in the developing countries,
in order to enable women to participate fully in the
economic, social, cultural and political life of their
respective countries ;
3. Welcomes the support given by the Economic
and Social Council to the other recommendations made
b¥ the Commission on the Status of Women at its
eighteenth session;
4. Invites the specialized agencies and the international non-governmental organizations to continue their
efforts for the improvement of the status of women;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
study especially the possibility of expanding the assistance which can be rendered for the advancement of
women in developing countries ;
6. Invites the Secretary-General to co-operate with
the Commission on the Status of Women to these ends;
7. Further requests the Secretary-General to keep
the Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly informed on developments in this respect, especially with regard to the possibility of establishing
a unified, long-term United Nations programme for
the advancement of women;
8. Expresses its appreciation to the Government of
Iran for its generous invitation, which enabled the
Commission on the Status of Women to hold its
eighteenth session at Teheran in conditions that were
particularly favonrnblr for its work.
1397th plenary meeting,
16 December 1965.

2060 (XX). Advisory services in the field of
human rights
The General Assembly,
Noting that proposals have been made to hold an
international seminar on apartheid in 1966,
Recalling that these proposals were brought to the
attention of the Economic and Social Council at its
thirty-ninth session, 20
Requests the Secretary-General to organize in 1966,
in consultation with the Special Committee on the
Policies of apartheid of the Government of the Republic
of South Africa and the Commission on Human Rights,
an international seminar on apartheid and authorizes
him to use such funds as may be necessary for the
purpose, making appropriate readjustments within the
budgetary allocations approved for section 14 (Human
rights advisory services), part V (Technical programmes), of the United Nations budget.
1397th plenary meeting,
16 December 1965.
20 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentirth
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/6003), para. 549.

43

2061 (XX). Freedom of information
The General Assembly,
ll/ oting that the heavy agenda of the Third Committee
at the twentieth session has not allowed the Committee
to consider rither the draft Convention on Freedom of
Information or the draft Declaration on Freedom of
fnformation which was snhmitted to it by the Economic
and Social Council,
Reiterating that freedom of information forms an
important part of the human rights and fundamental
freedoms, to thr promotion of which the Unitrd Nations
is dedicated,
Derides to devote, at its twenty-first session, as much
time as it deems necessary to the consideration of the
ikrn on frerdom of information.
1397th plenary meeting,
16 December 1065.
2062 (XX). Creation of the post of United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights
The General Assembly,
Considering that the agenda of its twentieth session
included the item entitled "Creation of the post of
United Nations High Commissionrr for Human
Rights",
Considering that owing to other priorities the proposal relating to this question could not he considered,
Convinccd that it would be useful to obtain the
opinion of the most appropriate United Nations organ
to dral with the matter.
1. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
transmit to the Commission on Human Rights the
proposal for the creation of the post of United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, for study of
all aspects of thr matter and for report, through the
Council. to the General Assembly at its twenty-first
session;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all
pertinent documents concerning that proposal to the
Commission on Human Rights.
1397th plenary meeting,
16 December 1965.
2080 (XX). Draft International Covenants on
Human Rights
The General Assembly,
Considering that the Third Committee, owmg to its
heavy agenda, has not been able to consider the draft
International Cov('.t'lants on Human Rights at the
present session,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 1075
(XXXIX) of 28 July 1965 on organizational and
procedural arrangements for the implementation of
conventions and rrcommendations in the field of human
rights,
1. Derides to defer to its twenty-first session the
further consideration of the draft International Covenants on Human Rights ;
2. Invites Governments of Member States to consider the measures of implementation and the final
clauses of the draft International Covenants on Human
Rights prepared by the Commission on Human Rights,
the explanatory paprr preparrd by the Secretary-
