S/2021/256

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 March 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 12 March 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by Her
Excellency Ms. Ann Linde, Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sweden, as well as
the statements delivered by the representatives of Estonia, France, India, Ireland,
Kenya, Mexico, the Niger, Norway, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Tunisia, the United States of America and Viet Nam in connection
with the video-teleconference on “Briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe” convened on Wednesday, 10
March 2021.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020
by the President of the Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
this briefing and these statements will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Linda Thomas-Greenfield
President of the Security Council

21-03488 (E) 170321 050421

*2103488*

S/2021/256

Annex I
Briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Sweden, Ann Linde
I thank you for this opportunity to brief the Security Council about the
Swedish chairpersonship of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). As the world’s largest regional security organization under Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations, the OSCE plays an important role in many of the
challenges on the Council’s agenda. Our 57 members span three continents ― North
America, Asia and Europe — a diverse group of countries bound together by joint
commitments dating back to the Helsinki Final Act of 1975.
Close collaboration between the United Nations and the OSCE remains
essential, an example of the partnerships that the Declaration on the Commemoration
of the Seventy-fifth Anniversary of the United Nations (General Assembly resolution
75/1) called on us all to strengthen. The Secretary-General’s vision for networked
multilateralism gives new impetus to our partnership and provides a framework for
how we can work together.
We have a security situation in the OSCE region that calls for more, not less,
common solutions. Old rivalries continue to fuel conflicts and pose challenges to
international peace and security. And new conflicts, crises and threats call for our
increased attention — from climate change to cybersecurity.
We are in the midst of a historic and devastating pandemic that will have longterm effects on the world.
As Chairperson-in-Office, I will do my part to ensure that the OSCE can
make a real difference on the ground and to defend the principles on which the
organization rests. Ultimately, our efforts aim to contribute to resolving the conflicts
and improving the lives of people in our region.
My first priority is to focus on the basic commitments and principles on which
the OSCE was founded ― the Helsinki Final Act and the Charter of Paris for a New
Europe of 1990. These documents clearly state the sanctity of sovereignty, territorial
integrity, the freedom from threat or use of force and the right of all States to choose
their own security policy path. Underpinning these documents, of course, are
international law and the Charter of the United Nations. They are relevant not only
to Europe but globally. The participating States of the OSCE made commitments
that constitute the foundation of the European security order and that remain valid
and relevant to this day. Our task is to implement these commitments.
We will also seek to strengthen the OSCE’s unique comprehensive concept of
security, which makes a clear link between security and respect for human rights,
democracy and the rule of law. This is a link well-known to the United Nations.
Through this concept we will contribute to conflict resolution in our region in
accordance with international law. We know that societies where human rights
are fully enjoyed by all are more secure and have better prospects for sustainable,
resilient and prosperous development. This is why the women and peace and security
agenda is a guiding theme of our chairpersonship.
One of my main priorities as Chairperson-in-Office will be to seek continued
engagement at the highest levels towards sustainable solutions to crises and conflicts
in the region, in line with international law and with full respect for the OSCE
principles and commitments
The crisis in and around Ukraine remains the most serious challenge to the
European security order. It was therefore important for me to visit both Kyiv and
the contact line in Donbas during my first trip as Chairperson-in-Office in January.
2/26

21-03488

S/2021/256

Seven years into the crisis, it is clear that efforts towards conflict resolution
need to intensify. As Chairperson-in-Office, I fully support the work of the Normandy
format and the Trilateral Contact Group to achieve the full implementation of the
Minsk agreements and will seek to contribute to a sustainable political solution in line
with OSCE commitments and principles, while respecting the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and independence of Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders.
During my visit to the contact line, I saw first-hand the dedication and courage
by which the women and men of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission carried out
their tasks on the ground. Their work is essential to the peace effort and must remain
unimpeded throughout Ukraine.
The conflict also has dire humanitarian consequences, and the ceasefire in
force since July of last year should now pave the way for further steps to ease the
burden on civilians. Recent violations of the ceasefire are deeply worrisome. Respect
for international law, including international humanitarian law, is of course essential.
As long as contact line crossing points remain closed, communities and families are
separated, elderly people struggle to receive care and access to Government services
is restricted for many citizens. I hereby reiterate my call to fully open the two new
crossing points in the Luhansk region on both sides of the contact line, as well as
to reopen the existing ones. These were also some of my key messages during my
recent visits to Kyiv and Moscow.
During my visit to Georgia in February I had an opportunity to meet President
Zourabichvili, and then Prime Minister Gakharia, and to reiterate the OSCE’s full
support for the Geneva international discussions and related incident prevention and
response mechanism formats. This dialogue process, co-chaired by the OSCE, the
United Nations and the European Union, is another important example of United
Nations-OSCE cooperation in conflict resolution.
In addition to meeting with leaders in both the Government and civil society,
I also visited one of Georgia’s administrative boundary lines in its conflict context,
where I saw first-hand the need for increased contacts and communication between
local communities. Together with the European Union, the United Nations and the
OSCE should seek to step up our joint efforts to build the confidence necessary to
bring the conflict closer to its resolution.
In my talks with President Sandu and other leaders in Moldova the prospects to
move forward with talks in the 5+2 format and to continue building on the Berlin Plus
package were discussed. I also confirmed our readiness to hold 5+2 talks in Stockholm
this year. This message was reiterated in my discussions with the representative from
Transnistria and was generally well received. Although I remain realistic, there may
be some cause for cautious optimism in making progress on the settlement process
this year. But to make progress, the full support of all the parties to the conflict
is needed.
The unresolved Nagorno-Karabakh conflict remains a serious challenge to
international peace and security. Last autumn, we witnessed a renewed outbreak
of the armed conflict, resulting in thousands of casualties and immense suffering,
including among civilians. The ceasefire achieved in November, with the assistance
of Russia, brought about a welcome stop to hostilities. Now we must seize this
moment to renew efforts towards a lasting peace agreement. The OSCE has been
given the international mandate to lead this process, under the auspices of the OSCE
Minsk Group co-Chairs. As Chairperson-in-Office, I fully support their continued
engagement in the peace process, and I will use my planned visits to Baku and
Yerevan next week to express my expectation that the sides recommit to talks on a
sustainable political solution. We must also address a number of humanitarian needs,
reminding us all of the need to implement international humanitarian law in this as
in other conflicts.
21-034883/26

S/2021/256

In situations where trust between States has eroded, confidence- and
security-building measures play an important role in supporting transparency and
predictability. As Chairperson-in-Office, I call on all participating States of the
OSCE to comply with the measures that are at the heart of confidence- and securitybuilding in our region, including the Vienna Document and the Open Skies Treaty.
These measures must be kept up to date and fully complied with and comprise as
many States as possible to ensure their continued functioning and relevance.
When crises erupt despite our efforts to prevent them, I remain ready to
engage directly with the stakeholders involved to offer the OSCE’s good offices to
facilitate solutions. In line with this, the offer that Albania’s Prime Minister Rama
as Chairperson-in-Office and I extended last year to facilitate a genuine dialogue
between the Government and the opposition in Belarus still stands.
Secretary-General Guterres’ call for a global ceasefire during the pandemic is
much-needed. The adoption of resolution 2532 (2020) on 1 July 2020 and the recent
resolution 2565 (2021), on vaccine access in conflict areas, show the importance that
the Security Council attaches to combating the pandemic and resolving conflicts. It
is my strong wish to see these resolutions implemented to support peace efforts in
the OSCE region.
Unfortunately, the pandemic has added another layer of challenges by
putting strains on open society. During the past year, we have seen a backsliding
of democracy and respect for human rights in the OSCE region, as we have seen
elsewhere. The Swedish chairpersonship will emphasize the right to freedom of
expression and freedom of the media, as well as other democratic rights that our
States have committed to respect. As Chairperson-in-Office, our efforts will be
carried out in support of, and be complementary to, the important work done by the
OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights, the Representative on
Freedom of the Media and the High Commissioner for National Minorities.
As Chairperson-in-Office, we will draw on the expertise of civil society to
ensure that their contributions inform all aspects of security. Before this meeting,
I met with civil society organizations from across the OSCE region, including
from countries affected by unresolved conflicts, to exchange views on the women
and peace and security agenda. Key takeaways were that impunity for sexual and
gender-based violence prevails and that the pandemic’s negative effects on women’s
economic and social rights are especially hard-felt for those in already vulnerable
situations. The meeting reconfirmed my conviction in the need to involve civil
society organizations in conflict resolution and peacebuilding, to engage women
in all parts of peace processes and to address threats to civil society actors. In that
regard, close cooperation between the United Nations and the OSCE in the field can
make a difference.
Our strong focus on advancing the women and peace and security agenda will
continue in the same spirit as during our tenure in the Security Council in 20172018. We also plan to work together on this agenda with UN-Women, including on
how to promote women’s economic empowerment in our region. I have appointed an
advisory group of experts on these issues, which held its first meeting at the end of
February. Through their support, I hope that our work to mainstream the agenda will
gain further momentum and continue long after we have passed the baton to Poland
and successive OSCE Chairperson-in-Office.
In the period ahead, I plan to visit OSCE field presences across our region
from South-East Europe to Central Asia. I will continue to highlight the priorities
outlined at this meeting today, while seeking common solutions to the challenges
facing our region.

4/26

21-03488

S/2021/256

Annex II
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sweden, Ann Linde, for taking on
the challenging task of leading the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) this year. I am sure this will be a natural continuation of Sweden’s
dedicated work in the Security Council. I thank her also for briefing us on Sweden’s
chairpersonship priorities. Estonia absolutely shares her view that multilateral
cooperation is the best way to address our common challenges and that we should
uphold our common rules and fulfil commitments, including notably those on which
the OSCE was founded upon. Respecting the norms and principles of international
law enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations as well as the Helsinki Final
Act is of the utmost importance. Global and regional organizations need to work
hand in hand — we stand for stronger cooperation between the OSCE and the
United Nations.
We welcome the Swedish chairpersonship’s focus on the conflicts in the OSCE
region, which constitute a threat to international peace and security and contribute
to great human suffering. Unfortunately, for the seventh year in a row, violations of
international law and the Helsinki principles, as well as a number of bilateral and
multilateral agreements and commitments, including the Budapest Memorandum,
continue. The Russian Federation has illegally annexed Crimea and occupied certain
parts in eastern Ukraine. We underline Russia’s responsibility as a signatory of the
Minsk agreements and urge Russia as a party to the conflict and to the Trilateral
Contact Group to implement the provisions that it has committed itself to.
We regret that the restrictions imposed on the freedom of movement of the
OSCE Special Monitoring Mission have persisted, notably in non-Governmentcontrolled areas of eastern Ukraine, hindering the Mission from fully implementing
its mandate. We further call on Russia to stop fuelling the conflict by providing
financial and military support to the armed formations it backs. Foreign Minister
Ann Linde, how could the OSCE and the Security Council further assist in advancing
the steps needed to bring about a solution to the conflict?
On Georgia, I would like to highlight that we are deeply concerned about the
Russian military build-up in the occupied regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. We
call on the Russian Federation to fulfil its obligations under the ceasefire agreement
of 12 August 2008 and its subsequent implementing measures of 8 September 2008
and withdraw its military forces from Abkhazia and South Ossetia regions without
delay. We are also deeply worried about Russian military exercises, infrastructure
reinforcements and borderization activities in the Georgian regions of Abkhazia and
South Ossetia. We urge Russia and the de facto authorities that it backs to refrain
from any new provocative steps that could further escalate the already fragile
security and humanitarian situation on the ground. In that context, we remind the
Russian Federation of its responsibilities in line with the judgment of 21 January of
the European Court of Human Rights in the case Georgia v. Russia. We reiterate our
call for access for the European Union Monitoring Mission to the whole territory of
Georgia, as well as for human rights monitoring mechanisms and humanitarian and
other civil society organizations.
Estonia supports the efforts of the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office, her Special
Representative and the OSCE Mission to Moldova to resolve the Transnistrian
conflict. In addition to confidence-building measures, we should also seek to resolve
the main underlying issues of the conflict. We are carefully following developments
on the ground, and we encourage a results-oriented meeting in the 5+2 format as
21-034885/26

S/2021/256

soon as possible in 2021. I would like to ask Foreign Minister Linde on what issues
the OSCE would expect to advance in the 5+2 format during this year.
With regard to the Nagorno-Karabakh issue, we continue to support the
efforts of the OSCE Minsk Group co-Chairs to find a comprehensive and sustainable
settlement to the conflict.
In addition, we commend and support the OSCE chairpersonship’s offer of
dialogue with Belarus, and we call on the Belarus authorities to respond to the offer,
as well as to bring their policies and practices into compliance with their OSCE
commitments. We also repeat our call on Belarus to follow up on the recommendations
from the Moscow Mechanism report, as presented in November 2020.
As a crosscutting priority, we must protect and promote human rights. We
agree with Foreign Minister Linde that the link between security and respect for
human rights, democracy and the rule of law is crystal clear. Upholding human
rights is not merely compatible with conflict-resolution strategies; it is an essential
element in ensuring peace and democracy. Human rights violations can be an early
indicator and a driver of conflict and, regrettably, are also its constant feature.
We strongly welcome the focus of the Chairperson-in-Office on women
and peace and security. We support the work of the OSCE on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), and we see merit in further cooperation and exchange
between the United Nations and the OSCE in that regard.
As an expression of the Estonian commitment to the OSCE, let me reiterate
that the Government of Estonia has confirmed its readiness to assume the role of the
OSCE chairpersonship for 2024.

6/26

21-03488

S/2021/256

Annex III
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations, Nathalie Broadhurst Estival
[Original: English and French]
I join all my colleagues in welcoming Ms. Linde and thanking her for her
briefing. I would also like to congratulate Sweden on its programme of work
during its chairpersonship of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE).
In line with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, the Organization
and the OSCE have the responsibility for coordinating their work to respond to
threats to international peace and security. I would therefore first like to refer to
several of those threats.
On the Ukrainian issue, France and Germany are continuing efforts, which
remain difficult, in support of the full restoration of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine more than a year after the Paris summit in December 2019. We
fully support the mediation role played by the OSCE within the Trilateral Contact
Group, in coordination with the Normandy format. We also welcome the work carried
out by the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, whose role in monitoring
the ceasefire is crucial. The mandate of the Special Monitoring Mission should be
fully implemented throughout Ukraine, which means including close to the RussianUkrainian border. We strongly condemn all actions that undermine the security of
the men and women who make up the Mission or that seek to impede their work.
With regard to Nagorno-Karabakh, France, as co-Chair of the OSCE Minsk
Group, is committed at all levels, together with its Russian and American partners,
to achieving a peaceful and lasting solution. We are determined to fully play our
role in seeking that lasting solution following the ceasefire agreement reached on 9
November 2020. That is the mandate that we have been given by the OSCE members.
We will continue to attempt to fulfil the mandate. Particular attention must be paid
to humanitarian access, the return of displaced persons, the situation of prisoners of
war and other detainees and the protection of cultural heritage.
With regard to Belarus, where human rights have been violated and where
the democratic aspiration of the people has been suppressed by violence, we fully
support the mediation initiative that Ms. Linde launched with her predecessor, Mr.
Rama, and welcome his achievements during his chairpersonship in 2020. We call
for the implementation of the recommendations of the report of independent expert
Wolfgang Benedek following the activation of the Moscow Mechanism, which we
requested with 16 other members of the OSCE.
France fully supports the OSCE in its attempt to resolve other crises in our
neighbourhood. That applies to the international discussions in Geneva, which
must allow Georgia to restore its territorial integrity. We also support the OSCE
mediating role within the 5+2 format so as to achieve a comprehensive, peaceful and
lasting settlement to the Transnistrian conflict, in full respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Republic of Moldova within its internationally
recognized borders.
France remains committed to the multidimensional approach to security that
prevails within the OSCE. In the context of the political and military dimension, the
weakening of arms control tools undermines our collective security interests and
the European security architecture. We must put an end to that pernicious dynamic.
Through its human dimension, the OSCE also focuses on the crucial link
between collective security and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
21-034887/26

S/2021/256

In that regard, France reiterates its full support for the human dimension institutions,
which continue to demonstrate their usefulness, and welcomes the priorities that
have been defined by the Swedish chairpersonship, particularly with regard to gender
equality and safeguarding freedom of expression and press freedom. We believe that
on all those issues we must also give full consideration to the civil society of the
States participating in the diplomatic and field activities of the OSCE.
The economic dimensions and, increasingly, the environmental dimensions
of collective security must also be taken into account. The OSCE is the model in
Europe for an effective form of grass-roots multilateralism, which was built on
the foundation of a common set of values at a time when there were stark political
differences. In cooperation with regional organizations, the United Nations can
continue to develop multilateralism that produces results capable of responding to
all the crises and challenges of our time.

8/26

21-03488

S/2021/256

Annex IV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations, Nagaraj Naidu Kakanur
At the outset, let me begin by welcoming Her Excellency Ms. Ann Linde,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sweden, to the Security Council. I also thank her for
her comprehensive briefing on the activities of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and its priorities.
The role of regional and subregional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security, as well as their cooperation with the United Nations,
is provided for in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. We welcome the
briefing by the OSCE’s Chairperson-in-Office.
The adoption of the Helsinki Final Act and the creation of the Conference
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) at the height of the Cold War
demonstrated that dialogue and cooperation were possible even in times of the most
serious confrontation. The CSCE transformed into the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe after the fall of the Berlin Wall. Today the OSCE, with its 57
participating members from three continents, including countries from the extended
neighbourhood, respecting the principles of the comprehensiveness and indivisibility
of security, an allegiance to shared values and a commitment to upholding norms
of behaviour, plays a significant role in the promotion of international peace and
security and empowers its membership to build a better and more secure future.
Peace and security are essential prerequisites for the growth and development
of humankind. We all have a collective responsibility for the prevention of conflict
and creating conditions for sustaining peace and ensuring security. Today the
international order is facing multiple challenges to peace and security. The parochial
policies of certain States and their perceived notion of existential threats have
contributed to insecurity in many regions. Purely bilateral issues are being brought
to regional and international forums, thereby diminishing the chances for direct and
mutual dialogue.
The challenges confronting the OSCE community come from different
sources. They include not only potential challenges to sovereignty but also threats
to peace from ethnic tensions and violent separatism within States. As the largest
regional security organization, the OSCE also addresses some of the toughest
transnational threats that its membership faces, such as weapons proliferation,
terrorism, cybersecurity, migration, environmental damage and drug trafficking.
Despite those challenges, the OSCE has broken new ground in developing effective
tools for conflict prevention, peacebuilding, crisis management and post-conflict
rehabilitation to address such risks and threats to security.
We believe that the bilateral agreements negotiated between the parties
concerned provide the basis for a negotiated and peaceful resolution of disputes. The
commitment to upholding a rules-based international order, underpinned by respect
for territorial integrity and sovereignty, the rule of law, transparency, freedom of
navigation in international seas and the peaceful resolution of disputes, remains
critical and relevant as well.
We support active engagement between the United Nations and the OSCE
based on the framework for cooperation and coordination between the United
Nations Secretariat and the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe,
signed in 1993, and in line with the Charter of the United Nations.
While noting the ongoing global counter-terrorism efforts and contribution
of the OSCE, we would like to take this opportunity to reiterate the importance of
21-034889/26

S/2021/256

that issue. It is evident from recent lone-wolf attacks in many parts of Europe that
terrorists have significantly enhanced their capabilities. We need to ensure that our
collective resolve to fight terrorism is not weakened.
The OSCE was among the first regional organizations to strongly condemn
the terrorist attack on the Indian Parliament in 2001. We believe that the OSCE has
an important role to play in our continued fight against terrorism and other new and
emerging threats. In that context, I would like the Security Council to take note of
the eight-point action plan on counter-terrorism proposed by India’s External Affairs
Minister on 12 January while addressing the Council (see S/2021/48, annex 5), which
also merits the serious consideration of the OSCE.
Lastly, the OSCE’s contribution to the rules-based international order and
multilateralism is immense. With the current pandemic putting a severe strain on
societies all over the world, Sweden will take on the OSCE chairpersonship in truly
challenging times. We welcome Sweden’s strong focus to further the women and
peace and security agenda during its chairpersonship. We believe that the inclusion
and meaningful participation of women are vital for the successful prevention
and mitigation of conflicts, as well as for consolidating peace. We also appreciate
Sweden’s strong emphasis on dialogue, inclusion and respect for agreed principles
in approaching the challenges that we face today. My delegation would like to join
all the other members of the Council in extending its good wishes for Sweden’s
chairpersonship of the OSCE.

10/26

21-03488

S/2021/256

Annex V
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Ireland to
the United Nations, Jim Kelley
I would like to thank Minister Linde for briefing us on her priorities as
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) in 2021. I want to assure the Minister of Ireland’s full support in her
important role.
Listening to the Minister’s briefing, I was very struck by the close links
between the work of the OSCE and the work of the Security Council and the wider
United Nations. It is a reminder that the importance of multilateral cooperation in
the face of our common challenges simply cannot be overstated.
As a founding member of the OSCE, Ireland regards the organization as a
vital instrument for European stability and security. We greatly value the OSCE’s
work on conflict resolution and prevention, its activities on human rights and its
regional role as well.
The OSCE’s comprehensive approach to security is as pertinent and relevant
as ever. Respect for human rights, the rule of law and economic progress are all
essential elements for sustaining peace and prosperity. We look forward to working
closely with the Chairperson-in-Office to ensure strong, complementary partnerships
between the United Nations and the OSCE.
We strongly support the priorities that Ms. Linde outlined this morning, in
particular her efforts to strengthen gender equality in all aspects of the OSCE’s
work, including by seeking women’s economic empowerment and supporting the
meaningful implementation of the Security Council resolutions on women and
peace and security in the OSCE region, including through dialogue with women
peacebuilders and civil society representatives.
Indeed, the women and peace and security agenda is a priority for Ireland
in our work on the Security Council, including as co-Chair of the Informal Expert
Group on Women and Peace and Security. The truth is that neither the OSCE nor
the Security Council can successfully address peace and security challenges without
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women at all stages in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding. Like Minister Linde, we believe
that the United Nations and regional organizations such as the OSCE have a special
responsibility to lead the way in those efforts and should work together to reinforce
each other’s messages.
In Ukraine, for example, we have seen how women on the ground are playing
a central role in peacebuilding efforts. Ensuring space for those women and civil
society in the peace process will be key to delivering effective and sustainable
conflict resolution.
Let me say as well that Ireland is a firm supporter of Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity, and we call for the full implementation of the Minsk peace
agreements. We also remain seriously concerned by the humanitarian situation in
Ukraine. During our discussion in the Security Council on 11 February, we heard
worrisome information regarding the humanitarian impact on civilians of the almost
complete closure of crossing points along the line of contact (see S/2021/159). Like
others, we call again today for the Shchastia and Zolote entry and exit crossing
points to become fully operational and for all currently closed entry and exit crossing
points to be reopened to avoid exacerbating the acute humanitarian crisis.
Ireland strongly supports Sweden’s intention to keep conflict prevention and
resolution at the top of the OSCE’s agenda. The Chairperson-in-Office has already
21-0348811/26

S/2021/256

demonstrated this commitment through her recent visits, including to Georgia,
where we commend her focus on the incident-prevention mechanism and on peopleto-people links between Tbilisi and the breakaway republics. Ireland also commends
Sweden’s focus on the Transnistrian settlement and plans for holding 5+2 talks.
We were reminded last autumn of the tragic human cost of conflict in the
region when we saw a return to hostilities in Nagorno-Karabakh. Ireland welcomes
the cessation of hostilities between Armenia and Azerbaijan. It is essential that both
sides now engage in finding a sustainable solution to the issues around NagornoKarabakh under the auspices the Co-Chairs of the OSCE Minsk Group.
Let me conclude by assuring Foreign Minister Linde once again of Ireland’s
steadfast support for her important work.

12/26

21-03488

S/2021/256

Annex VI
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Michael Kiboino
Let me welcome Her Excellency Ms. Ann Linde, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Sweden and Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and thank her for her briefing. I also congratulate
Ms. Linde on assuming her role at the helm of the OSCE and wish her success as she
advances the Swedish priorities for the organization, which focus on maintaining the
European security order, addressing protracted conflicts and enhancing democracy,
gender equality, human rights and the rule of law.
The importance of cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations is critical to the maintenance of international peace and security.
In this regard, the cooperation between the United Nations and the OSCE as the
primary organ for the maintenance of international peace and security throughout
the OSCE region is commendable.
Kenya lauds the OSCE for its record of preventive diplomacy and multilateral
cooperation on peace, security and development. We note that the organization has
made efforts in Ukraine as it continues to execute its mandate in monitoring the
implementation of the 2015 Minsk agreements, endorsed by the Security Council in
resolution 2202 (2015). I reaffirm Kenya’s support for the OSCE’s Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine, which should continue to have unobstructed access in order to
monitor and verify compliance with the Minsk agreements pursuant to its mandate.
Kenya believes that it is the responsibility of all relevant parties, including the
OSCE, to ensure a sustainable environment conducive to Kosovo’s long-term peace
and stability.
On Nagorno-Karabakh, we support the work of the OSCE Minsk Group CoChair countries, particularly their call on all the parties to the conflict to comply
with their commitments, including to the non-use of force to settle the dispute.
We commend the Chairperson-in Office of the OSCE for stressing the inclusion
and meaningful participation of women in all phases of the conflict cycle and the
importance of moving forward on the women and peace and security agenda in
line with the organization’s concept of comprehensive security. I also commend the
OSCE for its inclusion of civil society in the interests of the people and the stability
of the broader region to ensure lasting solutions to conflict.
I take note that the OSCE works to prevent conflicts from arising and
promotes peacebuilding and post-conflict rehabilitation. In particular, we commend
the organization for putting in place a wide range of early-warning and conflictmanagement tools, such as its network of field operations and the OSCE Conflict
Prevention Centre. We recommend that the OSCE share its experiences and expertise
with other regional organizations across the world.
As I conclude, let me reiterate that Kenya supports the OSCE in its pursuit of
genuine dialogue as the primary option in resolving all conflicts within the OSCE
region. With political will and genuine inclusive dialogue, tangible and sustainable
peace can be achieved in all conflict situations.

21-0348813/26

S/2021/256

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations, Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez
[Original: Spanish]
I welcome Foreign Minister Linde and wish her every success in her
term of office and thank her for the information she has kindly shared with the
Security Council.
As an international community, we face challenges that, because of their
complexity and urgency, are impossible to solve at the strictly national level. Mexico
supports the work of regional bodies in support of the efforts of the United Nations
to find solutions to these challenges. In this regard, we recognize the work of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) on several of the issues
on the international peace and security agenda, such as Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Ukraine and the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. Multilateralism harnesses common
action and cooperation to build sustainable peace founded on a rules-based system.
We recognize that the Swedish Chairpersonship-in-Office of the organization
has articulated the OSCE’s priorities for this year around values we fully share, such
as the peaceful resolution of conflicts in the region, making progress on the women
and peace and security agenda and supporting the link among security, respect for
human rights, democracy and the rule of law.
We also recognize the mediation and good-offices work of the OSCE through
the deployment of peace missions, field offices and special representatives. The
OSCE’s mediation work is instrumental in resolving disputes and building confidence
between States through cooperation in conflict prevention, crisis management
and post-conflict rehabilitation. We also note the work of the OSCE missions,
which seek to promote the rule of law in the region by strengthening local and
institutional capacities.
We express our support for the role of the OSCE and the Trilateral Contact
Group in the implementation of the Minsk agreements. We encourage the parties to
continue to support these efforts and comply with the provisions of resolution 2202
(2015), as this package remains the only agreed framework for a comprehensive,
negotiated and peaceful solution to the situation in Ukraine. It is essential that the
OSCE Special Monitoring Mission be granted full and secure access in order to
fulfil its mandate.
We also recognize the efforts of the OSCE Minsk Group aimed at seeking
a peaceful and negotiated solution to the conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh. Mexico
deplores the harm caused to the civilian population, in particular to children, as
well as the regrettable use of cluster munitions. We call once again on all countries
producing and using these weapons to implement a moratorium and join the
Oslo Convention.
Mexico commends the work of both Russia and the OSCE Minsk Group in
facilitating the ceasefire agreement signed on 9 November. We call on the parties
to engage in dialogue without preconditions, reach an agreement on the future
status of the region and facilitate unrestricted access for humanitarian aid workers,
the exchange of prisoners of war and the return of internally displaced persons, in
accordance with that agreement.
As we commemorate International Women’s Day this week, we applaud
Sweden’s initiative to strengthen gender equality in all aspects of the organization’s
work. The full, equal and effective participation of women in all decision-making
processes is essential.
14/26

21-03488

S/2021/256

Finally, we draw the attention of the Security Council to explore new avenues
of joint collaboration with the OSCE focused on conflict prevention, taking into
account the major challenge posed by the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons. This is undoubtedly one of the causes fuelling conflicts and crises in
the region.

21-0348815/26

S/2021/256

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
[Original: French]
I thank Ms. Ann Linde, Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Sweden, for her excellent briefing.
The Niger welcomes the priorities of the Swedish OSCE chairpersonship,
which include upholding the OSCE’s common principles and commitments, respect
for Europe’s concept of comprehensive security, support for and contribution to
conflict resolution, and the strengthening of gender equality in all aspects of the
organization’s work. My delegation particularly welcomes the OSCE’s efforts aimed
at resolving conflicts in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, at facilitating the settlement of disputes and at promoting peacebuilding
and post-conflict rehabilitation.
Within its area of operation, whether it is the Minsk process, the Trilateral
Contact Group, the Transnistrian settlement process or the Geneva international
talks, to name but a few, the OSCE plays an important role in facilitating dialogue
and in supporting mediation, conflict-prevention and resolution initiatives. That is
why my delegation supports the Minsk Group co-Chairs in their firm commitment to
the non-use of force or threat of force to settle disputes, reiterated in its statement of
3 December 2020, as well as its stance in favour of a negotiated, comprehensive and
lasting settlement of all core issues with regard to the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict.
In this month of March, strengthening gender equality is a vision that is in
line with resolution 1325 (2000), which calls for greater representation of women in
decision-making in national, regional and international institutions and mechanisms
for the prevention, management and resolution of disputes.
Respect for international humanitarian law is important, including the return
of all prisoners of war, civilians and other detained persons, and safe and unhindered
United Nations humanitarian access to Nagorno-Karabakh, in accordance with the
principles of humanity and neutrality. In this respect, any conflict-resolution process
will also have to take into account the preservation of cultural and religious heritage.
Beyond the aspects I mentioned, my delegation welcomes the partnership
between the OSCE and the United Nations, which also covers the fight against
terrorism, combating human trafficking and addressing the environmental
and economic aspects of security, cybersecurity and new information and
communications technologies.
Terrorism is one of the most important threats to peace, security and stability,
and to the enjoyment of human rights and to social and economic development.
Accordingly, the organization’s commitment to preventing and combating terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, whatever its motivation or origin, remains
essential. In this regard, the OSCE makes a broad contribution to international
efforts under the auspices of the United Nations to combating terrorism and
addressing its manifestations and the various social, economic and political factors
underpinning it.
The Niger supports the cooperative and coordinated approach to the fight
against terrorism at all levels and all efforts guided by the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and relevant Security Council resolutions, in line with
the OSCE’s consolidated framework for combating terrorism, which remains an
important asset that benefits all countries. The Niger therefore calls for an expansion
of OSCE cooperation with African regional and subregional organizations.
16/26

21-03488

S/2021/256

Annex IX
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Norway to
the United Nations, Trine Heimerback
I join others in warmly welcoming Her Excellency Ms. Ann Linde, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Sweden, and thank her for briefing the Security Council in her
capacity as Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE). The OSCE supports the work of the United Nations by promoting
and maintaining peace and security at the regional level. We value the fact that the
OSCE serves as a forum for cooperation with regional and subregional organizations
and other initiatives in the region. Norway will continue to support the Swedish
Chairperson’s emphasis on the OSCE’s comprehensive security concept. We also
share the focus on conflict resolution, especially in relation to ongoing conflicts
and crises.
Let me highlight three situations we believe need particular attention.
First, there is Ukraine. The conflict in that country undermines European
security. Norway welcomes the engagement of the OSCE in addressing this conflict.
We commend the Chairperson-in-Office for her trip to both Kyiv and the contact line
in Donbas in January. Let me also thank the OSCE’s Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine for the tremendous job it is doing under very difficult circumstances. This
Mission also continues to provide us with timely and impartial information on the
conflict in eastern Ukraine.
Secondly, there is Nagorno-Karabakh. The statement on the conflict signed
by Armenia, Russia and Azerbaijan last year ended the fighting. A lasting solution
will best be reached through the involvement of the international community. The
OSCE is well-placed to play such a role, building on the long experience of the OSCE
Minsk Group and the Personal Representative of the Chairperson-in-Office.
Finally, there is Georgia. Norway is deeply concerned about the situation in
the occupied regions of South Ossetia and Abkhazia and believes the OSCE can play
a greater role in assisting efforts aimed at achieving peace and reconciliation in these
regions of Georgia.
Two days ago, we, the States Members of the United Nations, called for
the Organization to lead by example in ensuring the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in United Nations-led peace processes. As the world’s
largest regional security organization, the OSCE also find this to be of the utmost
importance. The inclusion and empowerment of women is a prerequisite to achieving
comprehensive security throughout the OSCE area.
I therefore commend the Chairperson-in-Office for placing gender equality
high on the OSCE’s agenda. She can count on Norway’s full support in her efforts to
make women and peace and security a priority in the OSCE’s engagement on peace
and security, including building on the work done by the Security Council. Let me
also express our strong support for the Chairperson-in-Office’s initiative to invite
civil society to contribute its unique competence wherever possible and relevant.
Looking ahead, continued focus by the OSCE on the Balkans is necessary
for the stability of the region, as well as the consolidation of democracy there. We
appreciate the important role that OSCE missions play in assisting the participating
States in achieving greater security and economic and democratic development.
The OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights, the OSCE High
Commissioner on National Minorities and the OSCE Representative on Freedom
of the Media also give valuable support and advice to States in the areas of their
expertise. All of these efforts contribute to a more peaceful and prosperous region,
21-0348817/26

S/2021/256

and therefore also to our own work towards international peace and security in the
Security Council.
I would conclude by reiterating the shared visions and agendas of the United
Nations and the OSCE. Our common duty is to continue to strengthen security at
the regional level so as to end violent conflict and to ensure that human rights,
democracy, the rule of law and gender equality can be enjoyed by all. We welcome
the opportunity offered today to reinforce these ties.

18/26

21-03488

S/2021/256

Annex X
Statement by the First Deputy Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation to the United Nations, Dmitry Polyanskiy
[Original: Russian]
We thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sweden, Ann Linde, for briefing
us on the activities of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), issues on its agenda and the priorities of the Chairperson-in-Office.
Russia consistently stands for enhancing cooperation between the United
Nations and the OSCE on the basis of the Charter of the United Nations and the 2019
framework agreement on cooperation and coordination between the United Nations
and the OSCE, as well as 2006 declaration of the OSCE Permanent Council. It is our
understanding that the OSCE should supplement the efforts of the United Nations
throughout its area of responsibility.
Sweden took over the Chair of OSCE amid complicated geopolitical and
epidemiological circumstances. The volatile situation that has evolved around the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic overlaps with the growing crisis of
confidence in the OSCE space. At the same time, its broad geographical coverage
and its consensus rule turn the organization into a unique instrument for maintaining
peace and stability in the Euro-Atlantic space.
We note the active stance that the Chairperson-in-Office assumed at the
initial stage of their mandate and their eagerness to receive first-hand information
about the situation on the ground. Minister Linde has already visited Russia,
Ukraine, Moldova and Georgia. We hope that the Chairperson-in-Office will
firmly adhere to consensual approaches, work within the scope of decisions made
by the OSCE Council of Foreign Ministers and the Permanent Council in 2002 and
avoid making biased and imbalanced assessments and promoting concepts that do
not enjoy broad support.
At a time of widespread loss of mutual trust, regional organizations, including
the OSCE, have a very special mission, namely, to revive the feeling of mutual
understanding to help resolve crises in their respective regions. By all means, the
main criterion for effectiveness in that matter is assistance in conflict settlement.
The OSCE is expected to take an objective approach to the settlement of the
internal Ukrainian conflict, foster direct dialogue among the sides — Kyiv, Donetsk
and Luhansk — and help implement the Minsk package of measures, which the
Security Council endorsed in resolution 2202 (2015).
We expect that Sweden, as Chairperson-in-Office, will ensure impartial work
by the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission (SMM) in Ukraine and that the Mission
itself will carry out well-balanced monitoring, inter alia with regard to human rights,
on both sides of the contact line. The SMM mandate directly prescribes this. Also,
there is a need to keep track of, analyse and report on discriminatory initiatives by
the Ukrainian leadership with regard to the Russian language, national minorities
and the Ukrainian Orthodox Church, as well as control the situation with regard to
ensuring the freedom of speech and the activities of mass media.
Infringement of the freedom of the media and oppression of national
minorities, inter alia in terms of their civil and linguistic rights, have recently become
a scourge in a number of OSCE member States. Since the regional mechanisms do
not condemn this, the situation keeps worsening. We call on the Chairperson-inOffice and the specialized OSCE bodies to pay special attention to the deterioration
in the area of human rights that is observed within the OSCE space and throughout
its area of responsibility.
21-0348819/26

S/2021/256

I would like to make a point regarding statements that some our Western
colleagues made today that included a false interpretation of the situation concerning
an internal Ukrainian settlement. Let me stress that it is their actions that pose the
key security threat to the entire OSCE space, because such action supports Kyiv’s
destructive steps that seek to undermine the Minsk agreements. We call on Western
sponsors to address this matter and have those they sponsor stop distorting reality
and engaging in acts of political provocation, and instead get down to restoring
dialogue with the people of eastern Ukraine, as envisaged by the Minsk agreements.
Before blaming us, please look in the mirror and stop turning a blind eye to
blatant violations of human rights, the freedom of speech and the media and cases
of glorification of Nazi criminals and their henchmen, which have become a sad
reality not only in post-Maidan Ukraine but also in the Baltic States, in particular in
Estonia. This would both do some good to your tarnished reputation and help restore
an environment of trust and cooperation in the OSCE area of responsibility.
Hopefully, under the leadership of Minister Linde, the OSCE will be able
to make a meaningful contribution to a settlement on Nagorno Karabakh and give
new impetus to the 5+2 negotiations on Transnistria. We positively assess the work
of the United Nations and the OSCE as co-Chairs of the Geneva international
discussions on the South Caucasus. We expect the Special Representative of the
OSCE Chairperson-in-Office for the South Caucasus, Annika Söder, to facilitate
constructive contacts among Georgia, Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
We call on you, Minister Linde, to launch consultations to enhance the
effectiveness of the OSCE, which Russia proposed last year. The envisaged goal
is to increase the returns of the work of the OSCE Secretariat, its institutions and
field missions, optimize the OSCE event programme and the preparations for the
Foreign Ministers Councils, ensure a balance between the three OSCE “baskets” and
improve the budgetary process.
Overcoming the socioeconomic effects of COVID-19 is another vital track
where assistance should be given to the affected branches of the economy, tourism
included, as they recover from the coronavirus pandemic.
We support the plans of the Chairperson-in-Office to promote the participation
of women in economic activity — however, without a linkage to resolution 1325
(2000) that addresses women’s involvement in peace processes.
Also, thematic and geographical imbalances in the humanitarian dimension
need to be corrected. Countering racism, neo-Nazism, falsifications of history and
incitement to interreligious enmity should rank among the priorities. The issue of
collectively elaborating a unified methodology for observing elections retains high
relevance.
In conclusion, I would like to call the OSCE to engage in closer cooperation with
the United Nations and its specialized agencies and various regional organizations
— such as the Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Eurasian Economic
Union, the Commonwealth of Independent States and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, among others — on the basis of the Platform for Cooperative Security,
adopted at the OSCE summit in Istanbul in 1999.
We wish the Chairperson-in-Office effective work and hope that they will
stick to the position of being an honest broker. Sweden can count on Russia’s support
for the initiatives aimed at sustaining stability, restoring trust and galvanizing
cooperation among OSCE member States.

20/26

21-03488

S/2021/256

Annex X1
Statement by Halimah DeShong, Second Deputy Permanent
Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the
United Nations
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines warmly welcomes the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Sweden, Ms. Ann Linde, as Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and we wish her a successful tenure.
Multilateralism is not only a matter of confronting shared threats but also
of seizing opportunities. Our efforts to address the long-standing and incipient
challenges posed by climate change, gender inequality and the ever-present threat
of military confrontation must be approached with a united front. We therefore
underline the importance of multilateralism in strengthening coordination among all
international and regional organizations, with vital contributions from civil society,
women and youth.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines therefore welcomes Sweden’s decision to put
women’s economic empowerment at the forefront of its priorities. The importance of
the equitable treatment of women can never be overstated. Indeed, our participation
is crucial in conflict prevention and resolution and for securing better prospects for
sustainable development. We therefore wholeheartedly support its intention to fully
implement the women and peace and security agenda in the European region.
We underline the importance of addressing the nexus between climate change
and security, and welcome the initiative taken by the OSCE and Berlin-based think
tank Adelphi to launch the regional consultation on climate change and security in
South-Eastern Europe and for completing the first phase of the regional consultation
workshop in February.
Lasting peace cannot be sustained without respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms, democracy and the rule of law. In that regard, we welcome
Sweden’s focus on these issues, in particular on the right to freedom of expression
and media freedom.
The ongoing conflicts in the OSCE region remain the most obvious challenge
to European security. Our delegation welcomes the continued focus on finding a
sustainable political resolution to the challenges in eastern Ukraine and Crimea. We
recognize the vital importance of the Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine and
the efforts of the Normandy group and the Trilateral Contact Group for their efforts
in finding a peaceful solution in line with the OSCE’s principles. We continue to
support the full implementation of the Minsk agreements, as that remains the basis
for a political solution to the conflicts.
We take this opportunity to reiterate our support for the mediation efforts of
the Minsk Group co-Chairs to resolve the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. We encourage
the parties to continue implementing their obligations under the trilateral ceasefire
agreement of 9 November 2020 and to comply with the requirements of international
humanitarian law.
To conclude, we reiterate our full support to the OSCE as it continues
to promote peace, security and development in the region. It is only by working
together, in full support of multilateral institutions, that such threats can be managed
and overcome.

21-0348821/26

S/2021/256

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the
United Nations, Tarek Ladeb
I should like to thank Ms. Ann Linde, Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Sweden, for her valuable briefing on the programmes planned
in the context of the Swedish chairpersonship of OSCE for 2021. I wish her every
success, particularly with regard to promoting international peace and security.
Given the important role of OSCE, we support its priority areas of work
and stress the need to strengthen partnership and coordination between OSCE and
the United Nations on the basis of shared values and goals, in order to consolidate
preventive diplomacy mechanisms, regional peace and the peaceful settlement
of conflicts.
We believe that, in order to achieve these shared objectives, it is necessary
to strengthen the capacities of regional and subregional organizations. Such
organizations have a detailed knowledge of the situation in their regions and can
establish direct channels of communication between parties to a conflict.
Accordingly, we reiterate our support for OSCE efforts to resolve the crisis in
eastern Ukraine and to reach a comprehensive and balanced settlement based on the
Minsk agreements endorsed by the Security Council in resolution 2202 (2015), in
line with the framework of the Normandy format and the Trilateral Contact Group.
With regard to the situation in the Nagorno-Karabakh region, the outbreak of
armed conflict in late 2020, which resulted in hundreds of casualties and compounded
the suffering of the population, clearly highlights the threats inherent to frozen
conflicts and underscores the urgent need to resolve them through mechanisms for
multilateral action.
In that connection, my delegation welcomes the efforts of OSCE and the Minsk
Group and the virtual talks with the foreign ministers of the two countries held in
February 2021 with the aim of achieving a comprehensive, lasting resolution of the
conflict. It is vital to build relations between the two countries that are based on
peaceful coexistence and mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity. In
addition, the international community should support post-conflict reconstruction
and rehabilitation efforts.
We also hope that international and regional efforts to achieve comprehensive
solutions to the other protracted conflicts in the Euro-Mediterranean region
will continue.
Because the concept of comprehensive security includes political, security
and economic dimensions, and because Tunisia belongs to the Mediterranean and
African region, my delegation wishes to highlight the joint security challenges,
both traditional and emerging, on either side of the Mediterranean. It is important
to promote strategic cooperation between OSCE and regional partners, such as
the African Union and the League of Arab States, in such areas of shared concern
as combating terrorism and violent extremism and addressing the root causes
of conflicts.
Owing to the particular challenges posed by the coronavirus disease
coronavirus disease pandemic in conflict zones, we reaffirm the importance of
implementing resolutions 2532 (2020) and 2565 (2021) concerning a global ceasefire
and equitable access to vaccines, respectively, so as to ensure that the principles of
international cooperation and solidarity will take root.
22/26

21-03488

S/2021/256

Lastly, women have an important role to play in building peace and security
and must be integrated into conflict resolution efforts. We therefore welcome
the initiative by the Swedish chairpersonship in February 2021 to appoint an
advisory group to promote the organization’s work on the women and peace and
security agenda.

21-0348823/26

S/2021/256

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Linda Thomas-Greenfield
I thank Foreign Minister Linde for her clear and comprehensive statement on
the priorities of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
for 2021. The United States looks forward to working together with her on these
important issues in her capacity as Chairperson-in-Office.
As President Biden has made clear, the United States is renewing its
commitment to multilateralism and trans-Atlantic cooperation. We welcome and
celebrate Sweden’s prioritization of strengthening the OSCE’s activities on the
women and peace and security agenda. And as I said earlier this week, it is time for
all of us to turn our commitments on the agenda into action. We need to do more to
protect women, especially women leaders, from threats of silence and violence.
As Foreign Minister Linde and others have noted today, the OSCE and the
United Nations face shared challenges, ones that we must address this year together.
We just passed the seventh anniversary of Russia’s invasion and occupation of
Crimea and the launch of its aggression in eastern Ukraine. The conflict in eastern
Ukraine has killed more than 13,000 people and wounded tens of thousands more. It
has displaced more than 1.4 million people.
The aggression is far from over. In Crimea, the Russian authorities continue to
harass and imprison those who oppose its occupation, notably Crimean Tatars, ethnic
Ukrainians and members of other religious and ethnic minority groups. The United
States will never recognize Russia’s annexation of Crimea, and we will continue to
hold Russia accountable for its aggression in eastern Ukraine.
We welcome Sweden’s reappointment of Ambassador Heidi Grau as Special
Representative for Ukraine and in the Trilateral Contact Group. The Special
Monitoring Mission’s presence and reporting on daily activities of violence has
improved the situation on the ground. As Council members, we owe it to the Special
Monitoring Mission’s leadership and all of the brave monitors to do our utmost to
ensure the Mission can operate freely and without hindrance.
In addition to its aggression against Ukraine, Russia continues to occupy
nearly 20 per cent of Georgia’s territory while supporting or systematically ignoring
abuses of Georgian citizens living in or near Abkhazia and South Ossetia. Russia has
not yet fully implemented the 2008 ceasefire, including its obligation to withdraw
its forces to pre-conflict positions, or its commitment to allow unfettered access for
humanitarian organizations. The United States firmly supports Georgia’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity. We urge the OSCE to push for Russia to end its occupation
and implement the 2008 ceasefire agreement in full.
In Belarus, we urge the United Nations and the OSCE to press for progress
on the recommendations of the Moscow Mechanism report. The United States will
continue to support efforts to facilitate a genuine national dialogue between the
Belarusian authorities and the opposition, which would include representatives of
the Coordination Council. The OSCE is well positioned to support the democratic
aspirations of the Belarusian people, and we urge Minsk to engage with the OSCE.
In Moldova, the United States supports the results-oriented 5+2 settlement
process of the Transnistrian conflict. That settlement process should be based on
Moldova’s sovereignty and territorial integrity within the internationally recognized
borders, with a special status for Transnistria. We will continue to support a
sovereign, democratic Moldova that is firmly anchored in Europe and secure within
its internationally recognized borders. We also welcome Sweden’s support for
24/26

21-03488

S/2021/256

the Minsk Group co-Chairs in negotiating a long-term political settlement of the
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. Both sides should investigate all allegations of human
rights and international humanitarian law violations. It is time to bring justice to
those responsible. Both sides must engage with humanitarian actors to complete the
exchange process for all prisoners, detainees and remains.
The United States will work closely with the OSCE to defend OSCE mission
mandates, implement our collective decisions, and ensure that all participating
States live up to our shared principles and commitments. We are in this together, and
we wish Sweden every success in 2021.

21-0348825/26

S/2021/256

Annex XIV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to
the United Nations, Pham Hai Anh
At the outset, Viet Nam would like to extend a warm welcome to Her
Excellency Ms. Ann Linde, Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sweden, and
to thank her for her insightful briefing.
We also take this opportunity to congratulate Sweden on assuming the
chairmanship of the OSCE for the year 2021. We welcome Sweden’s commitment to
the promotion of multilateralism, the Charter of the United Nations and international
law, confidence-building measures and the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda.
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations has been one of the key priorities for Viet Nam’s tenure on the Security
Council and beyond. An in-depth and unique understanding of regional organizations
remains critical to addressing international peace and security challenges. That fact
cannot be overemphasized.
The work of regional and subregional organizations is not only complementary
but also necessary to the work of the United Nations as a whole and particularly to
the Security Council. We continue to encourage the strengthening of cooperation
between the United Nations as a whole, the Security Council and regional and
subregional organizations in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. Such cooperation has become even more essential in the face of
emerging complex challenges, especially the global health crisis, which no single
country or region can effectively address alone.
Viet Nam welcomes the ongoing cooperation between the OSCE and the
United Nations and the efforts to strengthen it. We encourage the two organizations
to deepen synergies in various aspects, for instance in the implementation of the
women and peace and security and combating trafficking in persons, and further
explore new areas of cooperation.
With regard to the maintenance of international peace and security, my
delegation takes note of the key role played by the OSCE in promoting dialogue,
building confidence, resolving conflict and enhancing development in Europe.
In that respect, we would like to reiterate our principled position that all
disputes must be settled by peaceful means in accordance with international law and
the Charter of the United Nations. We urge all sides to uphold their commitments,
address the root causes of conflicts and facilitate humanitarian access for
people in need.
The OSCE is the largest regional security organization, with a membership
larger than any regional group in the United Nations and coming from three
continents. It can draw additional strength from its members as well as from their
diversity and wisdom.
We encourage the OSCE to continue supporting all sides to engage in dialogue
and reach an agreement or implement existing agreements for peace, stability and
development for all countries and peoples of Europe.

26/26

21-03488
