"In reply to your letter of 30 September 1977 concerning your intention to appoint Lieutenant-General
D. Prem Chand as your representative in terms of
Security Council resolution 415 (1977) of 29 September 1977, I would like to inform you that copies
of your letter were transmitted to the members of the
Council.
"The consultations which l subsequently held with
the members of the Council on this matter indicate
that the appointment proposed by you is acceptable
to 14 members of the Council. China dissociates
itself from this matter."

Decision

Jn a note dated 4 October 1977,35 the President of
the Security Council stated that the Secretary-General
had informed him, on 30 September, in connexion with
the request contained in paragraph 1 of resolution 415
(1977), of his intention to appoint Lieutenant-General
D. Prem Chand as his representative to enter into discussions with the British Resident Commissioner designate and with ail the parties concerning the military and
associated arrangements considered necessary to effect
the transition to majority rule in Southern Rhodesia.
After holding the necessary consultations with the
members of the Council, the President addressed the
following reply to the Secretary-General:

3:; Official Records of the Securi1_,. Council, Thirty-second
Y car, S11pple111ent for Oclohcr, Noi·emher and December 1977,
document S/1241.1.

Complaint by Mozambique

At its 2018th meeting, on 30 June 1977, the Council
decided to invite the rcpresentative of Brazil to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the question.

Decisions

At its 2014th meeting, on 28 June 1977, the Council
decided to invite the representative of Mozambique to
participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item
entitled "Complaint by Mozambique: letter dated 22
June 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/12350 and Add.1 )". 36

Resolution 411 (1977)
of 30 June 1977

The Security Council,
Taking note of the telegram dated 18 June 1977
from the President of the People's Republic of Mozambique, Mr. Samora Moisés Machel, to the SecretaryGeneral, contained in document S/12350 and Add.1, 36
Having heard the statement of Mr. Marcelino dos
Santos, member of the Permanent Political Committee
of FRELIM0:17 and Minister for Devclopment and
Economie Planning of Mozambique,38 concerning the
recent acts of aggression against Mozambique comrnitted by the illegal racist minority régime in Southern
Rhudesia,
Taking note of the resolution adopted by the Council
of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its
twenty-ninth ordinary session at Libreville, Gabon, 39
Indignant at the systematic acts of aggression committed by the illegal régime in Southern Rhodesia
against the People's Republic of Mozambique and the
resulting loss of life and destruction of property,
Grave/y concerned at the rapidly deteriorating situation in Southern Rhodesia as a result of the continued
existence of the illegal régime,
Reaffirming the inalienable rights of the people of
Zimbabwe to self-determination and independcnce, in
accordancc with General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV) of 14 Dccembcr 1960, and the legitimacy of

At the same meeting, the Council also decided to
invite the representatives of Algeria, Angola, Botswana,
Egypt, Gabon, Guinea, Lesotho, Nigeria, Senegal, the
Syrian Arab Republic, the United Republic of Tanzania
and Zambia to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the question.

At its 2015th meeting, on 28 June 1977, the Council
decided to invite the representative of Cuba to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the question.

At its 2016th meeting, on 29 June 1977, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of the German
Democratic Republic and the Sudan to participate,
without vote, in the discussion of the question.

At its 2017th meeting, on 29 June 1977, the Council
decided to invite the representative of Swaziland to
participate, without vote, in the discJssion of the
question.
36 Ibid., Supp/ement for

:i, Frente de Libertaçâo de Moçambique.
8 See

Official Records of the Securily Counci/, Tliirty-second
2014th meeting.
:rn Ibid .. T/;irty-second Y car, Supplcment for April, May and
June /977, document S/12352.
:i

}'i'l/r,

April, May and June 1977.
9

t~eir struggle to secure the enjoyment of such rights as
set forth in the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolution 232 ( 1966) of 16 December
1966, in which it determined that the situation in
Southern Rhodesia constituted a threat to international
peace and security,
Cognizant of the fact that the recent acts of aggression perpetrated by the illegal régime against the
People's Republic of Mozambique together with that
régime's constant acts of aggression and threats again~t
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Repubhc
of Botswana and the Republic of Zambia aggravate the
existing serious threat to the security and stability of
the region,
Recalling its resolutions on sanctions against the
illegal régime in Southern Rhodesia, in particular resolution 253 (1968) of 29 May 1968,
Conscious of the important contribution made by the
Government of the Pcople's Republic of Mozambique
through its decision of 3 March 1976 to close its
borders with Southern Rhodesia and to apply strictly
sanctions against the illegal régime in confom1ity with
United Nations rcsolutions,
Deeply concerned that the measures approved by the
Security Council have so far failed to bring to an end
the illegal régime and convinccd that sanctions cannot
put an end to that régime unless they arc comprchensive, mandatory and strictly supervised and unless
measures are taken against States which violate them,
Recalling its resolution 386 (1976) of 17 March
1976,
Expressing its particular concern at the continued
violation of sanctions by South Africa and its support
of the illegal régime in Southern Rhodesia,
Reaffirming the primary responsibility of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ircland, as the
administering Power, to take all effective measures to
bring to an end the illegal régime in Southern Rhodesia,
in accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions,
Reaffirming the relevant provisions of the Maputo
Declaration in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and
Namibia 40 and in particular those provisions which call
for assistance to those front-line States victims of acts
of aggression by the racist minority régimes,
Afjirming the right of the Pcople's Republic of Mozambique to take all necessary measures, in accordance
with the Charter, to safeguard its sovereignty and territorial integrity,

trave11tion of Security Council resolutions on sanctions
against the régime at Salisbury;
4. Reaffirms that the continued existence of the
illegal régime in Southern Rhodesia is a source of
insecurity and instability in the region and constitutes
a serious threat to international peace and security;
5. Reaffirms the right of the people of Zimbabwe to
self-determination and independence, in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), and
urges ail States to intensify assistance to the people of
Zimbabwe and their national liberation movement in
their struggle to achieve that objective;
6. Commends the Govemment of the People's Republic of Mozambique for its scrupulous observance of
sanctions against the illegal régime in Southern Rhodcsia and its steadfast support to the people of Zimbabwe in their lcgitimate struggle, in accordance with
the relevant Gcneral Assembly and Sccurity Council
rcsolutions;
7. Demands that the national sovercignty and territorial integrity of Mozambique be scrupulously respectcd;
8. Dcmands that ail States refrain from providing
any support-overt or covert-to the illegal régime in
Southern Rhodesia and, in particular, demands that
South Africa adhere fully to Security Council resolutions and thus ccase from any co-operation or collaboration with the illegal régime at Salisbury in violation of
the Council's decisions;
9. Requests ail States to give immediate and substantial material assistance to enable the Government
of the Pcoplc"s Republic of Mozambique to strengthen
its defence capability in order to safeguard effectively
its sovereignty and territorial integrity;
1O. Requests ail States, regional organizations and
other appropriate intergovcrnmental organizations to
provide financial, technical and material assistance to
Mozambique in order to enable it to overcome the
severe economic Joss and destruction of property
brought about by the acts of aggression committed by
the illegal régime in Southern Rhodesia and to reinforce
Mozambique's capacity to implement United Nations
decisions in support of measures against the illegal
régime;
11. Requests the United Nations and the organizations and programmes concerned, including the Economie and Social Council, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the World Food
Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
International Fund for Agricultural Development, the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the
United Nations Educational, Scientifie and Cultural
Organization, the United Nations Conference on Tracte
and Development, the United Nations Development
Programme and the World Health Organization, to provide assistance to Mozambique on a priority basis in
implementation of the request contained in paragraph
10 of the presrnt rcsolution;

l. Strongly condemn.1 the illegal racist minority
régime in Southern Rhodesia for its reccnt acts of aggression against the People's Republic of Mozambique;
2. Solemnly declares that these acts of aggression
as well as the repeated attacks and thrcats against the
Republic of Zambia and the Republic of Botswana by
the illegal régime in Southern Rhodesia constitute a
serious aggravation of the situation in the area;
3. Condemns South Africa for its continued support of the illegal régime in Southern Rhodesia in con-

12. Calls upon ail States to implement strictly Security Council resolutions on sanctions and requests the
Security Council Committec established in pursuance of
resolution 2S] ( 1968) concerning the question of

40 Ibid., Supplement for lu/y, August and September 1977,
document S/ 12344/Rev .1. annex V.

JO

immediately an effective programme of international
assistance to Mozambique in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs 10 and 11 of the present resolution;
1-l. l>ecidcs lo rcmain activcly scized of the malter.

Southern Rhodesia to examine as a matter of priority
further effective measures to tighten the scope of sanctions in accordance with Article 41 of the Charter of
the United Nations and urgently to submit its appropriate recommendations to the Council;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to co-ordinate
the efforts of the United Nations system and to organize

A ../optcd 1111a11i111011slv al the
:!0/91/1 meeting.

B. ITEMS RELA TING TO THE MIDDLE EAST11
The situation in the Middle East: report of the Secretary-General .~ulmzitted under
Grneral AssrmMy re.wlulion .'U /62 nmcerning thr Prace Conferenre on tlw Middle Ea.~t

as thosc conferred on a Mcmber State when it was
invitcd to participate under rulc 37 of the provisional
rules of proccdure.

Decisions
At its 1993rd meeting, on 25 March 1977, the
Council decided to invite the representatives of Egypt,
Israel, Jordan and the Syrian Arab Republic to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item
entitled "The situation in the Middle East: report of
the Secretary-General submitted under General Assembly resolution 31 / 62 concerning the Peace Conference
on the Middle East (S/12290 and Corr.l )"Y

Adopted by JO votes to 1
(United States of America),
with 4 abstentions (Canada,
France, Germany, Federal
Republic of, United Ki11gdo111 of Great Britain and
lVorthem Ire/and).

At its 1995th meeting, on 28 March 1977, the
Council decided to invite the representative of Yemen
to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the
question.

At the same meeting, the Council also decided, by
a vote, that an invitation should be accordcd to the
representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization
to participate in the deba,te and that that invitation
would confer upon it the same rights of participation
41 Resolutions or decisions on this question were also adopted
by the Council in 1967, 1968, 1969, 1970, 1971, 1972, 1973,
1974, 1975 and 1976.
42 See Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-second
Year, Supplement for January, February and March 1977.

At ils 1997th me-:ting, on 29 March 1977, the
Council decided to invite the representative of Saudi
Arabia to participate, without vote, in the discussion
of the question.

The situation in the Middle East: reports of the Secretary-General 011 the
United Nations Disengagement 01Jserver Force

Resolution 408 ( 1977)

Expressing concern over the prevailing state of tension in the area,

of 26 May 1977

Decides:
(a) To call upon the parties concerned to impiement immediately Security Council resolution 338
(1973) of 22 October 1973:

The .')ecurity Council,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Disengagemcnt Observer Forcc,4~
Having noted the efforts made to establish a durable
and just peace in the Middle East area and the urgent
need to continue and intensify such effort~,

(h) To rcnew the mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force for another period of
six months, that is, until 30 November 1977;
( c) To request the Secrctary-General to submit at
the .:nd of this period a report on the developments in

43 Ibid., Supplement for April, l\fay and ltme 1977, document S/ 12333.

11
