Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2. Encourages the Fund to increase aid to countries
passing through difficult transitional stages, particularly
in Africa, without prejudicing the level of aid to othe"r
countries requiring assistance;
3. Expresses the hope that the Fund will receive
the necessary financial support to enable it not only to
continue its successful work but also increasingly to
meet the challeuge of extending its services.
943rd plenary meeting,
12 December 1960.

1508 (XV). Low-cost housing and related
community facilities

The General /lssembly,
Recalling its resolution 1393 (XIV) of 20 K ovember
1959 regarding low-cost housing,
Having noted section I of chapter V of the report
of the Economic and Social Council4 on progress made
towards the implementation of the long-range programme of concerted international action in the field of
housing and related community facilities,
Recognizing the importance of adequate housing and
community facilities and services for a rise in the levels
of living of the lower income groups in the congested
urban areas,
Recognizing the significant role of Governments in
the planning, financing and execution of programmes for
low-cost hous,ing and community facilities,
Considering that, owing to limited resources the developing and newly independent countries have difficulty
in meeting demands for simultaneous investment in
economic d_evelopment projects and in housing, health
and education,
Recognizing the need to utilize more fully the peoples'
own resources and the local sources of materials and
finances for the solution of the housing and urban
development problem,
1. R.equests Member States to review their housing
requirements, policies and programmes as well as the
extent of investment in this field from all sources in
their countries, and to indicate to the United Nations
the areas in which outside assistance is most needed ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in connexion
with the concerted programme of practical action in
this field, to investigate in consultation with interested
Member States the possibility of obtaining technical
services, equipment and funds for establishing or multiplying pilot projects:
(a) In low-cost housing and related community
facilities, services and utilities in the areas of rapid
urbanization in the developing countries ;
( b) In the production from local sources of suitable
materials, accessories and construction elements and
equipment for the execution of housing and urban development programmes ;
3. Further requests the Economic and Social Council to investigate, on the basis of work already done
by its functional commissions and regional economic
commissions, the possibilities for domestic and international financing of low-cost housing programmes in
less developed countries;
4. Invi.tes the Economic and Social Council to submit to the General Assembly a report on the implementation of the present resolution together with the com• IIJid., Fifteenth Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/4415).

21

ments of the Social Commission, the regional economic
commissions and the sprcialized agencies concerned.

9../3rd plenary mectinff,
12 December 1960.

1509 (XV). United Nations as8i8tance for the
advancen1ent
countries

of

women

in

devPlupin~

The General .lssembly,
Taking note of section VIlI 0£ chapter VI of the
report of the Economic and Social Counci1 4 and of
Council_ resolu'.ion i71 H (XXX) of 25 July 1960
concermng Umted ~ations assistance for the aclvancement of women in under-developed countries,
Recalling General Assembly resolution 1163 (XII)
of_ 2~ November 1957 concerning the work of the Com1111s~1on o_n the ?atus of vV omen and the progress
adueved Ill the held of women's rights,
Noting wit7i satisfaction that the Commission is
showing a special interest in the condition of women in
developing countries,
l. Expresses the hope that the Governments of Member S'.ates, _ancl particularly those of the developing
cour~tnes, will take full advantage of existing United
:.J at10ns programmes designed to improve the status of
"":omen, t?at they will coll~borate with the SecretaryGeneral Ill the study which he has undertaken in
compliance with Economic and Social Council resolution 771 H (XXX) and that the United Nations and
the specialized agencies will, for their part, direct their
programmes to a greater extent towards achieving this
end;
2. Invites the Economic and Social Council and the
Commis_sion on the Status of Vi/ omen to pursue their
efforts m the matter and take, in connexion with this
stu~y. appropriate me_asures t~at would lead to special
ass1st~nce by the Umted Nations and the specialized
~genc1es f~r the advancement of women in the developmg countries.
943rd plenary meetiny,
12 Drcember 1960.

1510 (XV). Manifestations of racial and national
hatred

The General Assembly,
I~ecalling. that the fundamental purposes of the
Umte_d Nations are to maintain international peace and
security and to. develop_ fr_iendly relations among nations
and t~at, to this encl, 1t 1s necessary to strengthen cooperat10n among peoples and nations and to educate the
younger generation in this spirit,
Noting 'With gratification that the manifestations of
racial and national hatred, religious intolerance and racial
prejudice which still exist in the world have been
consistently condemned by the United Nations,
Sharing the grave concern of the Commission on
Human Rights and the Sub-Commission on Prevention
of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities about
these manifestations,
Being alarmed by the fact that tendencies to racial
~nd national hatred are still not sufficiently combatted
m many parts of the world by orienting youth in
acco_rdance with the spirit of the Charter of the United
Nations,

22

General Assembly -

Expressing the principle that. the ~nited Nati~ns
is duty bound to combat these mamfestahons, to establish
the facts and the causes of their origin, and to recommend resolute and effective measures which can bl'
taken against them,
1. Resolutely condemns all manifestations and practices of racial, religious and national hatred in the
political, economic, social, educational and cultural
spheres of the life of society as violat\ons of the Char~er
of the United Nations and the Umversal Declarat10n
of Human Rights ;
2. Calls upon the Governments of all States to take
all necessary measures to prevent all manifestations of
racial, religious and national hatred.
943rd plenary meeting,
12 December 1960.

1511 (XV). Teaching of the purposes and principles, the structure and activities of the
United Nations and its related agencies

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 137 (II) of 17 November
1947, which recommended to the Governments of all
Member States that they take measures to encourage
the teaching of the purposes and principles, the structure
and activities of the United Nations in schools,
Noting the action which the Economic and Social
Council has taken in the intervening years in promoting
this objective,
Noting in particular Economic and Social Council
resolution 748 (XXIX) of 6 April 1960,
1. Believes that teaching about the United Nations
and its related agencies in schools is important as a
means of promoting interest in, and support for, their
work;
2. Believes further that knowledge and understanding of the aims and activities of the United Nations
and its related agencies contribute to the fostering
among young people of the ideas of peace and international co-operation and should therefore be promoted
as widely as possible;
3. Endorses the action taken by the Economic and
Social Council in encouraging the implementation of
the recommendation contained in General Assembly
resolution 137 (II) ;
4. Expresses its appreciation of the co-operation
shown by the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization and the other specialized
agencies and the non-governmental organizations in
advancing the United Nations idea;
5. Urges all those concerned to continue their
efforts to promote in primary and secondary schools, as
well as in faculties of the social and human sciences
and audio-visual education centres, the teaching of the
purposes and principles, the structure and activities of
the United Nations and its related agencies;
6. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, with the co-operation of
the United Nations, to assist by preparing basic material
which may be used for these purposes.
943rd plenary meeting,
12 December 1960.

Fifteenth Session

1512 (XV). Main trends of inquiry in the natural sciences, dissemination of scientific
knowledge and application of such knowl,
edge for peaceful encls

The General Assembly,
Considering the important role which the natural
sciences in general continue to play in promoting the
ernno111ic and social progress of mankind,
H avrng recciz,cd the smvey of the main trends of
inquiry in the field of n:itural sciences, the dissemination of scientific knowledge and the application of such
knowledge for peacdnl encls,fi
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 804
B ( XXX) of 3 August 1960 requesting wide dissemination of the sttrvl'y ancl seeking comments from Governments of Member States, the appropriate specialized
agencir·s and the International Atomic Energy Agency,
I. T:ndorscs the decision of the Economic and Social
Council to give detailed consideration to the survey
at its thirty-second session, taking into account such
views thereon as may be expressed by the General
Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization;
:?. Recommends Governments of Member States,
agencies related to the United Nations, and appropriate
non-governmental organizations to publicize this survey
as widely as possible;
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council, taking
into account the views obtained by the SecretaryGeneral in pursuance of Council resolution 804 B
( XXX) and the discussion on this item at the fifteenth
session of the Genl'ral Assembly, to report further on
this matter to the Assembly at its sixteenth session and
to recommend concrete measures including those relating
to:
(a) The possibility of utilizing the present achievements in the natural sciences for peaceful purposes, for
furthering the economic progress and welfare of
mankind, and especially for accelerating the economic
and social progress of the less developed countries;
( b) The possibility of extending international cooperation in the exchange of scientific information and
experience in the field of the natural sciences.
943rd plenary meeting,
12 December 1960.
1570 (XV). Draft Declaration on Freedom of
Information

The General Assembly,
Not having been able to consider at its fifteenth
session the draft Declaration on Freedom of Information
submitted by the Economic and Social Council in resolution 756 (XXIX) of 21 April 1960,
Decides to consider the draft Declaration at its
sixteenth session.
954th plenary meeting,
18 December 1960.
1571 (XV). Draft Declaration on the Right of
Asylum

The General Assembly,
Not having been able to consider at its fifteenth
session the draft Declaration on the Right of Asylwn,
~ See A/4461.
