S/2006/738

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 September 2006
Original: English

Letter dated 13 September 2006 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the decision adopted by the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union at its 40th meeting, held at Addis Ababa on 6 October
2005. I also refer to Security Council resolution 1633 (2005) of 21 October 2005, by
which the Council established an International Working Group to assist the
Government of Côte d’Ivoire in the implementation of its programme and
consolidate and strengthen the existing follow-up mechanisms.
In this regard, I am forwarding the text of the communiqué issued by the
International Working Group at the conclusion of its 10th ministerial meeting, held
at Abidjan on 8 September 2006 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring this communiqué to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

06-52203 (E) 180906

*0652203*

S/2006/738

Annex
[Original: English and French]

Final communiqué of the tenth ministerial meeting of the
International Working Group on Côte d’Ivoire
1.
The 10th ministerial meeting of the International Working Group was held at
Abidjan on 8 September 2006 under the joint chairmanship of Rodolphe Adada,
Minister of State, Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Francophonie of the Congo,
and Pierre Schori, Special Representative of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations for Côte d’Ivoire. In attendance were the Ministers of France, Ghana and
South Africa, as well as the African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security,
the Executive Secretary of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the High Representative for the elections in Côte d’Ivoire, and the
representatives of Benin, Guinea, the Niger, Nigeria, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America, the European Union,
the International Organization of la Francophonie and the World Bank.
2.
The Group strongly condemned the dumping of toxic waste in various sites in
the district of Abidjan and the culture of impunity that made this possible, and
expressed its solidarity with the Ivorian people and its sympathy with the victims
and their families. It urged the Government to accelerate the ongoing investigations
with a view to identifying and punishing the administrative and political officials
responsible for these extremely serious criminal acts. The Group urgently appeals to
the international partners to respond as quickly as possible to the requests for
assistance made by the Government in order to remedy this health and
environmental disaster.
3.
The Group was briefed by the Prime Minister on the progress achieved in the
implementation of the road map, in particular the implementation of the decisions of
the high-level meeting on Côte d’Ivoire held at Yamoussoukro on 5 July 2006 at the
initiative of the Secretary-General of the United Nations. The Group also heard a
presentation by the Prime Minister on the outcome of the meeting of the main
Ivorian political leaders, held on 5 September 2006 at Yamoussoukro with a view to
eliminating the obstacles to the effective pursuit of the peace process. The Group
also took note of the reasons, mentioned by the Prime Minister, that led to the
resignation of his Government, and it encouraged him to continue his consultations
with all Ivorian parties with a view to forming a new Government promptly, with
strict respect for resolution 1633 (2005). In this regard, the Group appeals to all
Ivorian political forces to join the efforts of the Prime Minister. The Group also
heard statements by the High Representative for the elections and the Commanders
of the impartial forces.
4.
While reaffirming its full support for the efforts made by the Prime Minister to
implement the peace process, the Group expressed strong concern about the deep
and persistent obstacles that hinder the implementation of the Yamoussoukro
decisions and of the road map. This impasse increasingly jeopardizes the security
and humanitarian situation in the country.

2

06-52203

S/2006/738

5.
The Group notes that these blockages are due to several essential causes,
including:
(a)

The lack of political will of the main political actors;

(b) The deep disagreement among the main Ivorian political actors on the
fundamental issue of the establishment of new, credible voters’ lists, which is a
precondition for the holding of free, regular, open and transparent elections;
(c) The stopping of the dismantling of the militias, and the suspension of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration since 8 August 2006, along with the
interruption of the military dialogue;
(d) The institutional duality and the legal interpretation conflicts that
paralyse the functioning of the Government, make it difficult to implement the
peace and reconciliation process, and distort the neutrality of the electoral process;
(e) The impossibility for the Prime Minister to exercise the powers conferred
upon him by resolution 1633 (2005), including nominations to civil and military
posts.
6.
Concerned about the blockages noted in the operation of the mobile courts, the
Group stresses the urgency of adopting exceptional and derogatory measures to
relaunch the process and allow the issuing of duplicates of birth certificates and
certificates of nationality as quickly as possible and in an equitable manner. The
Group also recalls that the Independent Electoral Commission has exclusive
responsibility, as confirmed by the Mediator, for the electoral process and the
establishment of voters’ lists that are credible and in conformity with international
norms.
7.
The Group stresses that, as a result of the above-mentioned blockages, it is
impossible to meet the deadlines set by the Security Council in resolution 1633
(2005) for the holding of the elections. In this regard, the Group considers it
indispensable that the Security Council define a new transitional framework that can
provide a remedy for the causes of the blockages identified above.
8.
The Group recommends that the United Nations envisage the following
measures:
(a) The definition, in consultation with ECOWAS and the African Union, of
new institutional and governance arrangements for the period after 31 October in
order to ensure the smooth functioning of the transitional institutions and a
republican behaviour by the security forces;
(b) The adoption by the Security Council of a new resolution that eliminates
the ambiguities and decisively reinforces the effective exercise of the powers
conferred upon the Prime Minister as well as the involvement of the international
community in the implementation of the road map, in particular the mandate and
means granted to the High Representative for the elections;
(c) The adoption of individual sanctions against, in particular, those
responsible for obstructing the peace and reconciliation process.

06-52203

3

S/2006/738

9.
The Group encourages the Prime Minister to involve civil society even more in
his peace and reconciliation efforts within the framework of the forum for national
dialogue.
10.

4

The Group will hold its next meeting on 6 October 2006 in Côte d’Ivoire.

06-52203
