92

General Assembly-Thirty-second Scssion

financia! position of the Programme and to improve
its management;
6. Further invites the Administrator of the Unitcd
Nations Development Programmc to continue discussions with the executing agencies with a view to improving the substantive co-ordination of technical cooperation on the basis of the consensus of 1970;
7. Urges ali States to take measures to provide thc
United Nations Development Programme with the necessary resources to fulfil the aims, objectives and programmes established in thc second programming cycle,
1977-19 81, and especially to achicve and e ven exceed
the over-all annual growth rate of 14 per cent for
voluntary contributions, on which the indicative planning figures for the cyclc are based;
8. Invites the Administrator of thc United Nations
Development Programme to pursue actively his efforts,
as requested by the Governing Council, to strengthen
the financia! basis of the Programme, taking into account the views expressed in the General Assembly
at its thirty-second session, and to report on the progress
achieved to the Governing Council at its twenty-fifth
session;
9. Further invites the Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme and the heads of
executing agencies to increase substantially the number
of experts from developing countries to be included
in the lists of experts submitted to Governments for
the execution of projects financed by the Programmc,
including nationals from their own countries, regional
and subregional groupings, in accordance with relevant
decisions of the Governing Council.
103rd plenary meeting
15 December 1977
32/115.

United Nations Conference on Science
and Technology for Development 04

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (SVI) of 1 May 1974, and 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974,
Recalling section III, paragraph 7, of its resolution
3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975, in which it decided that a United Nations Conference on Science and
Technology for Development should be held in 1978
or 1979,
Recalling paragraphs 2 and 3 of Economic and Social
Council resolution 2028 (LXI) of 4 August 1976,
Recalling also its resolution 31 / 184 of 21 December
1976, in which it decided, inter alia, to convene the
Conference during 1979, in time for the General Assembly to take action at its thirty-fourth session in the
light of the results of the Conference, and in which it
established the preparatory mechanism for the Conference,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of General Assembly resolution
31/184, 65
Taking note also of the report of the Preparatory
Committee for the United Nations Conference on
64 See also sect. U; resolution 32/184, and sect. X.B.4.
decisions 32/ 430 and 32/ 43 l.
º'•A/32/230 and Add.1-·3 and Add.4/Rcv.l.

Science and Technology for Dcvelopment on its first
scssion. fü:
Considering that thc vital role of sciencc and technology is universally rccognized and that thc General
Asscmbly has rccommended that science and techno!ogy should be called upon to play a more direct and
important role in thc process of stimulating dcvelopment and reducing intcrnational inequalitics,

I
l. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution 2123 (LXIII) of 4 August 1977;
'"'
Decides to hold the United Nations Confcrencc
on Scicnce and Technology for Development at an appropriate time in 1979, bearing in mind the dccision
contained in paragraph 8 of General Assembly resolution 31 / 184;
3. Affírms that the Conference should be aimed,
inter afia, at the development, through enhanced intcrnational co-operation in science and technology, including thc transfcr of technology, of the independcnt scientific and technological capacity of devcloping countrics,
in particular through tcchnological innovations, in
arder to facilitate the solution of their economic and
social problcms;

4. Decides that thc Committee on Scicncc and
Technology for Devclopment, when acting as thc Prcparatory Committce for the United Nations Confcrcncc on Science and Technology for Developmcnt. is
open to thc participation of ali States as full membcr~;
5. Urges ali Sta tes, in consultation when necessary
with the Secrctary-General of the Conference, to take
ali neccssary mcasures to make positive contributions
to the preparatory work of the Conference;
6. Requests the Secretary-Gcneral and the executive heads of the organs and organizations of the United
Nations system to givc high priority to the preparations
for the Conference;
7. Affirms that the Secretary-General of the Conference is invested with full responsibility for the coordination of ali substantive work of the Preparatory
Committee for the Conference;
8. Requests the Secretary-General of the Confcrence to submit to the Secretary-General of the United
N ations currcnt rcports on the statc of prcparations for
the Conferencc;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-third session, through the
Economic and Social Council, a comprchensive and
analytical progress report on the state of preparations
for the Conference;

II
Reaffinns thc provision in paragraph 5 of Economic
and Social Council resolution 2033 (LX[) of 4 August 1976, in which thc Council recommended thc
increasc in the participation of developing countrics in
the Advisory Committec on the Application of Scicncc
and Tcchnology to Development, and requests the Sccrctary-Gcneral, bcaring in mind thc role of thc Advisory Committec in the preparations far thc Unitcd
N ations Confcrcncc on Science and Teclrnology fnr
uG Ot]icia/ Rccord.1· of thc General Asscmblv, Thirtv-sccond
Ses.\·ion. Supplemcnt No. 43 (A/32/43 ami Cc)rr.:,). ·

V.

Resolutions adoptcd on the reports of the Second Committee

Development, to undcrtake cffective consultations with
Governmcnts with a view to implementing that resolution and appointing the members of thc Advisory
Committee, taking into account ínter ulia, the principie
of cquitablc geographical distribution.
103rd plenary meeting
15 Decemher 1977
32/156.

Agreement on Co-operation mul Relationships between the United Nations
aml the World Tourism Or~anization

The General Assembly,
Having considered Economic and Social Council dccision 254 (LXIII) of 3 August 1977 and thc draft
agreement annexed thcreto on co-operation and relationships between the United Nations and the World
Tourism Organization,
Approves thc Agrcement on Co-operation and Relationships between the United Nations and the World
Tourism Organization as set forth in the anncx to the
present resolution.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977
ANNEX
Agreement on Co-operation and Relationships between the
United Nations and thc World Tourism Organization

The General Assernbly of the Unite<l Nations, in its resolution 2529 (XXIV) of 5 Decernber 1969, decidcd, inter afia,
that an agreernent should be concluded which would establish
close co-operation and relationships between the United Nations and the future World Tourisrn Organization, define the
modalities of such co-operation and relationships and recognize
the dicisive and central role that the World Tourism Organization was to play in the field of world tourism in co-operation
with the existing machinery within the United Nations systern.
Artide 3, paragraph 3, of the statutes of the World Tourisrn
Organization provides that the World Tourism Organization,
in order to ,establish its central role in the field of tourism,
shall establish and rnaintain effective collaboration with the
appropriate organs of the United Nations and its specialized
agencies.
Therefore, the United Nations and the World Tourism
Organization agree as follows:
A rticle l
RECOGNITION OF RESPONSIBILIT!ES

l. The United Nations recognizes the World Tourism
Organization as being responsible for taking such action as
may be appropriate under its statutes for the accomplishment
of the purposes set forth therein, with due regard to the
competence and responsibilities of the United Nations and
its organs and of the agencies within the United Nations
system.

2. The United Nations takes note thal the World Tourism
Organization, in pursuing its aims, is concerned to pay particular attention to the interests of thc developing countries in
the field of tourism.
Articfe JI
RECOMMENDATIONS OF "I HE

lJNn U> NAT10NS

The World Tourism OrganizaLion. having regard to the
obligations of the United Nations to promot'e thc objectives
set forth in Article 55 of the Charter of the United Nations,
agrees to arrange for the submission as soon as possible to
its General Assembly or its Exccutivc Co11ncil, as appropriate,

of ali formal recommen<lations that the United Nations rnay
make to it and, in due coursc, to report to the United Nations
on the action takt~n bv it or its members in order to give effect
to such rccornmend,{tions or on the other results of their
consiJeration.
Articfc fil
RELA rIONSlll l'

AND

CO-ORDINATION

1. The United Nations and the World Tourism Organization agrce to striw for the maximum co-operation and the
elimination of unnecess:iry duplicaLion hdwecn th~m in thcir
rcsrcctiv_. activitie:; relatc<l to tourism.
,
The United Nations and the World Touri:;m Organization agrce that the activities of the World Tourism Organization and the activifres in respect of or related to tourism of
the United Nations and other organizations within the United
Nations system shall be co-ordinate<l by the Economic and
Social Council through consultations and recommendations.
lntersecrctarial co-ordination shall be ensured through the
machinery of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination,
in the opcration of which thc World Tourism Organization
shall participate in respect of rnatters of common interesl.
3. The World Tourism Organization will seek separate
arrangernents for co-operation with individual agencies within
the United Nations systern engaged in tourism or tourismrelated activities.
Aniclc IV
RITIPROCAL

REPRl'SENTAT!ON

1. The United Nations shall be invited to send representatives to attend in an observer capacity the rncetings of the
General Assernbly and the Executive Council of the World
Tourism Organization and any suhsidiary bodies which may
be established by the Workl Tourism Organization, as wdl
as such conferences as the World Tourisrn Organization may
convcne. and to participate. with the approval of the bo<ly
concemed and without the right to vote, in debates on questions of concern to the United Nations.
2. The World Tourism Organization shall he invited to
scnd representatives to attend in an observer capacity meetings
of the Economic and Social Council or its subsidiary organs,
conforences convened hy it and meetings of other United
Nations bodies which <leal with matters of common interest
and to participate. with the approval of the body concerncd
and without the right to vote, in debates on questions of
conccrn to the World Tourism Organization.
Article V
WRITTEN

STATEMENTS

The United Nations nrny subrnit written statements to
meetings of ho<lies of the World Tourism Organization and
other meetings organized by it on matters of common interest
which are relevan! to thc work of !hose bodies. The World
Tourism Organization may submit written statements to the
Economic and Social Council, to its subsidiary organs an<l to
confercnccs convencd by it. and also to the subsidiary organs
of the (jcncral Asscmbly of the United Nations. 011 matters
of common intercst which are relevant to the work of thosc
hodies.
Articlc VI
PROPOSAl

OF

AGE"IIJA

ITEMS

Subjcct to such preliminary consultations as may be necessary. thc secretaria! of the World Tourism Organization may
include in the provisional agenda of the General Assembly
and tite Fxccutivc Council of the World Tourism Organization
items prorosed to it hy the United Nations. Thc Sccretariat
of thc United Nations may include in the provisional agenda
of thc Economic and Social Council itcms proposcd by thc
World Tourism Organization. In this connexion, !he World
Tourism Organization rnay make recommcndalions and prorosals rclating to i nternation:il agrecments to be drawn up in
the ficld of tourism.
