S/2006/368

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 June 2006
Original: English

Letter dated 7 June 2006 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I have the honour to
convey the attached report on the international security presence in Kosovo
covering the period from 1 to 30 April 2006 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

06-37926 (E) 120606

*0637926*

S/2006/368

Annex
Monthly report to the United Nations on the operations of
the Kosovo Force
1.

This report covers the period from 1 to 30 April 2006.

2.
As at 30 April 2006, the total number of troops in theatre was 16,710, which
included 2,708 troops from non-NATO countries.
3.

There was no change in the status of partner/non-NATO country contributions.

Security
4.
The overall situation in Kosovo remains calm but fragile. The third round of
status talks was held in Vienna on 3 April 2006. The talks were reported as rather
unsuccessful and disappointing, owing to the fact that neither side was willing to
compromise on the important issue of decentralization. Belgrade continues to press
for an entity in Kosovo like the Republika Srpska in Bosnia and Herzegovina, while
Pristina seeks ethnically neutral municipalities. Neither side appears flexible at this
time. The people of Kosovo continue to closely monitor the status talks process and
the diplomacy associated with it. The ongoing process of status negotiation, and its
possible outcome, could potentially have implications for the overall stability in
Kosovo.
5.
During the period, very few inter-ethnic incidents (only two) were reported
and the overall inter-ethnic situation in Kosovo remains calm. It is assessed that the
Kosovo Albanians will not want to cause any inter-ethnic unrest because of the
possible repercussions it could have on the status talks.
6.

No incidents were recorded against KFOR.

7.
A total of 409 incidents related to unexploded ordnance, illegal weapons
possession, weapons and ammunition findings, drugs, human trafficking and
counterfeit currency were reported during the past month. Weapon seizures made up
the vast majority of incidents in April 2006. In March 2006, 408 incidents were
reported. Smuggling activities will continue to be one of the highest threats towards
a safe and secure environment within Kosovo and KFOR troops in Kosovo. There
could be confrontations if KFOR soldiers cross paths with smugglers. Most of the
Kosovo border is affected by smuggling activity; most of the smuggling is
concentrated in the eastern area, however, on the border with the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia. a Even with the frequent seizure of illegal weapons there is
no proof that the weapons were intended for extremist or criminal groups. It is
important to note that most of the weapons found are probably intended for hunting
or personal protection. Most of the weapon finds result in a small number of
weapons; therefore there is no known link to possible weapon caches. Drug
trafficking is still considered to be one of the most profitable criminal businesses for
local organized crime groups. The limited number of reported smuggling-related
incidents is assessed to be the result of efforts made by KFOR and UNMIK to fight
illegal trafficking along the borders. However, this may also be an indicator that the
smugglers are finding new ways to avoid detection by UNMIK and KFOR. Even as
the weather conditions are improving, no significant increase of reported criminal
__________________
a Turkey recognizes the Republic of Macedonia with its constitutional name.

2

S/2006/368

acts is expected. The criminal threat to the safe and secure environment and KFOR
is assessed as low.
8.
KFOR continues operations to prevent ethnic violence and protect patrimonial
sites and remains vigilant to deter possible threats directed against international
organizations and military bases. The Force continues to improve its crowd and riot
control capabilities so as to be better prepared to counter any resurgence of
violence.
Compliance by the Federal Army of Serbia and Montenegro and the
Ministry of Internal Affairs Special Police
9.

Two cases of non-compliance have been opened.

Kosovo Protection Corps
10. The KFOR Inspectorate for the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC) ensures
compliance through the day-to-day supervision of KPC using unannounced rollcalls and inspections. The main focus for the Inspectorate in April was the
development of an additional training management programme for KPC in support
of the Joint Force Command directive.
11.

There is nothing significant to report on KPC activities.

12. The current active personnel establishment is 3,038. There are 207 (6.8%)
active ethnic minority members (181 male, 26 female): 35 Ashkall, 4 Roma, 11
Egyptian, 17 Croat, 32 Bosniacs, 14 Muslim, 36 Turk, 2 Goran and 56 Serb. The
total number of ethnic minorities increased 23 from the previous month. The
recruitment of minorities remains a KPC priority. Currently, the percentage of
minorities within KPC still remains short of the 10 per cent goal set out in Standard
8. The reserve personnel establishment list includes 2,000 positions, 1,883 filled, of
which the ethnic minority number is 54 (2.8%), which is an increase of 14 from the
previous month. KFOR Inspectorate headquarters carried out 44 roll-calls. A total of
894 (67.7%) of 1,321 checked KPC members were on duty in their barracks and 168
(12.3%) on duty elsewhere. The active duty strength of 1,062 (duty in barracks and
duty elsewhere) shows that an average of 80 per cent of KPC personnel attended
work schedules. Roll-calls show a slight decrease in the number of personnel
reported absent without permission.
13.

KPC conducted training in accordance with the training plan for 2006.

14.

There are no significant ceremonies to report.

Conclusion
15. The overall situation in Kosovo will remain fragile because of the ongoing
status talks and the possible increase in inter-ethnic tension as the weather
conditions improve. The threat level against UNMIK and other international
community facilities remains medium, and the threat level for KFOR is low.

3
