S/PV.7076

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7076th meeting

Monday, 9 December 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lamek . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(France)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Manzi
Mr. Menan
Mr. Wilson
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

13-60378 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1360378*

S/PV.7076

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
At this meeting, the Council will hear briefings
by the outgoing Chairs of the subsidiary bodies of
the Council, who will speak in order according to the
year of adoption of the related resolutions. First is His
Excellency Mr. Masood Khan, Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1521 (2003) concerning Liberia, and Chair of the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations. Next
will be His Excellency Mr. Agshin Mehdiyev, Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and then His Excellency Mr. Gert
Rosenthal, Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004)
concerning Côte d’Ivoire, and Chair of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals. Lastly, we
will hear His Excellency Mr. Mohammed Loulichki,
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012) concerning GuineaBissau.
I now give the floor to Mr. Masood Khan.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): I am making these
remarks in my dual capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1521 (2003) concerning Liberia — the Liberia sanctions
Committee — and Chair of the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations.
The Liberia sanctions Committee was established
almost 10 years ago. Pakistan chaired it in 2003 and
2004. At that time, Liberia was taking initial steps away
from a debilitating civil war. Since then, Liberia has
come a long way in its quest to restore peace, security
and stability. With the support of the United Nations,
the African Union and the Economic Community of
West African States, the country has made substantial
progress.

2/9

09/12/2013

The role of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL) has been instrumental in achieving these
gains. Pakistani peacekeepers have remained an integral
part of UNMIL since its inception. We take pride in our
association with Liberia as a troop contributor and as
Chair of the Liberia sanctions Committee twice during
the past decade, which has seen Liberia’s transition
from civil war to stability.
Over the past two years, the Committee has held
six informal consultations in the light of reports
submitted by the Panel of Experts, and taken several
follow-up actions. My predecesssor, in his capacity as
Chair of the Committee, visited Liberia in May 2012.
His interaction with the Liberian stakeholders on the
ground helped us to fine-tune the general directions of
the sanctions regime.
The Panel’s reports have identified both progress
and shortcomings. In its most recent report, the Panel
has concluded that a majority of the individuals and
entities listed for assets freezes and travel bans do not
pose a threat to peace and stability in Liberia and the
subregion. There are some cases of concern among
the listed entities and individuals. The Panel does not
find any evidence that revenues from the diamond
and alluvial-gold sectors are providing financing for
weapons and arm smuggling.
The Panel has, however, identified huge institutional
capacity deficits in the Liberian Government and
security forces in the following areas: diamond
trafficking and gold mining, the marking of arms, the
legal framework to prevent trafficking in illicit arms,
conflict related to palm-oil production, accountability
and oversight in the forestry sector, land-tenure issues,
threats posed by the cross-border military activities of
Liberian mercenaries and Ivorian militias, and security
concerns along the Liberia-Sierra Leone border. The
panelists have confirmed that Liberia’s inability to
pass a firearms-control act to ensure the marking of
arms and ammunition and to interdict armed groups
in the interior boils down to capacity issues. This is a
prime factor in slowing down the full implementation
of sanctions.
The fundamental questions before the Council
today are how to consolidate the achievements made
so far, how to maintain the momentum towards peace
and stability, and how to decide on the nature and
role of sanctions in the future. The decision to lift the
sanctions should be based on the Council’s collective

13-60378

09/12/2013

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

political judgement. As I relinquish my responsibilities,
the Council is inclined towards scaling down the
sanctions gradually, in consultation with the Liberian
Government. Liberia still faces many challenges. These
include a frail State security apparatus, land-rights
issues and ineffectual natural-resources management.
Transnational organized crime and illicit drug
trafficking are becoming major problems.
The Council wants to use sanctions most efficiently
and effectively. There is a time for imposing them and
a time for winding them down. No country would like
to remain under sanctions indefinitely. I would say, in
my personal capacity, that we should scale back but not
disengage or lower our guard. It should be a measured,
calibrated response from the Council.
Before rendering this report, I held meetings with
the Permanent Representative of Liberia and members
of the Panel. They concur that the situation in Liberia
remains fragile and fraught with danger. As UNMIL
moves towards drawdown, the nature of the United
Nations engagement with the Liberian authorities
should be modulated to help the Liberian Government
build its capacities, including its civilian capacities.
The role of the Peacebuilding Commission, regional
and subregional organizations and the international
financial institutions remains crucial in this context.
Our efforts should be in sync with the Government’s
priorities for institution-building. Liberia’s security
cooperation with Guinea, Sierra Leone and Côte
D’Ivoire should be bolstered to build a broader strategic
approach to establishing regional stability.
Finally, I acknowledge with deep appreciation the
cooperation and support of all Committee members. I
also thank Committee Secretary Kelvin Ong, Political
Affairs Officer Anne Viken and Assistant Maria
Carmela Javier-Bobby for their support to the work of
the Committee. I also commend the comprehensive,
solid and substantive work done by the members of the
Panel — Christian Dietrich, Caspar Fithen and Lansana
Gberie — over the past two years. They are thorough
and very hard-working.
I now turn to the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, which I have chaired in 2013. Ambassador
Mohammed Loulichki of Morocco ably carried out that
responsibility in 2012. For Pakistan, it was a unique
honour to be a top troop contributor to United Nations
peacekeeping and to lead the Working Group. We
started off in 2013 with the adoption of resolution 2086

S/PV.7076

(2013) in January, under Pakistan’s presidency. That
comprehensive resolution on peacekeeping, the first of
its kind in over a decade, focused on multidimensional
missions based on a comprehensive approach to
addressing complex crises involving security, political,
humanitarian and development aspects.
The spotlight and new momentum on peacekeeping
generated by resolution 2086 (2013) were sustained
in the activities of the Working Group, which, in
accordance with its mandate, considered a number of
mission-specific and crosscutting thematic issues. In
February, in the run-up to the renewal of the mandate
of the African Union Mission in Somalia, the Working
Group brought together the representatives of the
African Union, the troop-contributing countries, and
senior leadership from the Secretariat to discuss and
address the challenges in Somalia. The discussion on
safety and security underscored the need for elaborate
force-protection measures, emergency evacuation
plans, the deployment of critical enablers and clear and
achievable mandates backed by adequate resources.
The Working Group also took up the use of modern
technologies in United Nations peacekeeping operations
in the wake of the authorization for deployment of
unarmed, unmanned aerial systems in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The exchange of views in the
related legal, operational, political and administrative
aspects was rich. The Group underlined the need for
fuller discussion of the issue in the relevant United
Nations forums. The deliberations of the Working
Group on transition and drawdown were timely, given
that several multidimensional missions were and are at
various stages of these processes.
In another meeting, the Working Group held
discussions on a capability-driven approach, which
is vital to enhancing the effectiveness of missions
in view of their evolving nature and complex and
challenging mandates. The discussion brought forth
the importance of planning and training, the provision
of adequate military resources — particularly critical
enablers such as aviation and engineering assets — and
the efficient utilization of resources in mission areas.
The important and evolving role of United Nations
policing in peacekeeping and the related challenges
and opportunities were discussed in November in the
first-ever meeting of the Working Group dedicated to
United Nations police. At its final substantive meeting,
scheduled for 20 December, the Working Group will

13-603783/9

S/PV.7076

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

look into issues related to force generation and mission
start-up.
Before concluding, I should like to make some
personal observations.
First, the Working Group is one of the most
important subsidiary bodies because of the centrality of
peacekeeping to the Council’s work. The Working Group
has a lot of space and opportunity to be proactive and
support the Council’s deliberations on peacekeeping.
We try to do just that. I am pleased to report that the
Working Group had a substantive and dynamic agenda,
and it was responsive to current peacekeeping issues.
Secondly, we planned early and developed a good
understanding among members on a range of indicative
topics and issues, and covered many of them in great
detail.
Thirdly, from the procedural point of view, it was
all along a smooth affair. All credit goes to the members
of the Working Group who extended full cooperation
to the Chair. The Secretariat supported us ably. We
consulted them extensively and benefitted from their
engagement and briefings at the highest levels. I would
like to convey our deepest gratitude to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and his peacekeeping team,
led by Under-Secretary-General Hervé Ladsous and
Under-Secretary-General Ameerah Haq, and all their
colleagues for their availability, advice and contribution
to our work. I convey my appreciation to Mr. Movses
Abelian and his team, in particular Mr. Nikolai Galkin
and his predecessor, for facilitating our work. I am also
happy to inform the Council that there will be a website
for the Working Group in the coming days.
Fourthly, one of the objectives we set at the very
beginning was to strengthen the synergy among the
Security Council, the troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Secretariat. Although we could
not hold an exclusive meeting on the subject, we
promoted such cooperation in practice by creating an
environment for full engagement and participation
by them in all our meetings. That open interaction
enriched our discussions and enhanced transparency
and inclusiveness in our work
The President (spoke in French):
Ambassador Masood Khan for his briefing.

I

thank

I now give the floor to Ambassador Mehdiyev.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for providing me
4/9

09/12/2013

and other outgoing Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council with an opportunity to summarize
our work and share some observations as our countries
complete their two-year terms as non-permanent
members of the Council.
For the past two years, I have had the honour and
privilege to chair the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004),
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
During my tenure, I have endeavoured to keep the
Committee centred in the overall implementation of the
sanctions regime, to offer all assistance possible to the
Group of Experts in support of their arduous work and
to establish an open, two-way dialogue with Member
States inside and outside the Committee, including the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the neighbouring
States.
Since January 2012, the Committee held a total
of six meetings, during many of which it exchanged
views with the Group of Experts in connection with
the Group’s reports and took decisions on various
recommendations contained in those reports. The
Committee also updated the sanctions list in April
2013, based on elements provided by a member of the
Committee and the Group of Experts.
In accordance with its guidelines, which allow
for non-members and others to participate in its
meetings and informal consultations, in August 2012
the Committee met with and heard the views of Major
Patrick Karuretwa, Defence and Security Adviser
to the President of the Republic of Rwanda, and His
Excellency Mr. Raymond Tshibanda N’tungamulongo,
Minister for International and Regional Cooperation
and Francophone Affairs of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
In early March 2012, the Committee held
a discussion with the Special Representative of
INTERPOL to the United Nations. That meeting led to
an agreement on the exchange of information among
INTERPOL, the Committee and the Group of Experts
in late 2012, which provided for the dissemination of
INTERPOL-Security Council special notices on the
individuals named in the Committee’s sanctions list.
Over the course of the past two years, in my
capacity as a Council member and Chair of the 1533
Committee, I have witnessed the effective use of
such instruments as peacekeeping, peacemaking and
sanctions, and their positive impact on the security

13-60378

09/12/2013

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

situation in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Great Lakes region, which radically deteriorated
in May 2012 with the Mouvement du 23 Mars (M-23)
rebellion. Continued efforts to end the rebellion
and address the drivers of chronic instability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo led to the signing of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region and
the subsequent adoption by the Council of resolution
2098 (2013). The international community’s search for
a political solution to the crisis was accompanied by the
actions taken in the 1533 Committee, which reacted to
violations of international law and the sanctions regime
by designating five M-23 leaders — Sultani Makenga,
Baudoin Ngaruye, Innocent Kaina, Jean-Marie Runiga
Lugerero and Eric Badege — as well as the listing of the
M-23 itself and the Forces démocratiques de libération
du Rwanda (FDLR).
The robust actions of the Congolese army and the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
supported by the Force Intervention Brigade, have
recently had a major military impact on the ground.
However, the military defeat of the M-23 is not an
end, which can only be achieved through a political
solution. There is still plenty of work to do in terms
of neutralizing other armed groups, such as the FDLR
and the Allied Democratic Forces, restoring State
authority throughout the country and creating space for
peacebuilding and national dialogue. But the building
blocks of change are there and the sanctions tool has
proven to be an integral part of these collective efforts.
The signing of the Framework Agreement and the
deployment of the Force Intervention Brigade clearly
demonstrate that the international community, including
the United Nations and the regional organizations, has
become increasingly involved in the active pursuit of
political and security-related solutions to the crisis
in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. In my
view, similar energy should be directed towards the
exploitation of natural resources and the development of
infrastructure, for the benefit of the Congolese people,
with a view to opening up the nearly untapped potential
of the region and creating less space for spoilers like
armed groups and criminal networks.
While the number of notifications of arms deliveries
by Member States to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo Government sent to the Committee has increased
over the past two years, which are allowed under the

S/PV.7076

sanctions regime, armed groups’ access to weapons in
violation of the arms embargo continues to affect the
lives of millions of civilians and threaten the stability
of the region as a whole. Addressing the issue of arms
proliferation could also be an area where increased
regional collaboration may have a major impact,
through the establishment of confidence-building
measures and control mechanisms. The unmanned
aerial systems recently deployed by MONUSCO could
play an important role in identifying the movement of
arms and armed groups.
In conjunction with the publication of the due
diligence guidelines produced by the Group of Experts
in 2010, which are designed to mitigate the risk of
further exacerbating the conflict in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo by providing direct or indirect
support to illegal armed groups, criminal networks and
sanctioned individuals and entities, the issue of the
traceability of minerals has gained more international
visibility in the past years. The Group of Experts has
engaged with the private sector and industry on this
issue, as well as with intergovernmental organizations
such as the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development and the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region. Increasingly, as noted in
the Group’s 2013 midterm report (see S/2013/433),
continuous instability in various parts of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is exacting a heavy
toll on the fragile equilibrium of wildlife and the unique
ecosystems, mostly for the trafficking of ivory beyond
the Great Lakes region. This is also a domain where the
cooperation between the Group of Experts and other
actors, such as INTERPOL and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, could be encouraged.
I would like to conclude by expressing my profound
appreciation to the members of the Committee for their
collegiality, spirit of cooperation and their interest
in adding value to the work of the Committee and
increasing the effectiveness of the sanctions regime
overall. I also wish to extend my sincere gratitude to the
Group of Experts, its previous and current members,
for the work done in contributing to compliance with
the sanctions regime, often in very trying and tense
situations.
I would also like to convey my sincere appreciation
to the Secretary of the Committee, Mr. David Biggs,
and his team for their professionalism, dedication and
invaluable assistance extended to me. Finally, I wish

13-603785/9

S/PV.7076

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

the next Chair of the Committee every success in the
discharge of the chairmanship functions.
The President (spoke in French):
Ambassador Mehdiyev for his briefing.

I

thank

I now give the floor to Ambassador Rosenthal.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for giving me
this opportunity to brief the Security Council with my
reflections as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004)
concerning Côte d’Ivoire and as Chair of the Council’s
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.
The first issue that I would like to point out is the
difference between those two subsidiary bodies. One
is a typical sanctions committee that acts pursuant
to Articles 40 and 41 of the Charter, while the other
can be viewed as a consultation and consensusbuilding mechanism useful needed to further the
work of the Security Council, in particular in the area
of international criminal justice. For that reason, my
personal observations on such two different bodies
must be presented separately.
I will divide my presentation into two parts, each
in turn divided into a very brief review of the work
achieved during our two-year term, followed by my
assessments. The reason for brevity is clear: we have
reported on the work of the 1572 Sanctions Committee
concerning Côte d’Ivoire to the Council when it
was considering the mid-term reports and mandate
renewals of the original resolution. We have also kept
the Council informed of the activities of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals.
I will therefore move on to the first part on the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1572 (2004). By the end of this month, the
Committee will have held a total of seven informal
consultations over the past two years, the majority
of which were devoted to exchanging views with
the Group of Experts on the Group’s midterm and
final reports, and to taking decisions on the Group’s
various recommendations in the form of draft letters,
notes verbales or press releases to be approved by
the Committee. In terms of other consultations, the
Committee also held an exchange of views with the
Special Representative of INTERPOL to the United
Nations, which led to an information-sharing agreement
between the Committee and its Group of Experts with
INTERPOL. The Committee also met with the Chairs of
6/9

09/12/2013

the Kimberley Process on two occasions regarding the
implementation of paragraph 6 of resolution 2101 (2013)
on the situation in CÔte d’Ivoire. Beyond the informal
consultations, the Committee has also received three
monthly reports on the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire, namely, on media monitoring, assessing
the embargo and human rights.
In short, I believe that the implementation of the
arms embargo, the diamond embargo, the assets freeze
and the travel ban have played the desired role in the
pursuit of a lasting political solution in Côte d’Ivoire,
but there remains a considerable way to go in order
to reach the full potential of those instruments. What
lessons can I and others transmit to the Council? I
would make the following brief points, some of which
are probably relevant to the other sanctions committees
as well.
First, the sanctions committees are certainly
flawed mechanisms, but, like the Security Council
itself, they fulfil an important role. Among the main
problems that we identified is the lack of compliance by
some stakeholders with the various kinds of sanctions
adopted by the Council. That is certainly true of
non-State actors but also applies to many State actors, in
particular in the area of the arms embargoes. It remains
necessary to continue improving transparency and the
provision of detailed information, with a particular
emphasis on ensuring that notifications and exemption
requests include the purpose, the end user, the technical
specifications and the quantity of the equipment to
be shipped and, when applicable, the supplier, the
proposed date of delivery, the mode of transportation
and the itinerary of shipments.
Secondly, although relations with the host
Government was generally good, there were at times
problems with the Mission in New York and in the
capital, in particular with the provision of timely
information and with receiving feedback regarding
the sanctions regime. The pace of dismantling the
sanctions was an ongoing source of underlying tension,
with the Government understandably pushing for its
rapid dismantling, while many Member States sought a
more conservative approach.
Thirdly, the interaction between the experts and
the members of the Committee was generally good, but
again, on occasion, there were some tensions, including
over the selection of experts and the differing views on
their performance. That area of interaction between the
Secretariat and Member States is particularly sensitive,
13-60378

09/12/2013

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

S/PV.7076

given the real consequences on the ground arising from
the implementation or lack of implementation of the
experts’ recommendations.

potentially conflicting requirements: on the one hand,
the need to respect due process and justice, and on the
other, the demand for efficiency and cost-effectiveness.

Fourthly, the sanctions committees seem to function
as independent units, with relatively little interaction
and coordination among them. I wish, however, to
acknowledge the cooperation and information-sharing
between the Group of Experts on Côte d’Ivoire and the
Panel of Experts on Liberia established pursuant to
resolution 1521 (2003).

In addition, the value added by the Working Group
derives from the fact that it constitutes a platform for
strengthening cooperation between the Tribunals and
the Security Council. I also believe that the discussions
in the Working Group have enriched the debates of the
Council during the crucial phases of the Tribunals’ life
and that of the Mechanism.

To sum up, we will, as I have said earlier,
nevertheless hand over to our successor a sanctions
committee that operates reasonably well in dealing
with a country that is moving in the right direction to
achieve peace, stability, democratic governance and
development.

To balance out this evaluation, allow me to
recognize the Tribunals’ achievements, especially
in signaling that leaders who commit crimes will be
held to account regardless of their official position, in
bringing justice to victims and in strengthening the
rule of law by working in partnership with domestic
courts in the region. The Tribunals have inspired the
creation of other courts, including the International
Criminal Court.

I will now move on to the second part of my remarks to
deal with the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals. That Working Group held several meetings,
drafted four resolutions, and the experts are now in the
process of negotiating a fifth resolution. In addition,
two press statements were issued concerning the
contribution of the international criminal tribunals in
the fight against impunity. In order to facilitate the
completion strategies of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda and the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, the Working
Group considered various requests by the Presidents
of the Tribunals, including the extension of the judges’
terms of office. By maintaining a flexible programme
of work over the reporting period, the Working Group
successfully accommodated the views and concerns of
all delegations.

As to my personal reflections — which are actually
my team’s reflections as well — I would like first of
all to say how pleased we have been to preside over
the Working Group. We took a strategic decision even
before being elected to the Council that we would try
to carve out a niche for our tenure in the general area
of peace and justice, as a reflection of our own national
experience of transition from conflict to peace and
from authoritarian to democratic governance. I would
say that respect for the rule of law was our “brand”
during our tenure and certainly during our presidency
of the Security Council, and chairing the Working
Group served to the same effect.

During our chairmanship, the Working Group
supported the setting up and commencement of
functioning of the Arusha and Hague branches of the
Residual Mechanism and a smooth transition from the
Tribunals to the Residual Mechanism.

A second personal reflection concerns the
satisfaction of managing what has become a genuinely
cross-cutting issue for the Security Council. Questions
of accountability, consolidating the rule of law and
judicial systems probably appear in the majority of our
resolutions.

Mechanisms dealing with residual functions
are a unique feature that is steadily increasing
in contemporary international tribunals. The
establishment of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals guarantees that the closure of
the Tribunals for Rwanda and Yugoslavia does not
leave the door open to impunity for the remaining
fugitives and for the trials or appeals that have not yet
been completed. I consider the Residual Mechanism
exemplary for striking a balance between two sets of

A third personal reflection has to do with the costbenefit calculations of the Tribunals. When I had the
honour to preside over the Fifth Committee, I must
confess that I harboured doubts regarding the high
cost involved in bringing a relatively small number of
perpetrators to justice. But of course the teaching of
justice cannot be measured solely in monetary terms.
Indeed, the rule of law is priceless, and the impact of
the Tribunals cannot be measured via metrics such
as the number of people judged. It lies rather in their

13-603787/9

S/PV.7076

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

dissuasive effect, through the knowledge that the entire
international community has mechanisms to ensure
that justice prevails, especially in symbolic terms.

09/12/2013

I now give the floor to Ambassador Loulichki.

Then there are relatively minor reflections. For
example, the Tribunals still face important challenges,
large and small. Staff retention is essential for the timely
completion of their work. I also regret that we could
not do more to address the urgent situation of persons
who have been acquitted or those who have served their
sentences who are living in safe houses in Arusha.

Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): After
submitting my final report to the Council a few days
ago in my capacity as Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to Security Council resolution
1373 (2001), more commonly known as the CounterTerrorism Committee, it is now incumbent upon me
to report to the Council one last time on the outcome
of the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2048 (2012) concerning Guinea-Bissau.

On another note, I would like to acknowledge the
invaluable role that State cooperation has played in
allowing the Tribunals to fulfil their mandates. It is
praiseworthy that, 20 years after the establishment of
the Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, all persons
indicted by the Tribunal have appeared before it. With
regard to the Tribunal for Rwanda, it should be noted
that while it is true that the transfer of cases to national
jurisdictions has facilitated the early conclusion of its
work, that will be achieved in reality only when all its
fugitives have been arrested and brought to justice,
whether through the Residual Mechanism or in national
courts.

That Committee’s mandate, as defined by the
Security Council, was to monitor implementation of the
measures envisaged in paragraph 9 of that resolution. The
Committee is the most recent to have been established
by the Council and the only one concerned exclusively
with interdicting travel. The Committee to deal with
the Central African Republic has been created, but has
not yet been established. The Committee concerning
Guinea-Bissau was established following the events
of 12 April 2012, which ended the electoral process in
that country. The Committee imposed a travel ban on
all individuals seeking to prevent the restoration of the
constitutional

My final reflection is that, in order to maintain the
momentum that has been generated, the Working Group
should continue to hold regular meetings and briefings,
to maintain a regular dialogue with the Tribunals and
close contacts with the affected countries and host
countries of the Tribunals and the Residual Mechanism,
and to pursue close cooperation with the Office of
Legal Affairs. As the importance and relevance of
the Working Group continue to increase, delegations
should give serious consideration to finding a forum for
experts to discuss issues that concern the International
Criminal Court in order to institutionalize the Council’s
cooperation with that Court.

“seeking to prevent the restoration of the
constitutional order or taking action that
undermined stability in Guinea-Bissau, in
particular those who played a leading role in
the coup d’état of 12 April 2012 and who aimed,
through their actions, at undermining the rule of
law, curtailing the primacy of civilian power and
furthering impunity and instability in the country”
(S/2012/627, p. 4).

Finally, I would like to acknowledge the sustained
support of the members of the two Committees and of
the Secretariat, in particular David Biggs and Manuel
Bressan in the work of of the 1572 Committee and
Davey McNab in the work in the Working Group on
International Tribunals.
In closing, I strongly urge the Security Council to
continue to play its essential role in the fight against
impunity.
The President (spoke in French):
Ambassador Rosenthal for his briefing.

8/9

I

thank

During the period in question, the Committee
held informal consultations, maintained channels of
communication among its members, and facilitated
discussions
and
decision-making
within
the
Committee’s framework. Examples of decisions taken
include the implementation of the sanctions regime,
the expansion of the list of individuals subject to the
travel ban, and the conclusion of an agreement with
INTERPOL on Interpol/Security Council Special
Notices, aimed at strengthening measures adopted by
Member States.
The main difficulty faced during the period was quite
clearly access to information, and the communication
of that information by the members of the Committee.
The Committee is one of the rare, one of the very few
committees, alongside the Committee established

13-60378

09/12/2013

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

pursuant to resolution 1518 (2003) concerning Iraq
and Kuwait and the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1636 (2005) concerning Lebanon, not to
have a panel of experts available to it. Nevertheless, the
Committee tried to discharge its mandate in cooperation
with the members of the Security Council and of course
all the other Members of the United Nations. Thus,
through an exchange of communications with Senegal
and Côte d’Ivoire, the Committee was in a position
to detect a violation of the travel ban by one of the
individuals subject to the ban.
Despite the very low number of reports
received — fewer than 20 — I would like to urge all
Member States that have not yet done so to report to
the Committee measures undertaken to implement the
provisions of paragraph 4 of resolution 2048 (2012).
In the next few days, a note will be addressed to the
Member States to assist my successor in launching his
term of office with an updated list of data that would
enable the Committee to continue to discharge its
mandate.
The 2048 Committee is one of the levers available to
the Security Council to address the situation in GuineaBissau. It is an instrument of information, coordination
and deliberation that can assist the Security Council’s
work regarding the many challenges facing that African

S/PV.7076

State. For my part, I am gratified by the growing interest
shown by the Security Council in that country, and by
the Council’s commitment to assisting it in its current
transition phase and contributing to stabilizing it, side
by side with the Economic Community of West African
States, the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau and the bilateral partners of
Guinea-Bissau. I cherish the hope that the momentum
will continue to grow in the coming few years.
Finally, like all my predecessors, I would like
to convey my gratitude to all the members of the
Committee for their assistance and their cooperation
during the Moroccan chairmanship, and to pay tribute
to the high level of professionalism and availability on
the part of the Secretariat in facilitating the work of the
Committee and its Chairman.
The President (spoke in French): On behalf of the
Security Council, I would like to take this opportunity
to convey our heartfelt gratitude to the outgoing
Chairmen for the way in which they have discharged the
very important duties entrusted to them by the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers.
The meeting rose at 3.55 p.m.

13-603789/9
