S/2018/845

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 September 2018
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017) and 2401 (2018)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the fifty-fifth submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of resolution 2165 (2014),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2191 (2014), paragraph 5 of resolution 2258 (2015),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2332 (2016), paragraph 6 of resolution 2393 (2017) and
paragraph 12 of resolution 2401 (2018), in which the Council requested the SecretaryGeneral to report, every 30 days, on the implementation of the resolutions by all
parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on data available to agencies of the
United Nations system and from the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and
other relevant sources. Data from agencies of the United Nations system on their
humanitarian deliveries have been reported for August 2018.

II. Major developments
Box 1
Key points: August 2018
1.
Concern around the prospect of military operations in the Idlib de -escalation
area grew significantly during the reporting period, with airstrikes and explosions in
Idlib and Aleppo Governorates between 10 and 12 August resulting in civilian deaths
and injuries. Reports were received of attacks affecting several health facilities, and
school activities in a number of areas were suspended.
2.
Humanitarian organizations continued to respond to needs in Idlib and across
the north-west of the country, drawing on cross-border assistance channels, while
coordinating readiness efforts, including the pre-positioning of aid supplies, in view
of the growing threat of large-scale displacement linked to expanded military
operations in the area.

18-15257 (E)

170918

*1815257*

S/2018/845

3.
In the south-west of the country, the Government consolidated its control over
the Dar‘a and Qunaytirah Governorates, as well as the vast majority of Suwayda ’
Governorate. Most of the approximately 325,000 people estimated to have been newly
displaced in the area since late June were reported to have returned to their areas of
origin. However, as at mid-August, an estimated 60,000 people remained displaced
and high levels of humanitarian needs persisted, including among returnees. The
United Nations continued to provide humanitarian aid in the area in partnership with
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, including through inter-agency convoys to Dar‘a
al-Balad on 9 August and Busra al-Sham on 16 August. However, access to many
areas remained limited for United Nations humanitarian agen cies and their partners.
4.
In eastern Dayr al-Zawr Governorate, fighting between Syrian Democratic
Forces and Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) continued to have an impact
on civilians, with reports that more than 20,000 people were displaced to makeshift
camps between late July and early August. Humanitarian access to many of these sites
was very limited, while there were also reports that the majority of the displaced
people were prevented from leaving, with exceptions only for some medical cases.
5.
In eastern Ghutah, the return of displaced people and the resumption of
commercial activities continued to be reported. However, the freedom of movement
of civilians and access to the area for humanitarian organizations remained very
limited, hindering efforts to scale up assistance and provide much-needed services,
including for returnees. Humanitarian assistance continued to be channelled through
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent.
6.
United Nations humanitarian agencies and their partners conti nued to reach
millions of people in need. Humanitarian assistance provided from within the country
by United Nations agencies reached more than 2.37 million people with food
assistance. Three inter-agency humanitarian convoys carrying life-saving relief, food
and medical supplies were deployed in August to the hard -to-reach locations of Irbin
and Zamalka in eastern Ghutah and Busra al-Sham and al-Balad in Dar‘a Governorate,
reaching a total of 75,000 people in need. In August, the United Nations delivered
life-saving food assistance to more than 574,000 people through cross -border
deliveries.

3.
Since 24 February 2018, when the Security Council adopted resolution 2401
(2018), demanding a cessation of hostilities, military conflict has continued in many
parts of the Syrian Arab Republic. During the month of August, air strikes, artillery
shelling, sniper fire and ground clashes were reported in the Governorates of Aleppo,
Idlib, Ladhiqiyah, Dayr al-Zawr, Hasakah, Homs, Hama, Rif Dimashq, Qunaytirah
and Suwayda’. Military operations continued between the Government and allied
pro-government forces and non-State armed opposition groups. Clashes occurred
between government forces and the Syrian Democratic Forces in Dayr al-Zawr
Governorate. In and around the Idlib de-escalation area, government forces and
non-State armed opposition groups, and their respective allies, continued to build up
and fortify military positions.
4.
Concern regarding the prospect of large-scale military operations in the Idlib
de-escalation area grew significantly during the reporting period, with airstrikes and
explosions in Idlib and Aleppo Governorates between 10 and 12 August resulting in
civilian deaths and injuries. Reports were received of attacks affecting several health
facilities, and school activities in a number of areas were suspended.
5.
A large-scale humanitarian response operation continued across Idlib and the
north-west, drawing on cross-border assistance from Turkey, delivered under the
framework of Security Council resolution 2393 (2017). The United Nations estimated
2/14

18-15257

S/2018/845

that some 2.1 million people were in need of humanitarian assistance in the Idlib
de-escalation area, including 1.4 million internally displaced people. The United
Nations and its humanitarian partners also expanded measures to prepare for the
possibility of large-scale civilian displacement linked to potential military operations
in the area. A readiness plan was developed, requesting $311 million to provide
multisectoral assistance to up to 900,000 people who could become newly displaced
in the event of a major military escalation, including up to 700,000 people expected
to be accessible only through cross-border channels. However, humanitarian
organizations continued to stress that a worst-case scenario in Idlib would exceed the
planning figures set out in the readiness plan, resulting in needs that would overwhelm
the response capacities of the United Nations and its humanitarian partners.
6.
In the south-west of the country, military activity decreased significantly, with
the Government having consolidated its control over the Dar ‘a and Qunaytirah
Governorates, as well as the vast majority of Suwayda’ Governorate. Most of the
approximately 325,000 people estimated to have been newly displaced in the area
since late June were reported to have returned to their areas of origin. However, as at
mid-August, an estimated 60,000 people remained displaced and high levels of
humanitarian needs persisted, including among returnees. The United Nations
continued to provide humanitarian aid in the area in partnership with the Syrian Arab
Red Crescent, including through inter-agency convoys to Dar‘a al-Balad on 9 August
and Busra al-Sham on 16 August, which delivered hygiene kits, nutrition supplies and
sanitary and household items for a total of 40,000 people. Some 74,000 people in
Dar‘a and Qunaytirah Governorates were also reached with food assistance, deliver ed
in partnership with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent. However, access to many areas
remained limited for United Nations humanitarian agencies and their partners.
7.
In eastern Dayr al-Zawr Governorate, fighting continued to have an impact on
civilians, with reports that more than 20,000 people were displaced to makeshift
camps between late July and early August. Humanitarian access to many of these sites
was very limited, while there were also reports that the majority of the displaced
people were prevented from leaving to reach other areas in southern Hasakah or
Raqqah, with exceptions for some medical cases. As at 25 August, 723 cases of acute
diarrhoea, resulting in 12 deaths, had been reported in Dayr al -Zawr Governorate
since March. The United Nations and its humanitarian partners scaled up household
water chlorination and awareness-raising activities in response.
8.
In eastern Ghutah, the return of displaced people and the resumption of
commercial activities continued to be reported. However, the freed om of civilians to
move in and out of the enclave remained restricted. Access for humanitarian
organizations to the area remained very limited, hindering efforts to scale up
assistance and provide much-needed services, including for returnees. Humanitarian
assistance continued to be channelled through the Syrian Arab Red Crescent.
9.
The humanitarian situation of some 45,000 people at the Rukban camp, on the
Syrian-Jordanian border, continued to be of great concern. Several hundred families
were reported to have moved out of the camp owing to poor living conditions,
although such movement was possible only at a significant financial cost and with a
significant security risk given the presence of armed actors along the route out of the
camp. As the need for the provision of humanitarian assistance became increasingly
urgent, with the last significant delivery of United Nations aid having taken place in
January 2018, discussions on an inter-agency humanitarian convoy to the area
continued.
10. My Special Envoy for Syria continued his diplomatic consultations in August.
He met with the Secretary of State of the United States of America in Washington ,
D.C. on 15 August to discuss the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic, including the
18-15257

3/14

S/2018/845

political process. Representatives of his office had further exchanges in Ankara,
Moscow and Tehran on the establishment of a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned
constitutional committee, facilitated by the United Nations within the framework of
the Geneva process and in accordance with Security Council resolution 2254 (2015).
Protection
11. Despite a relative decrease in the intensity of violence, civilians continued to be
severely affected by the direct and indirect consequences of hostilities. Air and
ground-based strikes continued to kill and injure civilians and damage and destroy
civilian infrastructure. The many civilian casualties and the scale of the destruction
of civilian infrastructure remained a strong indication that violations were continuing
of the fundamental rules of distinction, proportionality and precaution and, in
particular, of the prohibition on the launching of indiscriminate attacks.
12. Explosive weapons continued to be fired into populated areas, killing and
injuring civilians and destroying and damaging vital infrastructure. Explosive hazard
contamination in populated areas killed and injured civilians and impeded
humanitarian access. The use of improvised explosive devices in some areas added to
the complexity of the explosive hazard threat. In areas retaken by government forces
and their allies in Dar‘a and Dayr al-Zawr, reports continued of civilian casualties
caused by improvised explosive devices and unexploded ordnance or explosive
remnants of war.
13. In Idlib and Aleppo Governorates, intermittent bombardment by government
forces and their allies resulted in the killing and injuring of scores of civilians,
including women and children, and the displacement of thousands of others.
14. In areas of Aleppo Governorate, infighting between non-State armed opposition
groups continued to affect the well-being of civilians, owing primarily to the use of
improvised explosive devices in populated areas, lawlessness and criminality, which
included threats, intimidation, kidnappings and killings.
15. Fighting continued to have an impact on civilian infrastructure, including
medical facilities, schools, markets and places of worship. According to information
received by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR), civilian casualties occurred in various governorates, possibly in violation
of international humanitarian law (see annex). OHCHR has documented alleged
violations committed by parties to the conflict, including government forces and their
allies, non-State armed opposition groups and their allies, and Security Council designated terrorist groups.
16. Notwithstanding the call upon the Syrian authorities by the Human Rights
Council, in its resolutions S-18/1 and 19/22, to cooperate with OHCHR, including
through the establishment of a field presence with the mandate to protect and promote
human rights, OHCHR reporting remained limited, given that the Government had
not granted it access to the country.
17. Civilians across the country also continued to be subjected to killings, arbitrary
arrest and detention, deprivation of liberty, abduction, torture and inhumane, cruel
and degrading treatment. OHCHR continued to receive reports of civilians being
abducted or kidnapped by non-State armed opposition groups. Hundreds of men have
allegedly been taken by Hay’at Tahrir Al-Sham and other non-State armed opposition
groups in areas of Hama, Aleppo and Idlib Governorates under the control of
non-State armed opposition groups, either for ransom or reportedly because the
individuals targeted were promoting reconciliation with the Government. Of
particular concern were separate incidents involving the abduction of the heads of
three hospitals.
4/14

18-15257

S/2018/845

18. In one incident, an unidentified number of civilians, including young men and
children, were reportedly abducted by armed groups in the villages of Zarbah in
south-western rural Aleppo and Mughir in northern Hama on the afternoon of
25 August. Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) continued to hold at least 27
civilians, mainly women and children, as hostages following the group ’s assault on
Suwayda’ on 25 July. ISIL has threatened to kill them if its demands are not met by
the government forces and their allies, and it has been reported that they have killed
at least one of the hostages.
19. Since June 2018, more than 200 civilians have reported directly or indirectly to
OHCHR that they have received official death notices for family members or relatives
who had been detained at various times by the Government. All such certificates
indicated that the deaths were from natural causes. A number of families stated that
this was the second time that they had been notified officially of the death of their
relative, while others indicated that the death certificates that they had received were
dated in the 1990s, which was when their relatives had disappeared. O thers said that
they had become aware of the notification only when attending police or government
offices for other business. Only a few bodies were returned to the families, mostly of
persons who had died very recently. A number of families claim that th ey have been
prevented from requesting an independent forensic inquest into the cause and
circumstances of the deaths or are too fearful to do so.
20. The United Nations and its health partners verified several attacks affecting
health-care facilities and personnel during the reporting period. On 4 August, an
explosion near a hospital in Sarmin in rural Idlib caused damage to hospital windows.
No casualties were reported among staff and patients. On 7 August, several persons
broke into a hospital in Bdama subdistrict in Idlib and kidnapped a doctor from the
facility. No actor claimed responsibility for the incident. On 10 August, airstrikes hit
a dialysis centre in Kafr Nubl subdistrict in rural Idlib, damaging a pharmacy, the
outer walls, oxygen cylinders and water tanks. On 10 and 11 August, heavy airstrikes
near Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man National Hospital resulted in hospital services being limited
to emergency cases only for several days. On 22 August, an airstrike hit a hospital in
Ma‘arrah subdistrict. No casualties were reported. On 30 August, unidentified masked
men assaulted and kidnapped a doctor and head of a local hospital in front of his home
in Idlib city. The doctor was released several hours later in critical condition.
Following the incident, a medical non-governmental organization (NGO) announced
the temporary suspension of its activities at the hospital in question. The suspension
lasted for three days, during which time the hospital continued to operate.
21. Educational facilities also continued to be affected by the conflict. On 6 August,
local authorities ordered the closure of a number of private schools, including schools
supported by the Christian church in Qamishli city in Hasakah Governorate. On
10 August, educational activities in Kafr Nubl and Ma‘arrah in Idlib Governorate
were suspended for several days owing to a heavy bombardment in the area. At least
seven schools were affected by the closure.
Humanitarian access
Box 2
Key points
1.
United Nations humanitarian agencies and their partners continued to reach
millions of people in need, including from within the Syrian Arab Republic.
Humanitarian assistance provided from within the country by United Nations agencies
based in the country to regularly accessible locations in gove rnment-controlled areas
reached more than 2.37 million people with food assistance.

18-15257

5/14

S/2018/845

2.
Three inter-agency humanitarian convoys carrying life-saving relief, food and
medical supplies were deployed in August to the hard -to-reach locations of Irbin and
Zamalka, in eastern Ghutah, and ad hoc deliveries were made to Dar ‘a al-Balad and
to Busra al-Sham, both in the southern Syrian Arab Republic. Convoys to Irbin and
Zamalka and to Busra al-Sham were accompanied by the United Nations. United
Nations personnel were, however, not permitted to participate in the convoy to Dar ‘a
al-Balad because security approvals had not been received from the Syrian authorities.
3.
Cross-border assistance, authorized under Security Council resolutions 2165
(2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015) and 2393 (2017), remained a vital part of the
humanitarian response. In August, 319 trucks (13 consignments) delivered life -saving
assistance to more than 750,000 people through cross-border deliveries. United
Nations humanitarian cross-border operations through Jordan remained suspended in
August.

22. Under the United Nations inter-agency convoy plan for July and August, access
was requested to 25 hard-to-reach areas, with the objective of reaching 939,300
people. In August, three inter-agency convoys were authorized to deploy to the hard to-reach locations of Irbin and Zamalka, in eastern Ghutah, and to Dar ‘a al-Balad and
Busra al-Sham, both in the southern Syrian Arab Republic, providing multisectoral
assistance to a total of 75,000 people (see table 1 and figure I).
Table 1
Inter-agency cross-line humanitarian convoys, August 2018
Requested target
(number of
beneficiaries)

Number of
beneficiaries
reached

Type of assistance

35 000

35 000

Multisectoral

Date

Location

1 August

Irbin and Zamalka

9 August

Dar‘a al-Balad

Not applicable

32 500

Multisectoral

16 August

Busra al-Sham

Not applicable

7 500

Multisectoral

Figure I
Inter-agency humanitarian operations, August 2018

People reached in hard-to-reach areas

Inter-agency convoys

75,000

3

5%

Number of people in hard-to-reach areas

Proportion of people reached in hard-to-reach areas

1.48 million

Humanitarian response
23. United Nations humanitarian agencies and their partners reached millions of
people in need, including women and children, through all available access routes,
including: (a) humanitarian operations from within the Syrian Arab Republic,
whereby humanitarian deliveries reach those in need without crossing conflict lines;
(b) cross-line convoys, whereby assistance from within the country is delivered across
conflict lines; and (c) cross-border deliveries, whereby assistance is provided to those
6/14

18-15257

S/2018/845

in need from neighbouring countries (see tables 2 and 3). In addition to the United
Nations and its partners, the Government and NGOs continued to deliver life -saving
assistance to people in need. The local authorities in many areas controlled by
non-State armed opposition groups also continued to provide services where possible.
24. Individual agencies continued to submit requests for single -agency deliveries to
locations across the country. Such deliveries are undertaken by United Nations
agencies based in Damascus to regularly accessible areas. In August, all 1,652 official
requests submitted by the World Food Programme to the Syrian authorities to obtain
facilitation letters for the transport of food assistance to locations across the country
were approved. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) submitted 41 requests for facilitation letters for the movement of core relief
items and livelihood kits, all of which were approved. More than 2 million people
were reached with multisectoral support, including 412,000 children and mothers
receiving primary health-care and immunization services. In addition, an estimated
117,000 children and pregnant and lactating women were provided with nutritional
supplements and services. Some 134,000 children benefited from essential learning
materials and remedial education, and 190,000 children benefited from protection and
psychosocial support services. Around 328,000 people were reached with
reproductive health and gender-based violence services supported by the United
Nations Population Fund and its partners. Approximately 2.9 million people received
food assistance, and 1.7 million people benefited from water, sanitation an d hygiene
services and supplies.
Table 2
People reached by the United Nations and other organizations through all
modalities, August 2018
Organization

Number of
people reached

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

34 000

International Organization for Migration

71 000

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

2 860 000

United Nations Children’s Fund

2 000 000

United Nations Development Programme

918 631

United Nations Population Fund

328 000

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

175 000

World Food Programme

2 923 515

World Health Organization

922 000

25. Cross-border deliveries continued under the terms of Security Council
resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016) and 2393 (2017) (see
figure II and table 3). In line with those resolutions, the United Nations notified the
Syrian authorities in advance of each shipment, including its contents, its destination
and the number of beneficiaries expected to be reached.
26. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic
continued its operations as authorized under resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014),
2258 (2015) and 2393 (2017). During the reporting period, the Mechanism monitored
the delivery of 13 consignments by six United Nations agencies, consisting of 31 9
trucks, from three border crossings: eight from Bab al -Hawa (276 trucks), four from
Bab al-Salam (39 trucks) and one from Ya‘rubiyah (4 trucks). There were no concerns
or questions about the humanitarian nature of the consignments sent. The United
Nations provided 48-hour notice to the Government regarding all shipments. Once in
18-15257

7/14

S/2018/845

the country, United Nations partners ensured that shipments arrived at the designated
warehouses. Independent third-party companies contracted by the United Nations
ensured independent verification of the assistance arriving at the warehouses and
monitored the distribution and/or service provision. The Mechanism continued to
benefit from the excellent cooperation of the Governments of Iraq, Jordan and Turkey.
27. Since cross-border operations began in July 2014, following the adoption of
resolution 2165 (2014), the United Nations has conducted more than 861 cross-border
consignments, with more than 21,715 trucks (14,820 through Ba b al-Hawa and 2,249
through Bab al-Salam from Turkey; 4,605 through Ramtha from Jordan; and 41
through Ya‘rubiyah from Iraq). Those operations complement and support the aid
provided by international and Syrian NGOs that provide services to millions more
from neighbouring countries.
28. During the reporting period, humanitarian cross-border operations through
Jordan remained suspended. However, the World Food Programme and its
implementing partners delivered food assistance to more than 574,000 people from
the two authorized cross-border entry points with Turkey. The World Health
Organization also conducted health and medical deliveries, providing nearly 530,260
treatments through the cross-border mechanism. In the northern Syrian Arab
Republic, the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) delivered winter kits and
child protection assistance, as well as nutritional, educational, health, water,
sanitation and hygiene supplies, through a number of cross -border shipments. More
than 57,000 people had improved access to clean water through the operation and
maintenance of water and sanitation systems. Primary health-care services were
provided to more than 99,000 people through mobile and fixed health services. More
than 16,000 children under the age of five years, as well as pregnant and lactating
women, were reached with micronutrient supplies. More than 21,000 children under
the age of five years, as well as pregnant and lactating women, were screened for
acute malnutrition, as a result of which 247 severely mal nourished children received
appropriate treatment.
29. In the southern Syrian Arab Republic, United Nations humanitarian cross border operations were suspended in late June. Those cross-border operations
remained suspended throughout the reporting period. The response of the United
Nations in the southern Syrian Arab Republic included the delivery of food assistance
to 73,785 people during August.
30. UNHCR and its partners continued to enhance the response to the protection
needs of internally displaced persons, returnees and other crisis-affected populations.
By the end of August, 1,108,921 individuals had been reached through protection
interventions, including 825,168 benefiting from general protection activities,
164,296 benefiting from child protection activities and 119,457 reached through
awareness-raising campaigns across 12 governorates on sexual and gender-based
violence prevention and response activities. As at the end of August 2018, the total
number of functioning UNHCR-funded community centres and mobile units stood at
97 community centres, 17 satellite centres and 85 mobile units, supported by 2,315
outreach volunteers. That network provided protection-related services, including
community mobilization, child protection, legal aid, the preven tion of and response
to sexual and gender-based violence, livelihood services and services for persons with
specific needs, to benefit some 2.6 million internally displaced persons, returnees,
members of host communities and other crisis-affected people across 12
governorates. In August, 138,551 internally displaced persons in Damascus, Rif
Dimashq, Suwayda’, Dar‘a, Qunaytirah, Tartus, Ladhiqiyah, Homs, Hama, Aleppo
and Hasakah were direct beneficiaries of the UNHCR legal assistance programme,
including counselling; awareness sessions on legal topics, including civil

8/14

18-15257

S/2018/845

documentation and women’s rights; and lawyers’ direct interventions before courts
and administrative bodies.
31. Moreover, the United Nations Population Fund reached some 328,000 people,
carrying out activities relating to reproductive health and the prevention of and
response to sexual and gender-based violence and youth-related violence. In addition,
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) distributed food parcels to some 175,000 Palestine refugees, and 9,939
Palestine refugees displaced from Yarmouk, eastern Ghutah and Dar ‘a received
ready-to-eat food baskets in August. A total of 2,645 individuals received cash
assistance through the regular cash distribution round, and 1,250 Palestine refugees
displaced from Yarmouk and eastern Ghutah benefited from a one -time payment of
$70 per family.
Figure II
Number of beneficiaries assisted by the United Nations and its partners by
cluster through cross-border humanitarian deliveries, August 2018
(Thousands)

750
574
198
0

Nutrition

20

48

Non-food Education
Water,
Non-food
items/
sanitation items/Shelter
shelter
and hygiene

Food

Health

Table 3
Number of beneficiaries targeted through cross-border deliveries by sector and
by district, August 2018
Education

Food

Health

Non-food
items/shelter

Nutrition

Water, sanitation
and hygiene

–

91 450

–

18 000

–

–

27 000

79 880

90 950

10 400

–

5 000

–

–

110 500

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

65 600

95 710

–

–

–

30 000

79 360

–

–

–

19 005

276 510

231 840

14 200

–

10 000

152 330

30 785

117 170

5 400

–

5 000

–

24 280

–

–

–

Governorate

District

Aleppo

I‘zaz

Aleppo

Jabal Sim‘an

Hasakah

Qamishli

Hama

Suqaylibiyah

–

Idlib

Ma‘arrah

–

Idlib

Ariha

–

Idlib

Harim

Idlib

Idlib

Idlib

Jisr al-Shughur

–

32. The Russian Federation sent informational bulletins to the United Nations from
the Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in the Syrian Arab Republic, in which
it outlined the provision of bilateral relief assistance. Other Member States also
continued to provide bilateral and other forms of humanitarian assistance.
18-15257

9/14

S/2018/845

Visas and registrations
33. A total of 41 new United Nations visa requests were submitted to the
Government in August. Of those, 18 were approved, 22 remained pending (taking into
consideration that 14 of the requests were submitted late in August) and 1 was
cancelled by the United Nations. Of the 26 previously submitted visa applications that
remained pending at the beginning of the reporting period, 17 were approved in
August, 8 remained pending and 1 was rejected. A total of 64 United Nations visa
renewal requests were submitted in August, of which 28 were approved and 36
remained pending (taking into consideration that 22 requests were submitted late in
August). Of the 39 previously submitted visa renewal r equests that remained pending
at the beginning of the reporting period, 35 were approved in August and 4 remained
pending.
34. A total of 24 international NGOs are registered with the Government to operate
in the country.
Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and premises
35. Agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system continued to
implement programmes in areas affected by frequent clashes among parties to the
conflict, air strikes, the regular exchange of indirect artillery fi re and asymmetrical
attacks. As a result of activities relating to the armed conflict, significant populated
areas became highly contaminated with unexploded ordnance, explosive remnants of
war and landmines, which pose an elevated risk to the implementati on of
humanitarian activities in those areas.
36. Since the beginning of the conflict, dozens of humanitarian workers have been
killed, including 22 staff members of the United Nations and organizations of the
United Nations system, 18 of whom were staff members of UNRWA; 66 staff
members and volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent; and 8 staff members and
volunteers of the Palestine Red Crescent Society. Many staff members of international
and national NGOs have also reportedly been killed.
37. A total of 27 staff members of agencies and programmes of the United Nations
system (1 staff member of the United Nations Development Programme and 26
UNRWA staff members) were detained or missing as at the end of the reporting
period.

III. Observations
38. I am deeply concerned about the growing risk of a humanitarian catastrophe in
in Idlib Governorate and the surrounding areas that form part of the last de -escalation
zone in the Syrian Arab Republic. Close to 3 million people are currently in that area ,
of whom some 2.1 million are already in need of humanitarian assistance. That
includes some 1.4 million people who are internally displaced, many of whom are in
overcrowded camps, in which basic services have for months been stretched to
breaking point. A major military operation in such a setting could create an emergency
at a scale not yet seen in the more than seven years of conflict in the Syrian Arab
Republic.
39. I have appealed to the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and all parties
to the conflict to exercise restraint and to respect their obligation under international
humanitarian law to protect civilians, who make up the vast majority of the population
in Idlib and the surrounding areas. I condemn the abuses perpetrated against civilians
in Idlib and elsewhere, which have included threats, intimidation, kidnappings and
killings, as well as restrictions on fundamental freedoms.
10/14

18-15257

S/2018/845

40. I remind all parties to the conflict of their obligations under international
humanitarian law to protect civilians and civilian objects; not to make civilian objects
the target of attack and to take special care in military operations to avoid damage to
buildings dedicated to education, including schools; and to respect and protect
medical personnel and not to direct attacks against hospitals and other medical
facilities. I recall that any use of chemical weapons is unlawful and completely
unacceptable. Moreover, the parties should ensure civilians’ freedom of movement
and must continue to protect civilians whether they choose to move or remain.
41. Ensuring safe, rapid, unhindered and sustained humanitarian access through the
most direct routes is critical to avoid a further deterioration of the humanitarian crisis.
I note in that regard that cross-border humanitarian assistance continues to provide
an indispensable lifeline for hundreds of thousands of people, notably in Idlib and
elsewhere across the Syrian Arab Republic. I recall that, in its resolutions 2165
(2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015) and 2393 (2017), the Security Council allows for
cross-border assistance to be provided through the most direct routes to reach those
in need. As I have stated previously, all methods of delivery are essential to the
efficient and effective provision of humanitarian assistance and to ensuring a needs based response.
42. I reiterate that the perpetrators of serious violations of international
humanitarian law must be held accountable. Such a step is central to achieving
sustainable peace in the Syrian Arab Republic. I reiterate my call for the situation in
the country to be referred to the International Criminal Court.
43. I also call upon all parties to the conflict, all States, civil society and the United
Nations system to cooperate fully with the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011, in particular by providing information and documentation.
44. As regards the persons reported missing as a result of the armed conflict, it
remains incumbent on the parties to the conflict to take all measures feasible, in
association with mandated international bodies, where relevant, to account for them.
I am particularly concerned about the fate and well-being of persons who have been
detained by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic or non-State armed
opposition groups. I call upon all parties to ensure that persons deprived of their
liberty are treated humanely, allowed to correspond with their families and not
sentenced without previous judgment pronounced by a regularly constituted court,
affording all judicial guarantees that are generally recognized as indispensable by
civilized peoples.
45. In view of the serious ongoing concerns repeatedly raised by OHCHR with
regard to the protection of civilians and other human rights issues in the Syrian Arab
Republic, I strongly urge the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, in line with
Human Rights Council resolutions S-18/1 and 19/22, to cooperate with OHCHR,
including through the establishment of a field presence with the mandate to protect
and promote human rights.
46. I continue to urge all parties to support my Special Envoy as he pursues his
efforts to support a sustainable political solution. I continue to call upon the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and Syrian opposition actors to cooperate
with the efforts of my Special Envoy to reach a political solution. The efforts of the
United Nations have only one goal, which should be shared by us all: to end the
suffering of the Syrian people and find a sustainable solution to the conflict in the
country through an inclusive and Syrian-led political process that meets the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people, in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva
communiqué of 30 June 2012.
18-15257

11/14

S/2018/845

Annex
Reported incidents affecting civilians recorded by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
August 2018 *
Aleppo Governorate
• On 10 August, at least 41 civilians, including 7 women and 20 children, were
killed and dozens of civilians were injured when what was allegedly an airstrike
hit a residential neighbourhood in the Urum al-Kubra area in opposition-held
western rural Aleppo Governorate. The airstrike reportedly resulted in
significant material damage.
• On 12 August, two adult sisters were abducted by masked armed men from their
home in the Zaydiyah neighbourhood of Afrin. According to the information
received, the perpetrators were alleged to be members of the military police of
the non-State armed opposition groups operating in the area.
• On 13 August, one civilian woman was killed and three children were injured
when an improvised explosive device, reportedly attached to a motorcycle,
detonated at around 3 p.m. in the vicinity of the Grand Mosque near the Bayt
al-Qanun area in Jarabulus. The device reportedly detonated close to a vehicle
of the non-State armed opposition group Jabhah al-Shamaliyah.
• On 14 August, at least five civilians were captured by the military police of
non-State armed opposition groups in the village of Korzileh, in the Shirawa
area of Afrin district.
• On 29 August, members of non-State armed opposition groups raided the house
of the Deputy Chief of the Ma‘batli local council in the village of Qantarah, in
the Ma‘batli area of Afrin district. The perpetrators physically assaulted him and
his family members then fled the area.
Ladhiqiyah Governorate
• On 7 August, unknown masked armed men abducted the health director of the
Al-Sahel Hospital, near the village of Ayn al-Bayda in opposition-held rural
Ladhiqiyah. The perpetrators reportedly took him from his residence inside the
hospital after having beaten and handcuffed the security guards and stolen a
hospital vehicle. He was released on 12 August, reportedly after a ransom was
paid.
Suwayda’ Governorate
• On 2 August, Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) reportedly beheaded a
civilian hostage that the group had abducted from eastern rural Suwayda ’ on
25 July, along with several other civilians, including women and children. ISIL
issued a video of the beheading, in which it identified the young man ’s name
and village (Shabki) and demanded the release of ISIL members in the custody
of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic in exchange fo r the release of
civilian hostages being held by ISIL.
* In line with Security Council resolution 2258 (2015), the present description of incidents that
are reported to have occurred during the month relates to compliance with Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) by all parties in the Syrian Arab Republic. The
information is provided without prejudice to the work of the Task Force on the Ceasefire of the
International Syria Support Group. The reporting is not a comprehensive listing of all violations
of international humanitarian law and violations and abuses of international human rights law
that took place in the Syrian Arab Republic during the reporting period.
12/14

18-15257

S/2018/845

Dar‘a Governorate
• On 2 August, six civilian men from two families from the Ma ‘arriyah Valley, in
the Yarmouk Basin in western rural Dar‘a Governorate, were arrested by
government security forces during a screening process conducted in the
Ma‘arriyah camp for internally displaced persons. The men were reportedly
internally displaced persons from Shajarah in the Yarmouk Basin who had fled
that town owing to the intensified bombardment there. On the same day, at least
72 other men were reportedly arrested by government security forces in house
raids in the Lajah region of north-eastern Dar‘a.
• On 11 August, 10 men who reportedly had been on board buses evacuating
around 500 persons (including non-State armed opposition fighters and their
families, as well as civilians who had refused to reconcile with the Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic) from the town of Jasim in western rural Dar ‘a to
Idlib Governorate were arrested by Government security forces. The buses were
stopped in the town of Jibab, in Dar‘a, at a checkpoint controlled by members
of the Air Force Intelligence, who reportedly boarded the buses with masked
men, who identified the men as being ISIL affiliates. On the same day, at least
25 other men were arrested by government forces in the town of Da ’il in western
Dar‘a Governorate for unknown reasons; 12 of those men were reportedly
released a few hours later, after Russian forces allegedly reassured the local
population that those found not to be linked with ISIL would be released.
• Between 4 and 16 August, nine civilians, including one woman and two
children, were killed as a result of unexploded ordnance that detonated in
different areas in Dar‘a Governorate. On 4 August, two children were killed in
the towns of Shajarah and Nahtah in eastern and western rural Dar ‘a.
• Between 18 and 22 August, five civilian men were reportedly arrested after their
homes were raided by members of the Air Force Intelligence in the towns of
Mahajjah, Uthman, Jibab and Sayda in rural Dar‘a Governorate. Unconfirmed
reports suggested they had been accused of affiliation with ISIL.
Dayr al-Zawr Governorate
• On 23 August, a child was killed and three other civilians were injured when
unexploded ordnance detonated in the village of Kashmah in the eastern rural
Albu Kamal area of eastern Dayr al-Zawr Governorate.
• On 29 August, a civilian was killed when unexploded ordnance detonated in the
village of Mahkan in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr.
Idlib Governorate
• On 2 August, at around 3 p.m., a civilian woman was killed and 10 other
civilians were injured in what was allegedly an attack employing a vehicle borne improvised explosive device that detonated in a garage area in the centre
of Idlib.
• On 6, 8 and 9 August, Hay’at Tahrir Al-Sham — an Al-Qaeda affiliate — and
other non-State armed opposition groups imposed curfews and captured
civilians in southern and eastern Idlib Governorate and in northern rural Hama
Governorate. Reportedly, hundreds of civilian men who had been accused of
promoting reconciliation with the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic were
captured and detained at unknown places run by Hay’at Tahrir Al-Sham and
non-State armed opposition groups. Unconfirmed reports suggested that many
of those detained had been released, but the Office of the United Nations High

18-15257

13/14

S/2018/845

Commissioner for Human Rights could not substantiate such reports. Non-State
armed opposition groups have reportedly told the population in Idlib that they
would capture anyone who called for reconciliation deals with the Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic.
• On 10 August, 12 civilians were reportedly killed and 38 civilians were injured
when what were alleged to be airstrikes and ground-based strikes hit areas of
western and southern rural Idlib, bordering Ladhiqiyah and Hama Governorates,
including the following:
– Seven civilians, including 2 women, were killed and 23 civilians were
injured in Khan Shaykhun district in southern rural Idlib
– Three civilians, including 1 child, were killed and 2 civilians were injured,
including 1 woman, in the town of Tah in Khan Shaykhun
– Twelve civilians were injured, including 2 women and 2 children, in the
area of Tamani‘ah, in south-eastern Idlib
– One civilian was injured in the town of Kafr Ayn
– One civilian was killed in Jisr al-Shughur, in western rural Idlib
• On 11 August, a child was killed when what was alleged to be an airstrike hit
the town of Tamani‘ah, in Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man district of southern rural Idlib.
• On 12 August, 67 persons, including at least 6 women and 10 children, were
reportedly killed and 37 persons were injured in a massive explosion inside a
residential building in the Bab al-Hawa neighbourhood of the town of Dana, in
northern Idlib. Conflicting reports suggested that the building had either been a
weapons depot that had exploded for unknown reasons, or that the explosion
had occurred while non-State armed opposition groups were making improvised
explosive devices inside the residential building.
• On 13 August, a woman was killed in the village of Tah and a child was killed
in the village of Tahtaya, both in Khan Shaykhun district, in what were alleged
to be ground-based strikes.
• On 13 August, the health director of the al-Imad Hospital in Khan Shaykhun,
southern rural Idlib,H was abducted from his hospital, reportedly by members
of Hay’at Tahrir Al-Sham. He was released less than 24 hours later. The reasons
for his kidnapping and release are unknown.
• On 19 August, at least 13 civilian men from the villages of Salqin, Azmarin and
Ma‘arratmisrin in northern rural Idlib were taken from their homes after raids
by Hay’at Tahrir Al-Sham. Reportedly, the men had been accused of promoting
reconciliation with the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic.
• On 29 August, reportedly no fewer than 30 civilian men from the villages of
Buraysah, Tall al-Shih, Halbah and Eastern Dayr in eastern rural Idlib were
taken from their homes after raids by Hay’at Tahrir Al-Sham. Reportedly, the
men had been accused of promoting reconciliation with the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
• On 30 August, between 10 and 11 p.m., the health director of the specialized
surgical hospital in Idlib was abducted from his house in the city by unidentified
masked armed men. Reportedly, civilians found him unconscious a few hours
later on a street in the Ma‘arratmisrin area, located around 9 km north of Idlib.
The doctor was taken to hospital for treatment, and preliminary photographs
taken of him suggested that his body bore signs of torture and abuse.

14/14

18-15257
