UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1998/330
15 April 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 15 APRIL 1998 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE SECURITY COUNCIL

Pursuant to paragraphs 12 and 13 of Security Council resolution 1153 (1998)
of 20 February 1998, I have the honour to submit to the Security Council the
executive summary of the report of the group of experts established pursuant to
paragraph 12 of the resolution to determine, in consultation with the Government
of Iraq, whether Iraq is able to export petroleum or petroleum products
sufficient to produce the total sum referred to in paragraph 2 of the
resolution, not exceeding a total of US$ 5.256 billion (see annex). The group
of experts visited Iraq from 12 to 22 March 1998 and were accompanied by two
United Nations oil overseers. The full report of the group of experts is being
made available to the members of the Council.
After the adoption of Security Council resolution 1153 (1998), I was
informed by the Government of Iraq that it had no objection to increasing
revenues from the sale of its petroleum. The Government emphasized, however,
that in view of the present technically precarious condition of the structure
for the production, processing and transportation of its petroleum, and in view
of the extremely low level of petroleum prices at present, it was not at all
possible to guarantee that Iraq had the capacity to achieve the increase in
production required to realize the maximum sum indicated in the resolution.
According to the Government, assuming that the requirements for spare parts
and repairs are met urgently, the new sum will not exceed $4 billion, and it is
highly probable that it will be between $3.5 billion and $4 billion. It may be
recalled that the price per barrel was $18 when the Memorandum of Understanding
was first implemented, compared with the present price of $10.50 per barrel for
Iraqi crude oil.
In paragraph 13 of its resolution 1153 (1998), the Security Council
requested the Secretary-General to report to it if Iraq was unable to export
petroleum or petroleum products sufficient to produce the total sum
($5.256 billion) and, following consultations with the relevant United Nations
agencies and the Iraqi authorities, to make recommendations for the expenditure
of the sum expected to be available, consistent with the distribution plan
referred to in paragraph 5 of the resolution.

98-10489 (E)

150498

/...

S/1998/330
English
Page 2

The group of experts is less optimistic than the Government of Iraq is
regarding the Government’s capacity to meet the $4 billion target during the
period envisaged. Its overall impression is that the oil industry of Iraq is in
a lamentable state and that the developed oilfields have had their productivity
seriously reduced, some irreparably, during the past two decades. In its view,
the oil processing and treatment facilities, refineries and storage terminals in
the country have been severely damaged and continue to deteriorate, and that
this deterioration, particularly in the oilfields, will accelerate until
significant action is taken to contain and relieve the problems. The group of
experts has strong doubts that the production profile of 3 million barrels
per day, as projected by the Government, will be sustainable for the period
envisaged. It has also stated that a sharp increase in production without
concurrent expenditure on spare parts and equipment would severely damage oilcontaining rocks and pipeline systems, and would be against accepted principles
of "good oilfield husbandry".
According to the group of experts, should the current average price of
$10.50 per barrel for Iraqi crude oil remain unchanged, based on the existing
export capacity of 1.6 million barrels per day, revenues in the amount of only
$3 billion could be achieved during a 180-day period, starting in June 1998,
provided the spare parts required are ordered immediately. During a 180-day
period starting in December 1998, Iraq could export 1.7 million barrels a day,
generating $3.9 billion based on a price of $12.50 per barrel.
The two United Nations oil overseers who accompanied the group of experts
have also indicated that the Iraqi oil industry is in desperate need of spare
parts in order to comply with the provisions of Security Council resolution
1153 (1998). They share the view of the group of experts that the request by
the Ministry of Oil for $300 million for spare parts - $210 million for upstream
operations and $90 million for downstream operations - is reasonable and that it
reflects only the most essential and urgent needs of the Iraqi oil industry.
The list of the spare parts needed is provided in annex IV to the report of the
group of experts. The United Nations oil overseers have indicated that the
current condition of the "downstream" storage and transportation sectors of the
Iraqi oil industry seriously affects the ability to produce petroleum and
petroleum products for export under the provisions of the programme. The group
of experts is presently carrying out a comprehensive review of the list of spare
parts provided by the Government with a view to fully verifying the price,
delivery time and relevance of all the items concerned. Owing to time
constraints, the review could not be completed before the present letter was
finalized, although it is expected to be completed very soon. Once the review
has been completed, copies of the list with comments thereon by the experts will
be made available to the Security Council Committee established by Council
resolution 661 (1990) of 6 August 1990.
The group of experts visited suitable warehouses in both the northern and
southern parts of Iraq, and has provided in the main report details of the
methodology of monitoring the arrival, storage and utilization of the spare
parts. The two United Nations oil overseers share the view of the group of
experts in that regard.

/...

S/1998/330
English
Page 3

In view of the determination made that under the existing circumstances
Iraq is unable to export petroleum or petroleum products sufficient to produce
the total sum of $5.256 billion referred to in resolution 1153 (1998), it is
recommended that the Security Council decide that the authorization given to
States by paragraph 1 of its resolution 986 (1995) of 14 April 1995 shall permit
the import of petroleum and petroleum products originating in Iraq, including
financial and other essential transactions directly relating thereto, sufficient
to produce a sum, in the next 180-day period, of up to $4 billion, on the
understanding that as and when the increased funds become available, they will
be utilized on a priority basis as reflected in the approved distribution plan
prepared pursuant to paragraph 5 of resolution 1153 (1998). As the revenues
generated will depend not only on increased exports of oil but also on the
market price of oil exported, the Council may in addition wish to decide to
review further the level of the sum authorized during its interim review of the
report of the Secretary-General to be submitted pursuant to paragraph 10 of
resolution 1153 (1998), also taking into account the progress made in the
ordering and arrival of spare parts and repairs.
With respect to spare parts, it may be recalled that in paragraph 12 of its
resolution 1153 (1998), the Security Council expressed its readiness to take a
decision, on the basis of the recommendations of the Secretary-General,
regarding authorization of the export of the necessary equipment to enable Iraq
to increase the export of petroleum or petroleum products and to give the
appropriate direction to the Committee established by resolution 661 (1990). I
wish to recommend to the Council that it authorize the export to Iraq of the
equipment necessary to enable Iraq to increase most urgently the export of
petroleum or petroleum products. As indicated above, the total cost of the
spare parts and equipment needed is estimated at $300 million ($210 million for
upstream requirements and $90 million for downstream requirements). For
covering the cost of the spare parts and equipment, the Council may wish to
apply the procedures outlined in paragraph 10 of resolution 986 (1995).
In order to expedite the approval process for the spare parts and
equipment, it is recommended to the Security Council that it consider the
possibility of authorizing the United Nations oil overseers to approve contracts
for spare parts, once the list is reviewed and finalized by the Security Council
Committee, pursuant to the same procedures currently applied for oil contracts,
on the understanding that the required expertise and technical support will be
made available to the oil overseers, as appropriate. An effective monitoring of
spare parts, from approval to delivery in Iraq, storage and utilization, will be
ensured. Should this recommendation be acceptable to the Council, I will submit
to the Security Council Committee, after the comprehensive review of the list of
spare parts referred to above, details for the monitoring of spare parts inside
Iraq.
At my invitation, a delegation from Iraq led by the Minister of Foreign
Affairs, His Excellency Mr. Mohammed Said Al-Sahaf, visited New York from 9 to
13 March 1998 to review with the Secretariat the implementation of resolution
1153 (1998) and the preparation of the distribution plan. At present,
consultations are under way between the United Nations and the technical
ministries in Iraq regarding the preparation of the draft distribution plan.
After the Security Council’s decision on the level of the sum to be available in
/...

S/1998/330
English
Page 4

the next phase for the humanitarian programme, the Government of Iraq will
submit the draft distribution plan for my consideration and approval.
I should like to take this opportunity to thank the members of the group of
experts, the United Nations oil overseers and Saybolt Nederland B.V. for their
valuable contribution as well as to the Government of Iraq for its full
cooperation with the group of experts.

(Signed)

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1998/330
English
Page 5

Annex
Report of the group of experts established pursuant to
paragraph 12 of Security Council resolution 1153 (1998)

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1.1

Terms of reference

1.
Paragraphs 12 and 13 of Security Council resolution 1153 (1998) of
20 February 1998 read as follows:
"12. Requests the Secretary-General to establish a group of experts to
determine in consultation with the Government of Iraq whether Iraq is able
to export petroleum or petroleum products sufficient to produce the total
sum referred to in paragraph 2 above and to prepare an independent report
on Iraqi production and transportation capacity and necessary monitoring,
also requests him in the light of that report to make early and appropriate
recommendations and expresses its readiness to take a decision, on the
basis of these recommendations and the humanitarian objectives of this
resolution, notwithstanding paragraph 3 of resolution 661 (1990), regarding
authorization of the export of the necessary equipment to enable Iraq to
increase the export of petroleum or petroleum products and to give the
appropriate directions to the Committee established by resolution
661 (1990);"
"13. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Council, if Iraq
is unable to export petroleum or petroleum products sufficient to produce
the total sum referred to in paragraph 2 above, and following consultations
with relevant United Nations agencies and the Iraqi authorities, making
recommendations for the expenditure of the sum expected to be available,
consistent with the distribution plan referred to in paragraph 5 above;"
1.2

Introduction

2.
At the request of the Secretary-General, a group of experts visited Iraq to
ascertain the current export capacity of crude oil and petroleum products, and
also to review and assess the potential for increased exports of crude oil and
petroleum products.
3.
The group consisted of six experts, each with a specific oil industry
background. Two of the United Nations oil overseers accompanied the group. The
group visited Iraq from 12 to 22 March 1998, to observe the condition of the
production and transportation facilities necessary for the export of petroleum
and petroleum products.

/...

S/1998/330
English
Page 6

4.

The scope and purpose of the site visits were:
-

To establish current crude production capacity;

-

To establish the condition of the oilfields and relevant production
capabilities;

-

To establish the condition of crude oil processing and treatment
facilities;

-

To establish the status of the storage terminals and transportation
infrastructure;

-

To identify the necessity, cost and implementation time-frame for
required spare parts and repairs;

-

To inspect local refineries.

All elements have been examined and the results are given in detail in the
report.
1.3

Methodology

5.
In order to satisfy the terms of reference, the group of experts needed to
maximize the collection and verification of data within the time-frame
allocated. This was achieved, after initial meetings with the Ministry of Oil
in Baghdad, by visits to the North Oil Company, based in Kirkuk, the South Oil
Company, based in Basrah, and numerous site inspections in both areas including a cross-section of production facilities, processing plants, tank
farms, pumping stations, metering sites and refineries. The group of experts
separated into two teams at various locations in order to facilitate greater
coverage.
6.
Owing to the lack of measurement equipment operating at all stages of
production and transportation (except at the export installations of Ceyhan and
Mina Al-Bakr) estimates were made based on:
-

Physical inspection coupled with on-site discussion with experienced
operators;

-

Information supplied at various meetings and briefing sessions with
the Oil Ministry, North and South Oil Companies, and refinery/plant
visits;

-

Analysis of historical data;

-

On-site application of the group’s accumulated experience and
subsequent discussion.

At all stages the group noted the physical condition of plant as seen, and
obtained photographic and video records.

/...

S/1998/330
English
Page 7

1.4

General observations

7.
The group of experts’ overall general impression is that the oil industry
of Iraq is in a lamentable state. The developed oilfields have had their
productivity seriously reduced, some irreparably, during the past two decades.
The oil processing and treatment facilities, refineries and storage terminals in
the country have been severely damaged and continue to deteriorate. This
deterioration, particularly in the oilfields, will accelerate until significant
action is taken to contain and relieve the problems.
8.
Although measurement devices are non-existent at Iraq’s oil producing
fields, the team has identified oilfield production and treatment as one major
constraint with respect to increased production. Because of the age and
precarious physical condition of the main fields there is strong doubt among the
experts that the production profile of 3 million barrels per day (bpd), as the
Government of Iraq is endeavouring to achieve, will be sustainable for the
period under review. A sharp increase in production without concurrent
expenditure on spare parts and equipment would severely damage oil-containing
rocks and pipeline systems, and would be against accepted principles of "good
oilfield husbandry".
9.
A second major constraint is that the transportation system and
intermediary storage within Iraq are significantly compromised and need repairs
at critical points. Significant issues are the degradation of the 40-inch
pipeline, major losses in pumping capability and reduced intermediary storage
capacity in the north, with identical problems in the south.
10. A third constraint is the need for proper coordination of loading schedules
at the offshore terminal at Mina Al-Bakr, supported by efficient and reliable
tugboats and mooring boats.
11. Provided that the pipeline infrastructure and intermediary storage to the
loading facilities in Ceyhan and Mina Al-Bakr are brought up to standard, there
may be no need to utilize other existing pipelines for increasing export
volumes.
1.5

The current overall capacity as advised by the Ministry of Oil

12. According to the Ministry of Oil, the following is the present capacity in
barrels per day before repairs and improvements are undertaken:

Production
Local consumption
Available for export

1.6

2 330 000 bpd
700 000 bpd
1 630 000 bpd

Historical data of oil exports under the oil-for-food programme

13. All exports under the oil-for-food programme have been monitored by
Saybolt, and the table below shows the rates of exports per day under the
current mechanism:
/...

S/1998/330
English
Page 8

Phase I average export
Phase II average export
Phase III
- February 1998 average export
- March 1998 average export

1.7

664 000 bpd
1 124 000 bpd
1 121 000 bpd
1 223 000 bpd

Proposals to increase production

14. At the first meeting between the group of experts and officials of the
Ministry of Oil, it was stated by the officials that the targets proposed and
already submitted to the United Nations were:

Time-frame

Production

Current production
Achievable within two to three months
Achievable within six months
Achievable within 18 months

2 300 000 bpd
2 650 000 bpd
3 000 000 bpd
3 500 000 bpd

The expenditure required to reach these targets would be:
US$ 340 million to reach 3 million bpd production within six months
$400 million to sustain 3 million bpd production over a 12 month period
$300 million extra to reach 3.5 million bpd production within 18 months
15. Nevertheless, the Ministry of Oil was also cognizant of the high level of
proposed expenditure, and its effect on the availability of funds for
humanitarian aid, and had produced a revised spare parts estimate, indicating
the lowest possible figure to achieve 3 million bpd production within six
months. The revised figure was $210 million.
16. In addition, the Ministry produced spare parts documentation requesting a
further expenditure of $90 million related to "downstream" operations. The
downstream operation comprises the operation from refinery to consumer. The
requirements vary for spare parts and repairs for petrol stations, liquified
petroleum gas filling units, etc. While not strictly relevant to the group of
experts’ objectives in relation to the increase of oil exports, these
requirements have been noted, and the request is considered to be reasonable.
17. The increase in production from 2.3 million bpd to 3 million bpd over six
months is planned for both the north and south, as follows:

North
South
Total

Current

Three months

Six months

1 000 000 bpd
1 300 000 bpd
2 300 000 bpd

1 055 000 bpd
1 600 000 bpd
2 650 000 bpd

1 162 000 bpd
1 800 000 bpd
2 962 000 bpd
/...

S/1998/330
English
Page 9

18. The accurate verification of production figures is not currently possible,
as the oil industry in Iraq has no functioning internal monitoring system in
operation. Wellhead production is not measured, movement between terminals is
only estimated or is based on non-calibrated meters and/or storage tanks, and
the whole operation is close to collapse.
1.8

Export of petroleum products and local consumption

19. The Government of Iraq indicated to the group of experts that the export of
petroleum products would not be considered, mainly in view of the poor quality
of the products and the lack of refining capacity. It is considering, however,
the initial export of some 30,000 to 50,000 bpd of straight-run fuel oil
(atmospheric residue) by direct injection into the Kirkuk-Yumurtalik pipeline in
Iraq, before the metering station at Zakho, thus mixing it with Kirkuk crude
exports. If marketable, this may be increased to 100,000 bpd.
20. Observation of the working refineries in Iraq has shown that the condition
of the refineries in general is indeed poor. Significant pollution and
environmental damage has also been noted. The current refining capacity and
consumption is about 700,000 bpd, consisting of 620,000 bpd of local refining
capacity and 80,000 bpd exported to Jordan. Local consumption is deducted from
overall production to derive the potential export volume/value.
1.9

Group of experts’ estimate of local consumption

21. The estimate of quantity available for export automatically requires an
estimate of local consumption. The group of experts has estimated local
consumption to be 630,000 bpd. This has been calculated by reference to
production throughputs provided by refinery staff and plant operators
interviewed during site visits. The estimate is summarized in the relevant
appendix to the report.
1.10 Group of experts’ opinion on spare parts and repairs
22. In view of the deplorable state of the oil industry, the group discussed
with the relevant authorities of the Government of Iraq the priorities for
essential action. As indicated, the group had received a list of spare parts
based on a minimum spare parts requirement of $210 million. An initial
investigation into the key items affecting short-term production increase and
transportation suggested delivery times of two to six months and prices
marginally higher than estimated. A fully comprehensive review of the lists, in
respect of prices, relevance and delivery time, is expected to be completed
soon.
23. With regard to the monitoring of incoming spare parts and repairs, the
group visited suitable warehouses in both the northern and southern parts of
Iraq. The methodology of monitoring the arrival, storage and utilization of the
spare parts is described in more detail in the report.

/...

S/1998/330
English
Page 10

1.11 Conclusions
24. Without rapid and adequate investment in spare parts and repair of the
production wells, plus the development of a number of smaller fields, the gap
between the existing decline curve and the projected increment in crude oil
production will grow wider for each month that financing is delayed.
25. The oil industry of Iraq has the expertise and technical knowledge to
increase production gradually over the next 18 months.
26. The incremental increase in the "production versus time" scenario proposed
by the Ministry of Oil is a reasonable one, representing a viable optimization
of the large number of petroleum-engineering variables in the equation. The
Iraqi-proposed profile, however, is deemed optimistic with regard to the gross
volumes predicted, as well as unrealistic in terms of timing (see table below).

Profile
Ministry of Oil
Group of experts

Current production

After three months

After six months

2 300 000 bpd
2 160 000 bpd

2 650 000 bpd
2 130 000 bpd

2 962 000 bpd
2 360 000 bpd

27. Current production as indicated above by the group of experts is
2,160,000 bpd. This results in a daily export capacity of 1,530,000 bpd, taking
into consideration that, according to the group’s estimate, 630,000 bpd is used
for local consumption.
28. As described above, Iraq is presently exporting approximately
1,200,000 bpd. With a current capacity of 1,530,000 bpd, an immediate increase
of 300,000 bpd is realistic and, once spare parts arrive and repairs begin, a
gradual increase will be noticeable after four to six months.
29. The forecast in production versus time is based on the utilization of spare
parts estimated at $210 million.
30. However, to ensure gradually increasing and sustainable crude oil
production and the improvement of the oil industry of Iraq in general, with due
regard to environmental and pollution issues, the group of experts estimates
that the total expenditure required will be approximately $1.2 billion to reach
production levels of 3 million bpd.
31. Based on the above, it is difficult to predict accurately the proceeds of
the export figures as stated in the table, since they will be heavily influenced
by the world oil market. It seems very unlikely, however, that proceeds of
$5.256 billion during the 180-day period will be reached, since this would
require an average oil price over the period of $16.90 per barrel of exported
Iraqi oil.
32. On the basis of the group of experts’ estimate of total production less
local consumption (after arrival of spare parts), sales during a period of 180

/...

S/1998/330
English
Page 11

days, based on prices of $12.50 and $14.50 per barrel of exported Iraqi oil, are
envisaged as follows:

Sales after six months
Sales after nine months

$12.50 per barrel

$14.50 per barrel

$3.9 billion
$5.0 billion

$4.5 billion
$5.8 billion

33. The group of experts’ assessment, taking into account the numerous
technical variables involved and given the availability of the necessary spare
parts and repairs indicated and amounting to an estimated $210 million, is that
the Government of Iraq’s volume targets are optimistic, and that the time-frame
for reaching its predicted figures, and therefore export targets, will slip.
However, these production/time variations have significantly less effect on the
dollar value of exports than the current price differentials in crude oil.

------
