S/PV.8493

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8493

rd meeting
Wednesday, 27 March 2019, 10.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Trullols Yabra
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Goolab
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-08685 (E)
*1908685*

S/PV.8493

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, and Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham,
Director, Coordination Division, United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: Earlier this month, the Syrian
conflict entered its ninth year. There have been eight
long, horrendous years of suffering by the Syrian
people, and it seems far from over.
The Secretary-General has watched with great
concern the deterioration of the situation in Idlib in
recent weeks amid escalating violence. We have seen
reports of exchanges of artillery and mortars and of
air strikes, some reported to have hit civilian targets,
causing civilian casualties and further displacement of
tens of thousands. There are reports of rocket attacks
in cross-line raids by Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, which
have resulted in casualties among Government soldiers
and civilians.
The United Nations is worried about the strain
this escalation has placed on the memorandum of
understanding between Russia and Turkey, which,
since September 2018, has largely contained the scope
of military operations in the area. We hope that the
recently announced coordinated patrols by Russia and
Turkey will help avoid further escalation in the northwest, urge them to uphold their agreed arrangements
for Idlib, and press all concerned to halt violence and
stabilize a dangerous situation.
We also call on the guarantors to work together
to address the issue of Security Council-listed
2/24

27/03/2019

terrorist groups in full compliance with international
humanitarian law, which is essential to avoid mass
displacement and yet another humanitarian catastrophe
from unfolding. Last week, the Syrian Democratic
Forces, backed by the United States-led international
coalition, proclaimed the capture of Baghouz, the last
remaining territory in Syria held by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), which is an important
advance in combating terrorist groups that have inflicted
untold misery on countless victims. However, much
work remains to be done to fully address ISIL’s threat.
Meanwhile, thousands, mostly women and children,
are fleeing counter-ISIL operations in Deir ez-Zor and
have found their way to the Al-Hol camp, in Hasakah
governorate. More than 140 children have died on the
road or shortly after arriving at Al-Hol camp. There is
a desperate need to maintain and ramp up the response
to meet the humanitarian and protection needs of some
72,000 people there, with thousands more expected
to arrive.
In the north-east, the United Nations is strongly
encouraging international diplomatic efforts to
ensure military escalation is avoided at all costs. Any
escalation in the north-east could lead to devastating
consequences for civilians and create conditions
conducive to ISIL’s re-emergence. I reiterate the
Secretary-General’s reminder to the international
community: counter-terrorism operations cannot
override the responsibilities to protect civilians.
The Council will soon hear from my colleague from
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
but I add my own call for sustained and unimpeded
delivery of humanitarian relief to civilians throughout
Syria, but in particular to Rukban, where the United
Nations last delivered assistance in mid-February. We
have had reports that other commercial routes have
been cut, leaving the settlements’ inhabitants in an
even more vulnerable position. The United Nations
is working with all parties to find a durable solution,
including relocation of the settlements’ residents to
their areas of origin or of their choosing.
A durable solution can succeed only through a
carefully planned principled approach that ensures
respect for core protection standards. It requires
constructive engagement and coordination by all
parties involved: the Syrian Government, the armed
opposition group present in the settlement, Russia,
the United States and Jordan. Meanwhile, the United
19-08685

27/03/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Nations is awaiting approval from the Government for
humanitarian access for a third convoy of life-saving
assistance. I encourage all parties to cooperate with the
sense of urgency that these humanitarian issues deserve.
Sustained de-escalation towards an eventual
nationwide ceasefire and tangible improvements for
Syrian lives are essential for a credible political process
that can achieve the full implementation of resolution
2254 (2015).
In that regard, Special Envoy Pedersen has been
seeking to advance the five goals outlined to the
Council on 28 February (see S/PV.8475). The goals
are, first, to begin and deepen a sustained dialogue
with the Syrian Government and the opposition on
building trust and confidence towards a safe, calm and
neutral environment; secondly, to see more concrete
action on detainees, abductees and missing persons;
thirdly, to engage and involve a wide range of Syrians
in the political process; fourthly, to convene a credible,
balanced and inclusive constitutional committee as soon
as possible; and, fifthly, to help the international parties
deepen their own dialogue towards the common purpose
of a credible and sustainable political settlement of the
Syrian conflict that can enjoy international legitimacy.
On the first goal, the Special Envoy held a second
meeting with the Government of Syria in Damascus
and a second meeting with the opposition Syrian
Negotiation Commission in Riyadh. Both consultations
have gone into depth on the issues covered in resolution
2254 (2015). No subject has been off limits and both
parties welcome a broad-ranging dialogue. That regular
and deep engagement is necessary to identify concrete
steps to build trust and confidence towards a safe, calm
and neutral environment.
Our second goal — concrete action on the release
of detainees, abductees and the clarification of the fate
of missing persons — was also raised in depth with
the Government and the opposition. On 18 March in
Moscow, the Office of the Special Envoy put forth a
number of concrete suggestions to the Working Group
on the release of detainees/abductees and handover
of the bodies as well as the identification of missing
persons, of which the United Nations is a member, along
with Iran, Russia and Turkey. A key United Nations
request was to move beyond one-for-one exchanges and
focus on the simultaneous release of unequal numbers,
which was met with no objection from other members
of the Working Group. However, details about the next

S/PV. 8493

release operation, including the numbers of those to be
released and the timing and monitoring of the release,
still need to be worked out, in close cooperation with
the Syrian parties. Furthermore, the United Nations has
proposed that the Working Group meet in Geneva in the
near future.
Ultimately, the Secretary-General wants these
discussions to move from good words to good deeds,
see the release of as many detained persons as possible
and clarify the fate of missing persons. Progress on that
file could build confidence that a new Syria is possible,
especially for those who want to return. So many Syrian
families have been affected, and they yearn to see the
issue meaningfully addressed.
On the third goal, engagement continues to
ensure that the priorities and voices of a broad range
of Syrians, within Syria and across the diaspora, are
included in the political process. Most recently, the
United Nations heard the diverse voices of the Syrian
Women’s Advisory Board and Syrian civil society
during the third Brussels Conference on Supporting the
Future of Syria. We heard about how the conflict has
impacted their lives, but also about their strength and
resilience in responding to the terrible needs created by
the conflict. Such broad-based engagement with all the
dimensions of Syrian society helps to strengthen Syrian
ownership in shaping its future. Those necessary but
difficult discussions are a microcosm of the meaningful
engagement required from both of the negotiating
parties. The issues affecting Syrians, including
obstacles preventing voluntary, safe and dignified
returns, must be addressed. A political settlement that
meets their needs and legitimate aspirations would help
to advance that.
On the constitutional committee, the fourth goal
aimed at opening the door to a broader political process,
the discussions so far, including with the Government
and the opposition, have led to an agreement in principle
that a viable launch of a constitutional committee would
require a set of understandings to regulate its work.
That would need to include understandings regarding
the committee’s mandate, structure, voting and sharing
arrangements; the United Nations facilitation role and
assurances regarding the safety and security of all
constitutional committee participants. Discussions
are also continuing to facilitate the finalization of the
middle third list of committee members. There are no
artificial deadlines, but the Special Envoy hopes now to
be able to move forward as soon as possible to convene

19-086853/24

S/PV.8493

The situation in the Middle East

a credible, balanced, inclusive and viable constitutional
committee under United Nations auspices in Geneva.
We must remain committed to seeking a minimum of
30 per cent women’s representation on the committee.
The fifth goal is to improve international dialogue
and cooperation on Syria. The situations in Idlib,
Rukban and Al-Hol, the uncertainty over the north-east
and the potential for regional escalation all underscore
the need for such continuous cooperation. We must
avoid misunderstandings and actions that could
escalate matters.
In that regard, Secretary-General has taken note
of the developments regarding the occupied Syrian
Golan. The United Nations position is determined by
the Security Council and General Assembly resolutions
on that issue. The efforts of the United Nations to
facilitate a political process in Syria, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015), will continue to fully uphold the
principles of Syria’s sovereignty, unity, independence
and territorial integrity.
Finally, we welcome the generosity expressed by
the donors at the Brussels Conference and their record
pledges to support the Syrian people and the wide
expressions of support by all attendees for a political
settlement for Syria under United Nations auspices.
As the Secretary-General reminded us on the grim
anniversary of the conflict, it is a moral obligation and
a political imperative for the international community
to support Syrians in uniting around a vision that
addresses the root causes of the conflict and forges
a negotiated political solution in accordance with the
Council’s own resolution 2254 (2015).
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Rajasingham.
Mr. Rajasingham: This month marks the eighth
year since the Syrian crisis began — eight years of
lives being uprooted; eight years of families being torn
apart; eight years of children being needlessly exposed
to traumatic violence.
Eight years on, the humanitarian crisis in Syria is
far from over. United Nations assessments indicate that
11.7 million people require humanitarian assistance
and protection inside the country in 2019. More than
5.6 million Syrians live as refugees across the region.
And while violence has decreased in many locations, in
4/24

27/03/2019

others, recent weeks have seen increasing numbers of
civilians being killed and injured.
The situation in Idlib and surrounding areas in
the north-west of Syria remains of grave concern. The
agreement to establish a demilitarized zone, announced
by the Russian Federation and Turkey on 17 September
2018, was followed by a reduction in violence across
much of the north-west. But recent weeks have seen
an alarming spike in civilian casualties and new
displacement, with increased shelling along the front
lines, an intensification of air strikes and a growing
number of attacks involving improvised explosive
devices in urban areas, including Idlib city. Residential
areas in Aleppo city have also been targeted with mortar
and sniper fire. Last month alone, 90 people were killed,
of whom nearly half were children. At least 86,000
people have also reportedly been displaced by this
latest upsurge of violence. Health facilities, including
a hospital in Saraqib city, which had been deconflicted
with the parties through established procedures and
schools are reported to have been hit.
Last August, the Secretary-General spoke about
the “growing risks of a humanitarian catastrophe in the
event of a full-scale military operation in Idlib”. Today,
those risks continue to loom large. Humanitarian
organizations continue to respond to needs in Idlib and
to prepare for the possibility of further deterioration,
but, as we have stated previously, a full-scale military
onslaught in the area would overwhelm humanitarian
response capacities. We therefore reiterate the
Secretary-General’s call on all parties to exercise
restraint and to prioritize the protection of civilians. It
is critical that respect for international humanitarian
law and human rights be at the centre of the parties’
military efforts to address the challenging situation on
the ground in the north-west.
Tens of thousands of displaced people — the vast
majority of whom are women and children — have
continued to arrive at Al-Hol camp in Hasakah governorate
from south-east Deir ez-Zor governorate. Most new
arrivals are in extremely poor health, with many
showing signs of distress and suffering from trauma
injuries, malnutrition and fatigue. They have undergone
a gruelling journey of hundreds of kilometres in open
trucks, in many cases after an extended period of
exposure to intense hostilities and after years of living
in a situation of extreme deprivation and human rights
abuse under the rule of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL). It is estimated that, since early
19-08685

27/03/2019

The situation in the Middle East

December, more than 140 people have died either on
the way to Al-Hol or shortly after arrival in the camp;
of those, some 80 per cent were children under the age
of five.
The population of Al-Hol now exceeds 72,000 — an
increase of more than 25,000 over the past month — with
indications that more people could still be on the way.
The United Nations and its humanitarian partners have
rapidly mobilized a major relief operation and continue
to scale up the response, in many cases redirecting
capacities and stocks from other parts of the country.
Food, shelter, water, sanitation and hygiene,
non-food items and health and protection services
are now being provided for new arrivals. In line with
humanitarian principles, needs-based assistance is
also being provided to women and children from third
countries, including family members of suspected
foreign fighters. But the situation remains extremely
challenging, with the rate of new arrivals far exceeding
the capacity of the site. Expansion efforts are under way.
It is critical that Member States continue to support
humanitarian organizations impartially by providing
life-saving assistance in Al-Hol.
The situation in Al-Hol and south-east Deir ez-Zor
presents a number of complex protection challenges.
Among them is the notable absence of adult males
and adolescent boys over the age of 15 in the camp.
The parties have clear obligations under international
humanitarian and human rights law to treat all persons
within their power humanely and allow persons
deprived of their liberty to communicate with their
families. Special protections are also provided to all
children under the age of 18, including those affiliated
with fighters.

S/PV. 8493

expressed a desire to leave the settlement, although
most also highlighted various protection concerns.
Movement out of Rukban has taken place in recent
days. Some 362 people left the settlement on 23 March,
passing through a Government checkpoint and transit
site and arriving, on 24 March, at a collective shelter
in Homs city, where they received humanitarian
assistance from the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, with
United Nations support. Further gradual movement
is expected in the coming weeks. Discussions are
ongoing with the main parties involved, including
the Government of Syria, the Russian Federation, the
United States and the Government of Jordan, to further
clarify the process and address the concerns that have
been raised by people in Rukban.
The United Nations continues to reiterate the
importance of a carefully planned, principled approach
that ensures respect for core protection standards
and does not expose vulnerable, and in many cases
traumatized, displaced people to additional harm. All
movements must be voluntary, safe, well-informed and
dignified, with humanitarian access assured throughout.
In parallel, the United Nations also continues to
strongly advocate for additional humanitarian assistance
for those who remain in Rukban. The deployment of
a third convoy has therefore been requested to allow
essential needs to be met ahead of the Ramadan period,
which begins in early May. Food, medicine and other
life-saving supplies delivered in February are already
running low, and the replenishment of stocks will
become increasingly urgent over the coming weeks.

In Hajin, Baghouz and other areas most directly
affected by counter-ISIL operations, the extensive
destruction of homes and infrastructure is reported,
and high levels of explosive hazard contamination will
represent an additional serious obstacle to the safe return
of the tens of thousands of civilians displaced from
the area. The rapid mobilization of explosive hazard
clearance capacities is needed, in line with the parties’
obligations under international humanitarian law.

Earlier this month, the Secretary-General noted
that “[a]s the conflict enters its ninth year, Syrians
continue to suffer from one of the worst conflicts of
our time”. The Secretary-General appealed for the
protection of civilians in Idlib and broader respect for
international humanitarian and human rights law, and
highlighted the importance of continued improvements
in sustained humanitarian access. The scale of the
humanitarian challenges facing the people of Syria
remains staggering by any measure. International
support for efforts to respond to the needs of millions
of Syrians remains critical.

The United Nations welcomes efforts in support of
durable solutions for the more than 41,000 people who
remain stranded in the makeshift Rukban settlement.
Some 95 per cent of people surveyed by United Nations
and Syrian Arab Red Crescent teams last month

At the third Brussels Conference on Supporting
the Future of Syria and the Region, on 14 March,
international donors pledged a record $7 billion to meet
needs inside Syria and ensure support for refugees
and host communities in neighbouring countries. The

19-086855/24

S/PV.8493

The situation in the Middle East

Conference was a resounding demonstration of the
international community’s continued solidarity with the
people of Syria and Syria’s neighbours, who continue to
host millions of refugees at great economic cost.
We reiterate our thanks to the donor community
for the new funding announced in Brussels and the
billions more that have been provided since the crisis
began, saving countless lives. Close to $2.2 billion
were provided against the 2018 humanitarian response
plan alone, covering 65 per cent of the requirements
requested for operations inside Syria. We appeal for the
pledges made in Brussels to be quickly converted into
contributions for 2019.

27/03/2019

started when the Al-Assad regime delivered the body
of 13-year-old Hamza Al-Khateeb to his family — shot,
burned and mutilated — after he had taken part in a
peaceful protest in southern Syria. Unfortunately,
Hamza’s story foreshadowed the next eight years of
suffering for the Syrians. The world will never forget
the images of three-year-old Aylan Kurdi’s corpse
drifting to the shore in the Mediterranean; five-year-old
Omran Daqneesh covered in dust and blood in Aleppo;
and countless children and others gassed in Khan
Shaykhun and Douma, and those starved in besieged
eastern Ghouta.

We commend the Government of Turkey for its
hospitality in hosting close to two-thirds of the total
number of registered Syrian refugees and facilitating
help to millions more inside Syria, including through
cross-border operations authorized by the Security
Council. In addition, we express our appreciation to the
Governments and people of Jordan and Lebanon, which
are hosting the highest numbers of refugees per capita
in the world, as well as those of Iraq and Egypt, where
efforts towards inclusive policies are making a huge
difference to refugees’ lives.

The source of that suffering and the ultimate
cause of the conflict is and has been the Al-Assad
regime’s violent crackdown on its own people. The
Al-Assad regime and its allies must take concrete
steps to de-escalate military operations and end forced
disappearances, release innocent civilians held in
detention and permit rapid, safe and unhindered access
for humanitarian agencies across Syria. Meanwhile, a
future credible, legitimate and pluralistic constitutional
committee should have the opportunity to invigorate a
political transition to leadership that will protect, rather
than harm, Syria’s citizens.

Humanitarian organizations have shown that
they can deliver. An average of 5.5 million people
were reached with assistance inside Syria each month
last year, from Damascus and through cross-border
channels. Continued international engagement and
support will allow us to build on this in 2019, sustaining
and further strengthening what is one of the largest and
most complex aid operations ever implemented.

As the Security Council, we should demand that the
regime respect international humanitarian principles
and human rights standards. We encourage Special
Envoy Pedersen to finalize a political settlement by
and through the Syrian people, and we must see the full
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015), including
a political settlement, a nationwide ceasefire and
unhindered humanitarian access.

We remain firmly committed to implementing
principled, needs-based humanitarian action across all
areas of Syria, working with Syrian counterparts and
communities. Protection, saving lives and restoring
dignity will remain at the centre of our efforts.

In 2015, the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2254 (2015), calling for the drafting of a
new constitution within six months and an election in
18 months. We fully support the efforts of Special Envoy
Pedersen to revitalize the political process without any
further delay.

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Rajasingham for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and Director
Rajasingham for their briefings today.
After eight years of the Syrian conflict, we would
like to remind members of the Council that this war
6/24

A political process will be futile, however, unless
hostilities end across Syria. Shelling and airstrikes
have displaced more than 70,000 Syrians just since
February. The United States is gravely concerned by
the recent escalation and by the Russian Federation and
Syrian regime’s joint strikes in the demilitarized zone.
These attacks on civilian infrastructure and innocent
Syrians, including members of the White Helmets,
must end immediately.
19-08685

27/03/2019

The situation in the Middle East

We have also heard from our United Nations
colleagues that the food delivered to 42,000 internally
displaced persons (IDPs) in Rukban last month has
already run out. The United States strongly supports the
United Nations request for a third convoy to Rukban,
and we call on the Russian Federation, as should the
rest of the Council, to press the Syrian regime to allow
humanitarian agencies access to vulnerable populations
throughout Syria.
We reiterate that the United States and its local
partners are not impeding departures from Rukban.
Rather, for the past year, Syria’s allies have obstructed
the Council’s efforts to ensure that the regime handles
the issue of Rukban humanely and in a manner
consistent with humanitarian principles. The United
States appeals directly to the Russian Federation to
work with us in finding a way to assist the Syrian
people. We welcome increased coordination to facilitate
the return of displaced persons, wherever they may be.
However, such a process must be closely coordinated
with the United Nations. IDPs should have access to
accurate information as to what awaits them, including
the availability of services, access to the civil registry,
safe passage and physical safety at their destination.
All Syrians seeking relocation must be protected from
arbitrary detention.
We are also deeply concerned about the situation
in Al-Hol camp, where 70,000 civilians currently
reside, 90 per cent of whom are women and children.
Humanitarians are working around the clock to respond
but are constrained by capacity. We encourage countries
to contribute to the response, as the United Nations
recently outlined in its emergency appeal for Al-Hol.
Efforts to release the detainees held by the Al-Assad
regime and Syrian opposition groups have stalled under
the auspices of the Astana guarantors. Meanwhile,
the regime continues to arbitrarily arrest, torture and
execute detainees. The United States supports a United
Nations-led approach to address detainee issues.
A key component of accountability is recognizing
the rights of victims and transitional justice. That is
why the United States recently announced its intention
to provide $2 million in support of the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism for Syria. We
hope that fellow Member States will continue to support
the important work of the Mechanism.
To end on a positive note, the liberation of the
territory in Syria once held by the Islamic State in Iraq

S/PV. 8493

and the Sham is now 100 per cent complete. Moreover,
in an incredible display of commitment, 60 members of
the international community came together this month
to pledge $7 billion to humanitarian aid to Syria. The
extraordinary nature of pledges this month reflects the
recognition of the fact that this conflict and its impact
on the Syrian people are far from over.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I will deliver this
statement on behalf of the three co-penholders: Kuwait,
Belgium and Germany. Let me thank Mr. Rajasingham,
Director of the Coordination Division of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
and Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for
their comprehensive briefings.
We would like to extend our heartfelt gratitude and
deep respect to all humanitarian and medical workers
throughout Syria, in the region and at Headquarters for
their tireless efforts to care for the affected population.
The figures given by OCHA speak for themselves.
With the Syrian conflict entering its ninth year,
the humanitarian needs in Syria remain huge. Our
response must be needs-based and comply fully with
humanitarian principles. It must also include cross-line
and cross-border assistance, as mandated by the Security
Council. In areas of Syria that recently shifted control,
continuity of services must be ensured. Humanitarian
access must be provided in an unconditional, safe,
timely, unhindered and sustained manner. The Syrian
humanitarian crisis is at its core a protection crisis.
Today I would like to focus on the following
aspects: the situation in the north of the country, that is,
Idlib and the north-east; the protection of returnees and
refugees; and the recent Brussels Conference.
First, concerning the situation in Idlib, we are
gravely concerned at the recent increase in violence
against civilians and their infrastructure. Shelling and
air strikes have killed civilians, including women and
children. We strongly condemn the loss of civilian lives
as a result of these attacks. We remind all parties of
their obligations under international humanitarian
law, including humanitarian principles, and human
rights law that require them to protect civilians and
civilian infrastructure.
As penholders, we would like to amplify OCHA’s
clear and repeated assessment that any military offensive
would lead to an uncontrollable and unmanageable
humanitarian disaster. A breakdown of existing support

19-086857/24

S/PV.8493

The situation in the Middle East

27/03/2019

pipelines would multiply the human suffering. There
would be no winners.

High Commissioner for Refugees to returnees and
refugees. That is the litmus test we are facing.

The fight against terrorism must not impede
impartial humanitarian action. We therefore reiterate
our call for the continual and faithful implementation
of the Russia-Turkey memorandum of understanding.
We stand united in our call for a nationwide cessation of
hostilities, in accordance with resolution 2401 (2018).

In the case of Rukban, additional assistance must
be made available to the camp population as soon as
possible. We cannot accept undue delays as in the past.
That would raise serious questions as to the willingness
of the parties concerned to help those in utter need and
without protection. Reports point to urgent medical
needs, in particular among children and young adults.
The quest for long-term solutions cannot distract
us from addressing the urgent needs that exist in the
camp now.

Secondly, with respect to the north-east, the
displacement situation is particularly unsettling, with
a new influx of displaced persons from Baghouz to
Hasakah province. Camps for internally displaced
persons are overcrowded, and the most important
point of refuge, Al-Hol camp, is operating far beyond
capacity. Ninety per cent of the people in Al-Hol are
women and children, and many are in poor health.
During the last week alone, 16 people died en route to
or after arriving at Al-Hol.
The special needs of the most vulnerable, including
the elderly and the disabled, must be urgently addressed.
We call on all parties to the conflict to allow sustained
access to displaced persons, including at screening
sites. The United Nations and its partners must be in a
position to provide needs-based assistance to all people
in need without delay or bureaucratic impediment.
Thirdly, concerning the protection of returnees
and refugees, the fragile situation in Rukban and
other parts of the country shows why the Council
needs to closely follow the security situation on the
ground. All returns and relocations must be voluntary,
safe, dignified and well-informed. Compliance with
international humanitarian and human rights law is an
obligation. Let us be clear: those who favour more and
speedy relocations bear the burden of proof that the
right conditions are in place. Family unity needs to be
ensured during all phases. Key protection mechanisms
such as proper monitoring along routes and at screening
and reception centres must be in place at all times.
People willing to return must receive reliable safety
guarantees. The outcome of the intention surveys
carried out in Rukban made it clear that concerns go
beyond personal security. Other important factors
are access to documents and property and confirmed
information on amnesty and conscription procedures.
This burden of proof does not lie with the
humanitarian community or donors. In the first
instance, it is essential to provide regular, free and
unimpeded access by the Office of the United Nations
8/24

Lastly, the Brussels Conference on Supporting the
Future of Syria and the Region, held under the leadership
of High Representative Mogherini and Emergency
Relief Coordinator Lowcock, sent an unambiguous
sign of solidarity to the Syrian people. At more than
$9 billion, the pledges reached an unprecedented level.
As penholders, we would like to thank all donors for
their contributions, which will sustain a high level of
humanitarian engagement in 2019. As penholders,
we are committed to delivering on the pledges we
announced at the conference. We kindly ask all donors
to make their funding available as soon as possible.
The conference stressed the importance of
adherence to international humanitarian law by all
parties to the conflict and put special emphasis on the
urgent need for the improved protection of civilians and
humanitarian access to all people in need inside Syria.
The Conference renewed the strong commitment to the
United Nations-led political process under the guidance
of Special Envoy Pedersen. Obviously, there can be no
sustainable peace without justice. True reconciliation
in Syria requires a thorough investigation of breaches
of international law and that perpetrators be held
accountable. As a concrete step towards increased
accountability, we support the strong call to release
persons arbitrarily detained and underline that the
utmost needs to be done in that regard. The Conference
also acknowledged the extraordinary generosity of
neighbouring countries and host communities in
providing refuge and support for millions of displaced
people. The international community remains
committed to substantially supporting those efforts.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I also thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo and Mr. Rajasingham for
their briefings today.
19-08685

27/03/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Let me start by welcoming the news that, over the
weekend, the final tract of Da’esh-held territory was
liberated by the Syrian Democratic Forces. That is a
huge testament to the courage and commitment of the
Forces and the work of the Global Coalition against
Da’esh. The liberation of Da’esh-held areas is not the end
of the fight against the group, however. Da’esh retains
significant organizational and economic capability with
which to pursue its dangerous and pervasive ideology.
We remain committed to the enduring defeat of Da’esh
in the region and globally.
Other serious challenge remain, including the huge
humanitarian challenge faced by the Al-Hol camp
for internally displaced persons (IDPs) following the
large influx of people displaced from Al-Baghouz.
We commend United Nations efforts to scale up its
response. The United Kingdom stands ready to provide
further support. During this financial year, the United
Kingdom has allocated more than £40 million to
address basic life-saving needs across north-east Syria,
where the Al-Hol camp is located. United Kingdomfunded partners are doing all that they can to support
those affected by providing vital services, including
health care and shelter. But the threat of a humanitarian
disaster continues to loom in Idlib, where according
to reports frequent shelling and air strikes by the
regime and its backers have caused the deaths of more
than 90 people and the displacement of 72,000 more
since February.
We continue to support Turkey’s ongoing efforts
to prevent a reckless military offensive by the Syrian
regime in north-west Syria. We call on Russia and Iran,
as Astana guarantors, together with Turkey, to ensure
that the ceasefire is respected. But the threat to the
Syrian people and the stability of Syria is not just in
the regime’s actions. It is in its failure to take the steps
needed to address the immense challenges to peace
and stability.
The Syrian economy has shrunk by more than
60 per cent since the start of the conflict, while the
Syrian pound has depreciated against the United States
dollar by more than 90 per cent. Six out of 10 Syrians
now live in extreme poverty. More than 13 million
Syrians are in need of humanitarian assistance. More
than 11 million persons have been displaced, and
approximately 400,000 have been killed. Up to 100,000
persons have been detained or have disappeared.

S/PV. 8493

The conflict and the crisis in Syria will not end
unless the root causes of the conflict are addressed.
There will be no stability without the creation of a
safe environment. Refugees will not return without
credible assurances for their safety. Radicalization
and unrest will not end without action being taken to
resolve failures of governance, including the lack of
provision of basic services, economic opportunity and
representative institutions.
The Security Council unanimously set out a
comprehensive mechanism in resolution 2254 (2015) to
deliver an alternative, inclusive and representative way
forward. Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and his team
continue to command our full support in seeking to find
a solution to the conflict. As has already been said today,
the United Kingdom, together with others, remains
committed to addressing the humanitarian needs of the
people of Syria. At the Brussels Conference, the United
Kingdom pledged £400 million — or $530 million — and
we have mobilized £2.81 billion to the Syrian crisis since
2012. That is more than $3.7 billion and represents our
largest humanitarian response ever. We and others have
indicated on numerous occasions our readiness to assist
Syria with reconstruction should there be a negotiated
political settlement.
Yet the Al-Assad regime continues to refuse to
change its behaviour and follows the course of action
that gave rise to the conflict in the first place. It
continues to seize the assets and property of citizens
and engage in widespread and arbitrary arrests. It
continues to provide limited or no basic services to
those in need and interfere with United Nations efforts
to fill that gap, including by stalling desperately needed
aid convoys to the Rukban IDP camp. The Syrian
regime continues to spread lies and disinformation
while failing to uphold its responsibilities under the
Chemical Weapons Convention. It continues to refuse
to engage in United Nations efforts under resolution
2254 (2015). No progress can be made without a change
in attitude and behaviour by the Syrian regime. It is
time for a Government in Syria that will do what is
right for its people.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I express my thanks and gratitude to
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, and to Mr. Ramesh
Rajasingham, Director of the Coordination Division
of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.

19-086859/24

S/PV.8493

The situation in the Middle East

We align ourselves with the statement delivered
by Ambassador Christoph Heusgen on behalf of
the co-penholders of the Syrian humanitarian
dossier — Germany, Belgium and Kuwait. I would like
to make the following points in my national capacity.
This month has witnessed important milestones and
developments in the Syrian crisis. The most significant
pertains to the fact that the crisis has unfortunately
entered its ninth year. Another year has gone by, while
the bloody conflict continues. It has claimed the lives of
hundreds of thousands of civilians and forced millions
to flee the country. It is a reminder to all that the Security
Council remains unable to carry out its responsibilities,
maintain international peace and security, implement its
resolutions and address the crisis in it various aspects,
especially with regard to the political aspect. We
support the Secretary-General in the implementation of
the four measures he announced as the Syrian crisis
entered its ninth year, namely, first, urging all parties
to respect the ceasefire agreement in Idlib brokered by
Russia and Turkey; secondly, respecting international
humanitarian law and protecting human rights in
all military operations; thirdly, enabling sustainable
access to humanitarian assistance; and, fourthly,
enhancing international support for a political solution
that meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian
people, and supporting Special Envoy Geir Pedersen in
the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) and the
2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
Another important milestone was the holding of
the third Brussels Conference on Supporting the Future
of Syria and the Region. That was the seventh donor
conference aimed at alleviating humanitarian suffering
in Syria, following three conferences held in the State
of Kuwait, one in London and three others in Brussels.
The most recent Brussels Conference reminds us all
that the humanitarian situation in Syria continues to
deteriorate. Approximately 11.7 million people remain
in need of humanitarian assistance. We welcome the
generous pledges made during the latest conference
and call on all countries to honour their obligations.
The State of Kuwait contributed $300 million for the
humanitarian response over the next three years as part
of its efforts to alleviate the suffering of our brothers
in Syria and improve the humanitarian situation in the
country. Kuwait has provided about $1.9 billion since
the conflict began.
We have also closely followed the efforts of Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen this month. We reiterate our full
10/24

27/03/2019

support for him in his efforts to revitalize the political
process in Syria in order to achieve a fair Syrian-led
and Syrian-owned political settlement facilitated by
the United Nations through the implementation of
resolution 2254 (2015). That resolution sets out the steps
for a political transition process that contains many
milestones, including drafting a constitution and holding
free and fair elections pursuant to that constitution
under the supervision of the United Nations and in
accordance with the highest international standards of
transparency and accountability, with the participation
of all Syrians, including those living abroad.
In his recent briefing to the Security Council, the
Special Envoy spoke about five objectives that he is
trying to implement in the next phase (see S/PV.8475).
We believe that implementing those objectives will give
momentum to the political process in Syria. All parties
must support the Special Envoy so that he can fully
carry out his mandate.
In March we also witnessed another important
milestone in the war against terrorism. The terrorist
group Da’esh lost the territories that were under its
control in Syria. That is truly an important and major
achievement in the war against terrorism and against
that terrorist group, which has launched terrorist and
criminal attacks against many countries, including my
country, Kuwait. We must now work on preserving the
military achievements of the international coalition
against Da’esh and on maintaining the intensive
international efforts to eradicate it and ensure that
it does not return through the joint efforts of the
international community to eliminate the financial,
logistical, military, security and media networks of
Da’esh.
As we mentioned yesterday during the Security
Council meeting on the Middle East (see S/PV.8489), I
would like to point out that Security Council resolutions
on Syria, particularly in their preambles, always
include a paragraph that stresses the commitment of the
Council and the international community to respecting
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Syria. We therefore reiterate our regret that
the United States decided to recognize the sovereignty
of Israel over the occupied Syrian Arab Golan.
International resolutions, especially resolution 497
(1981), which was adopted unanimously, stipulate that
the Security Council and the international community
reject the annexation of territories by force and that the
decision of Israel, the occupying Power, to impose its
19-08685

27/03/2019

The situation in the Middle East

laws, administration and sovereignty over the occupied
Syrian Golan is null and void and has no international
legal effect. That resolution also emphasized that the
1949 Fourth Geneva Convention is applicable to the
occupied Syrian territories.
Ms. Goolab (South Africa): Allow me to begin
by thanking Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo and Mr. Ramesh
Rajasingham for their briefings on the political and
humanitarian situations in Syria.
South Africa remains committed to protecting the
fundamental interests of all Syrian people, maintaining
peace and stability in the Middle East region, upholding
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and preserving the basic norms governing
international relations.
My delegation commends the efforts of Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen, through his extensive
consultations with all parties, to create a conducive
environment for a Syrian-led, Syrian-owned and United
Nations-facilitated process to establish credible and
inclusive negotiations. As stated by the Special Envoy
in his previous statement to the Security Council (see
S/PV.8475), resolution 2254 (2015) is a comprehensive
road map for ensuring a political settlement in Syria.
We call for its full implementation.
South Africa believes that the only sustainable
solution to the Syrian question remains the achievement
of a political solution through an inclusive Syrian-led
dialogue. In that regard, we welcome the Special Envoy’s
engagements with the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board
and other stakeholders to ensure that all Syrian voices
be given the opportunity to be heard and to contribute
to the Syrian peace process. We also welcome the
Special Envoy’s continued efforts towards finalizing
the establishment of the constitutional committee and
its rules of procedure.
Turning to the dire humanitarian situation in
Syria, South Africa is deeply concerned about the large
numbers of civilians requiring assistance in various
parts of Syria. The escalation of violence in recent
weeks has only exacerbated that crisis. The situation in
Al-Hol camp in northern Syria is of particular concern.
In recent weeks, there has been a massive influx of
people, mainly women and children, in various degrees
of ill health, to the camp. We call on the international
community to fully support the United Nations efforts
in providing assistance to all those who require it.

S/PV. 8493

My delegation believes that many Syrians would
prefer to return to their homes and cities in due course.
However, it is essential to ensure that the necessary
conditions for their safe return be met. We support the
Special Envoy in his belief that the return of Syrians
to their homes must be voluntary, safe, dignified and
well informed.
South Africa wishes to commend the United Nations
and its implementing partners for the humanitarian and
life-saving assistance that they continue to provide to
millions of people throughout Syria. We mourn the
deaths of hundreds of humanitarian workers who have
been killed in this devastating war and call for the
protection of all humanitarian personnel, in line with
international humanitarian law.
In that regard, it is noted with concern that many
Syrians do not receive the aid that they so desperately
need. We therefore call for the full implementation of
resolution 2449 (2018), which renewed the authorization
for cross-border and cross-line humanitarian access to
Syria. The recent convey to Rukban provided some
relief to the people who remain isolated within the area.
We call on the relevant stakeholders to ensure that the
necessary approvals be granted for additional convoys
of humanitarian aid.
It is essential that the international community
support a political solution to the situation in Syria as
a matter of priority and the United Nations as the main
channel for mediation. South Africa reiterates that in a
complex and diverse society such as Syria there can be
no military solution to the conflict.
In conclusion, in 1967 the Security Council adopted
resolution 242 (1967), which calls for the withdrawal of
all troops from the occupied territories, including the
Syrian Golan Heights. However, 40 years later, Israel
continues to occupy the Golan Heights in violation of the
Council’s decisions. The annexation of territory seized
through the use of force is a violation of international
law and must be condemned. For long-term peace and
security in the Middle East region, it is vital to ensure
that international law be upheld.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary
DiCarlo
and Director Ramesh Rajasingham for their very
comprehensive briefings.
The conflict in Syria has brought enormous and
unspeakable suffering to the civilian population

19-0868511/24

S/PV.8493

The situation in the Middle East

of Syria. Almost 12 million people are in need of
multisectoral humanitarian assistance. More than
6 million people are internally displaced, of whom an
estimated 870,000 live in sites of last resort.
A glimpse of hope emerged from the third Brussels
Conference on Supporting the Future of Syria and the
Region, held in the middle of this month, as donors
pledged a record amount to support people in need in
Syria, as well as the refugees and host communities in
neighbouring countries.
Let me be clear. There is no peace without justice
and continuing impunity for serious violations of
international humanitarian law remains our grave
concern. Any military operation should be fully in line
with international humanitarian law and international
human rights law in order to prevent harm to thousands
of civilians trapped in the middle of the fighting.
The protection of civilians and unhindered access to
humanitarian assistance are not a
choice but a legal obligation of all sides to
the conflict; those who do not comply should be
held accountable. In our opinion, the international
community, especially the Security Council, should
advocate more for their health and protection, especially
in the case of women and children. In that context, the
situation is extremely worrying in the north-eastern
and north-western parts of Syria, just to mention the
Al-Hol camp. Let me also underline the significance of
the agreement between Russia and Turkey on the Idlib
de-escalation zone as a crucial move towards avoiding
a humanitarian catastrophe. All parties to the conflict
should ensure the full implementation of the agreement.
The second convoy to Rukban delivered
humanitarian assistance to 40,000 people at the
beginning of February. The assistance provided
life-saving support to people there. Nonetheless,
it was only a temporary measure — sufficient for
approximately one month. As we approach the end of
March, it is clear that we desperately need a long-term,
safe, voluntary and dignified solution for thousands of
people, many of whom have been staying in the Rukban
area for more than two years now. We feel encouraged
by positive steps made recently by the Syrian authorities
in that respect and expect them to swiftly authorize
another inter-agency convoy to Rukban.
Let me conclude by underlining that there can be
no military solution to the Syrian conflict. A political
agreement in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the
12/24

27/03/2019

Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) remains
the only way to achieve peace. We look forward to
the establishment of a constitutional committee, the
first step towards a genuine political process under
the supervision of the United Nations. Let me also
underscore that we should pursue an intra-Syrian
framework for political agreement in Syria. The
Syrian authorities have a special role to play, and they
should participate in the negotiations in good faith and
without preconditions.
Allow me to reiterate the European Union common
position on the reconstruction of Syria. We think
that it should commence once an inclusive political
transition is firmly under way, as we need to support
the safe return of millions of Syrian people who fled
their homes. We believe that the main durable solution
for Syrian refugees throughout the region will be
their sustainable, safe, dignified and voluntary return
to their country of origin, Syria, in accordance with
international law and the principle of non-refoulement.
Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): We are grateful for the briefings today
on the political and humanitarian situation in Syria.
As always, we take this opportunity to reiterate our
appreciation for the intense work of the United Nations
and its partners towards achieving peace, development
and the well-being of the Syrian people.
Alleviating the suffering of the more than
11 million people with humanitarian needs remains
a global concern. That was apparent at the recently
concluded Brussels Conference, where the international
community expressed its willingness to help alleviate
the plight of the Syrian people, including the 5.6 million
refugees and the communities that host them. It is truly
everyone’s responsibility to improve the conditions of
the people caught up in one of the longest and most
heartbreaking conflicts of recent times.
Eight years of devastating clashes have left women
and children disproportionately affected by the lack of
security and stability, and 80 per cent of the population
living below the poverty line. We therefore applaud
the success of the Conference and hope to see a broad,
accelerated, transparent and sustained implementation
of the humanitarian response plan. We encourage the
humanitarian actors involved to observe and uphold
international humanitarian law, the principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence in
each of their operations and in all circumstances, and to
19-08685

27/03/2019

The situation in the Middle East

keep the Syrian people at the centre of their plans and
actions. With your permission, Mr. President, I would
like to elaborate on the following points.
In view of the current situation in the country,
where 5 million people have acute humanitarian needs,
we believe that one of our main priorities is to work
to increase the access of the United Nations to the
communities where those people are found, throughout
the country, in order to provide adequate assistance to
enhance their own resilience.
With respect to the recent displacements recorded
in north-eastern Syria, most ending up in the Al-Hol
camp, we would like to highlight the extraordinary
work to accommodate and attend to the more than
70,000 people — mainly women and children — who
have arrived at the camp in recent months. We are
particularly concerned about the malnourishment of
the child population. We urgently need tools to
provide medical and nutritional assistance to the most
vulnerable. We call for additional financial support in
order to expand those services.
We also highlight the conditions for humanitarian
access to Rukban camp. We are very concerned that
the provisions of the most recent convoy are about
to run out and there is still no permission to return.
That is why we call on the Syrian Government and the
countries that can — in one way or another — make
that possible to work together so that a new convoy
can reach Rukban as soon as possible. We welcome the
initiative to establish a coordination process with the
Syrian Government on possible evacuations from the
camp. We emphasize, however, that all returns must be
voluntary decisions, based on reliable information and
carried out in a safe and dignified manner. In addition,
basic standards of protection must be met in the pursuit
of durable solutions for Syrians.
I would like to add my voice to those who have spoken
before me regarding the worrisome situation in Idlib
and the hostilities that have taken place in recent weeks.
This is a serious concern for the civilian population that
resides there and creates major challenges in terms of
protection, including for the thousands of displaced
people. In that regard, we reiterate the need for full
compliance with the Idlib ceasefire agreement in order
to halt that escalation, which could have catastrophic
humanitarian consequences and could jeopardize the
political process under way.

S/PV. 8493

That leads me to highlight a few points regarding
that process, which we see as the only solution to this
conflict. We reiterate our support for the five pillars
of the Pedersen proposal for future peace in Syria.
We applaud their inclusive yet ambitious approach
and awareness of the realities on the ground and the
lessons learned along the way. With that approach,
and under the guidelines of resolution 2254 (2015), we
believe it necessary to continue to work arduously and
strategically towards revitalizing the political process
with the creation of the constitutional committee.
We call on the parties to continue a constructive and
meaningful dialogue, facilitated by the United Nations,
so that the committee can be established and meet at a
not-too-distant date.
Finally, we reiterate that the pursuit of sustainable
peace in Syria that will alleviate the suffering of its
people and help to steer its course towards a new future
must be carried out with the effective participation of
all parts and segments of society, particularly that of
women and young people as agents of change for peace,
progress and the well-being of all.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation commends Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, UnderSecretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, and Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, Director of the
Coordination Division of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), for their detailed
briefings on the political process and the humanitarian
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, my
country remains concerned about OCHA’s alarming
statistics showing that 11.7 million Syrians are in need
of humanitarian assistance in their own country as
are about 5.7 million Syrian refugees in neighbouring
States. Besides that, also according to OCHA, tens of
thousands of internally displaced people, including
women, children and the elderly, are in extreme
distress. The number of internally displaced persons in
the Al-Hol camp in the north-east, which is sheltering
most of the people fleeing the last pocket of Islamic
State resistance, went up from 9,721 in December to
70,480 on 20 March. As of 16 March, it was estimated
that more than 130 people, of whom 80 per cent
were children, had died in the camp or close to it.
Approximately 200 deaths have been recorded in Idlib
province since September 2018, 90 of them, including
40 children, in February alone.

19-0868513/24

S/PV.8493

The situation in the Middle East

With respect to the concerns that such statistics
elicit, my country welcomed the third donor conference
under the theme of supporting the future of Syria and
the region, held in Brussels from 12 to 14 March. It
raised $7 billion of the $8.8 billion needed to fund the
humanitarian response plan coordinated by the United
Nations and the regional refugee and resilience plan.
It will undoubtedly a boost for the people in distress
in the Syrian Arab Republic and its neighbours. My
country calls on all the parties involved in military
operations throughout Syria to respect international
humanitarian law regarding the protection of civilians
and hospital infrastructure. I should point out that
creating obstacles to the free movement of people and
goods and violating the rights of displaced persons
constitute serious violations of international law and
are subject to prosecution.
Turning now to the political process, Côte d’Ivoire
welcomes the tireless efforts to reconcile the positions
of the stakeholders that Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, has been
making since taking up his post on 7 January. We
fully support the five priorities he identified in his
briefing to the Security Council on 28 February (see
S/PV.8475). My delegation agrees with him that the
dialogue with the Syrian Government, the opposition
and civil society, particularly through the Syrian
Negotiation Commission, should be deepened. That
approach, which consists of direct meetings with all the
parties, will help to build trust and bring Syrians back
to the negotiating table. In that regard, my delegation
welcomes the consultations that Mr. Pedersen’s team
has conducted over the past two months with more
than 200 Syrian stakeholders from civil society and
the diaspora. Similarly, his two visits to Damascus,
most recently on 18 March, enabled him to exchange
views with the Syrian authorities on establishing the
constitutional committee responsible for drafting a
new Constitution.
The military defeat of Da’esh that has been
announced gives the parties to the conflict a window of
opportunity to silence their guns for good and engage
resolutely in the political settlement of the crisis through
constructive dialogue, while building on the provisions
of resolution 2254 (2015) and the complementary
Astana and Sochi processes.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire once again calls on the
warring parties to maintain the ceasefire in the Idlib
demilitarized zone in order to allow the unimpeded
14/24

27/03/2019

delivery of aid to Syrians in need, in accordance
with international humanitarian law. Lastly, we
urge the Syrian parties to agree on the definite
establishment of the constitutional committee to draft
the new Constitution, with a view to holding free and
fair elections.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Ms. DiCarlo, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, and
Mr. Rajasingham, Director of the Coordination Division
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, for their briefings.
There have been major changes recently in the
military and political situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic. Thanks to the fact that the terrorist threat has
been crushed in most of the country, the authority of
the legitimate Government has been restored and the
level of violence has significantly decreased. Active
efforts are under way to rebuild ruined infrastructure
and restore normal life to the liberated areas. Needless
to say, it would be premature to speak of an end to the
Syrian conflict, as a number of serious issues have to
be resolved first.
First of all, we must continue to work intensively
in support of Special Envoy Geir Pedersen’s efforts to
give new impetus to the political settlement in Syria.
The Astana troika is facilitating his work and making
its own contribution to the political track. The work
of launching the constitutional committee and getting
the political process going is only one of the elements
in our joint push to settle the Syrian conflict. It will
be important to continue taking steps to combat the
terrorist threat and expand de-escalation throughout
Syria. In that context, we should be careful not to lose
sight of two points.
First, with regard to the situation in Idlib, we are
committed to implementing all the provisions of the
Russian-Turkish memorandum of September 2018.
We understand the concerns about the threats to
civilians there. Nonetheless, it is obvious to everyone
that the situation in that part of Syria is heading in
a dangerous direction. The Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham
terrorist group now controls almost 90 per cent of the
province. Terrorists continue their provocative raids
against Government forces. There have been 460 such
incidents since the beginning of the year, claiming
the lives of 30 people and injured around 100. We are
seriously concerned about new information showing
19-08685

27/03/2019

The situation in the Middle East

that Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham fighters, with the assistance
of the infamous White Helmets, are preparing to stage
new scenarios using toxic substances. On 23 March, we
received information that extremists were firing shells
filled with chemical substances at villages in northern
Hama, and several people were injured.
This status quo is unsustainable. If we do nothing
but observe, Idlib will become a source of constant
terrorist threats for Syria, its neighbours in the region
and other States. Pretending that the Al-Nusra Front
has suddenly become part of the moderate opposition
will not work either. We should not forget that a decentsized skeleton of international terrorism is still out there
in the provinces. Incidentally, many speakers today
expressed concern about the escalation of tensions in
Idlib, while completely forgetting the fact that at the
same time civilians are dying as a result of coalition
strikes in Baghouz, in Deir ez-Zor governorate. We have
not heard anyone calling for the situation in that area to
be frozen, despite the fact that what brought people to
the Al-Hol camp cannot be called anything other than a
large-scale humanitarian disaster. It is time to drop the
double standards. Is there any difference between the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and the Al-Nusra
Front? Anyone who thinks so is seriously deluded.
The second point is that as history has shown,
the most intensive normalization in Syria is going on
where the legitimate Government’s authority has been
restored. In that context, the illegal occupation of
various parts of the country, including the north-east
and in the area of Al-Tanf, is not only not conducive to
a settlement but undermines the prospects for it. I have
discussed Al-Tanf previously, and I want to emphasize
that the situation in southern Syrian in the area of the
Rukban camp, remains very difficult. In response to
humanitarian appeals, the Syrian Government gave its
consent to two humanitarian convoys, but the reality is
that keeping tens of thousands in a temporary camp on
a humanitarian drip is simply inhumane. A survey of
the residents of Rukban showed that an overwhelming
majority of them want to leave the camp but cannot.
Since May 2018 about 800 Syrians have managed to
get out of Rukban and return home, and each of them
paid $300 to the Maghawir Al-Thawra group for their
freedom. The most sustainable solution is resettlement.
In that regard, we have opened two humanitarian
corridors to get people out, and the Government of
Syria has also prepared six columns of comfortable
buses ready to go to straight to Rukban at any moment

S/PV. 8493

in order to evacuate 2,400 people at once to places of
their choosing. The conditions in Latakia, Khalidiya,
Al-Amara, Homs, Mkhin, Al-Qaryatayn, Palmyra
and the Damascus and Aleppo suburbs can decently
accommodate more than 35,000 people.
On 26 March, the Russian military forces initiated a
coordinated discussion at the Jleb checkpoint to develop
gradual measures for moving people out of Rukban,
together with representatives of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the Syrian Red Crescent Society and Syrian authorities.
Sheikhs from tribes in the camps also participated.
We invited our American colleagues, but they refused
to come or to allow the meeting participants into the
so-called security zone around Al-Tanf. Nonetheless,
we intend to continue our dialogue on Rukban with
all interested parties, including the United Nations,
the United States and Jordan, without preconditions
and without politicizing the humanitarian aspects of
the issue. We believe that the legal right of all Syrian
refugees and internally displaced persons to return to
their homes must be ensured and implemented.
As a matter of principle, the paradigm of
humanitarian assistance in Syria itself should be
reviewed. The Brussels III conference was important
in terms of collecting financial resources, but without
the participation of the Syrian Government it will
be impossible to solve the country’s humanitarian
problems. We urge the organizers to reconsider their
approach. We emphasize the importance of putting a
definitive end to anti-regime projects whatever format
they are promoted in. We once again call on everyone
to recognize how damaging the unilateral sanctions
that a number of Western countries have imposed on
Damascus are, since they only worsen the humanitarian
situation in Syria and make ordinary people suffer.
Furthermore, these policies run counter to the logic of
humanitarian work. The result is that while one hand
is helping, the other is blocking the possibilities for
exploiting and strengthening the country’s national
capacity to help the Syrian people. We could start by
freeing up funds allocated for Syrian development needs
through the major international financial institutions.
It is time to stop speculating about the refugees.
Their return must be voluntary. We all know that
most Syrians want to go back to their homeland. The
Syrian Government is ready to extend the necessary
assurances. The flow of Syrian refugees returning

19-0868515/24

S/PV.8493

The situation in the Middle East

to their permanent homes in Syria is constantly
growing. At the beginning of March a delegation led
by Mr. Filippo Grandi, the High Commissioner for
Refugees, visited Syria. Besides meeting with the
Syrian leadership in Damascus, the United Nations
representatives were able to visit places to which
Syrians had returned in Homs and Hama governorates.
It is notable that during this first-hand opportunity for
conversations with Syrians, the United Nations people
saw for themselves that returnees are living in normal
conditions and have expressed no complaints about the
conditions of their return.
We propose engaging in an honest joint effort to
restore stability to Syria, not only by countering the
threat of terrorism but by rebuilding the country’s
economy. Russia is making its contribution. With
our assistance, more than 31,000 homes, 148 medical
facilities and 836 educational institutions have been
rebuilt, and more than 1,000 kilometres of road repaired.
Together we can bring the hostilities to an end and
focus on moving the political process forward, which
will enable national reconciliation to begin in Syria.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the presidency for convening today’s meeting, and
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo and Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham
for their comprehensive briefings, in which they have
described for us a scenario that requires the urgent
attention of the Security Council. Peru recognizes
the valuable efforts that both briefers are making in
their respective remits to put an end to the devastating
conflict in Syria and to alleviate human suffering.
The armed conflict in Syria has entered its ninth
year, and Peru can only strongly condemn the serious
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in the
country and the deliberate attacks on civilians, which
have caused more than 400,000 fatalities and the
displacement of 11 million people inside and outside
Syria. We note with concern that the change in the
balance of forces we have observed in recent months
has not yet been reflected in a sustained cessation
of hostilities, while the much-needed humanitarian
assistance on which 13 million Syrians depend continues
to be provided in a restricted manner. We note with
alarm the prospect of a further escalation of violence in
north-west Syria, particularly in Idlib, as a result of the
actions of terrorist organizations present there and the
intensification of air strikes, which do not discriminate
between combatants and the civilian population.
16/24

27/03/2019

In those circumstances, we call on the Syrian
Government and all those involved in the conflict to
prevent further deterioration, which basically means
preserving the ceasefire agreed by Turkey and Russia
last September. We also want to focus attention on the
east of the country, where tens of thousands of civilians
have had to flee the heat of the clashes against the
remnants of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
At this time, we emphasize the urgency of meeting
the humanitarian needs of the more than 70,000
internally displaced persons who have been living at the
Al-Hol camp and of providing them with the financial
means required to adapt their needs. Similarly, we
encourage new and sustained deployments by the
United Nations and other humanitarian actors in Rukban
to provide assistance and conduct comprehensive
humanitarian-needs assessments. We urge that, in
parallel and with the utmost urgency, comprehensive
solutions be promoted that address the willingness of
95 per cent of its people to return home in a safe and
dignified manner. We would also like to welcome the
generous contributions from donor countries at the
recent Brussels Conference, which should substantially
help to alleviate the shortages that have caused much
suffering to the Syrian population and contribute to the
urgently needed reconstruction of the country.
However, we must bear in mind that only the
achievement of a political solution that lays the
foundations for sustainable peace in Syria will make
it possible to overcome the humanitarian disaster that
continues to affect its population. Such a solution
must respect Syria’s sovereignty, territorial integrity
and unity. We therefore note with satisfaction the
constructive tenor of the meetings held in recent weeks
between the Special Envoy and relevant stakeholders,
which we hope will be reflected in substantive progress
in the political process based on resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
Finally, we consider it essential to achieve concrete
results soon with regard to the establishment of an
inclusive and representative constitutional committee,
as well as with regard to the release of prisoners and
the identification of missing persons and the return
of corpses, as important confidence-building and
reconciliation measures for achieving peace in Syria.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and Director
Rajasingham for their briefings. My delegation also
19-08685

27/03/2019

The situation in the Middle East

wishes to congratulate Ms. Khawla Matar on her
appointment as the Deputy Special Envoy for Syria. We
wish her every success in carrying out her mandate.
Indonesia is pleased to hear the continuing
discussions and engagement between Special Envoy
Pedersen and the relevant parties to the conflict. As
stated last month by Ambassador Pedersen in this
Chamber (see S/PV.8475), building confidence and
trust with the parties is indeed key. My delegation
therefore fully supports the Special Envoy’s approach
in developing a sustained dialogue. For Indonesia, it is
a sine qua non for any future progress.
As the conflict enters its ninth year, it is more
crucial than ever to move the political process forward,
pursuant to the Geneva communiqué (S/2013/522,
annex) and resolution 2254 (2015). Indonesia believes
that a negotiated political solution is the only way to
achieve lasting peace in Syria. The absence of a political
solution will continue to deteriorate the humanitarian
situation in Syria. My delegation wishes to share three
pertinent points: the need to respect Syria’s sovereignty,
the need for strong political commitment and the
urgency of addressing the humanitarian situation in
Al-Hol camp, Rukban and Idlib.
First, Indonesia urges the international community
to fully respect and reaffirm its commitment to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab
Republic. That is a basic foundation that is needed to be
able to effectively assist the Syrian people. That is also a
necessity, not an option. Moreover, a Syrian-owned and
Syrian-led political process is not merely a slogan, it is a
process that would lead to a lasting political settlement
of the crisis. We are fully aware of the complexity
of the crisis, and ignoring the principled elements of
sovereignty and territorial integrity will complicate the
situation. In that context, let me reiterate Indonesia’s
strong rejection of the recognition of Golan Heights as
part of Israel by the United States, as elaborated by our
Vice-Minister at yesterday’s meeting (see S/PV.8489).
Secondly, a strong political commitment is greatly
needed by all parties to work together and gradually
begin the political process. Indonesia is of the view that
the establishment of a credible, balanced and inclusive
constitutional committee is an important phase of
the process, but my delegation also believes that a
measured and careful process is necessary to lay a firm
groundwork. We support the Special Envoy’s work in
facilitating the finalization of the rules of procedure

S/PV. 8493

and the composition of the committee. Again, that is
not an easy task, but it is doable.
Thirdly, Indonesia is deeply concerned about the
humanitarian situation in Syria and stresses the urgent
need to promptly address and alleviate the suffering of
millions of people in need. More than 70,000 displaced
people reside in Al-Hol camp, of whom 90 per cent are
women and children. The majority of the people suffer
from malnutrition, with no adequate medical assistance.
In the four months since December 2018, there have
been approximately 60,000 arrivals in Al-Hol, and the
camp has exceeded its capacity. We hope to see the
establishment of 4,000 additional shelters and other
responses related to food security, water and sanitation,
as well as health services.
On Rukban, we are encouraged by the second
humanitarian assistance convoy delivered in February
and look forward to the next delivery to thousands of
refugees in Rukban. With regard to potential Rukban
evacuees, and based on the results of the survey of
intentions, Indonesia wishes to underline that it is
important to accommodate a safe and voluntary return
for refugees and displaced persons. All parties should
work together in rebuilding Syria through a steady
reconstruction process. Indonesia would also like
to emphasize the need to maintain and respect the
ceasefire agreement in Idlib in order to prevent another
humanitarian tragedy. My delegation takes note of the
pledges made during the third Brussels Conference
on Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region
and underlines the importance of ensuring the proper
distribution of the funding to those in need.
In conclusion, Indonesia shares the SecretaryGeneral’s view, expressed in his statement of 15 March,
that it is indeed a moral obligation for the international
community to support Syrians in uniting around a
vision for their future. It is also the Council’s obligation
to support all Syrians in deciding their own future — a
future that is stable and peaceful.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): First of all, I would like to express my
delegation’s thanks to Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, UnderSecretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, and Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, Director
of the Coordination Division of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for providing
us with updates on the most recent developments with
regard to the Syrian Arab Republic. We are aware that

19-0868517/24

S/PV.8493

The situation in the Middle East

their efforts and the work they do together with their
respective teams are fully working towards a lasting
resolution of the conflict.
With regard to the political process, the Government
of Equatorial Guinea has not changed its position on the
need to comply with resolution 2254 (2015) and will
continue to support the current negotiating process
led by the Syrian people under the auspices of the
United Nations. We are aware that it continues to be
difficult to specify the dates for the formation of the
constitutional committee and for the commencement
of the committee’s work. We therefore urge the
parties, especially the Syrian authorities, to take all
the measures necessary and give priority to their
cooperation with the Special Envoy and very actively
expedite the conclusion of that process.
As we have recently stated, it is necessary for
all parties to move into an active phase of the peace
negotiations. There should be no further delays in
the formation of the constitutional committee, and
the stalemate in the Geneva negotiations should not
lead to the collapse of the Astana process. We again
encourage the Special Envoy to continue to explore all
opportunities to overcome obstacles to the formation
of the committee, so that its first meeting can be
convened without further delay. While we hope that the
next meeting on Syria in Astana, scheduled for April,
contributes, in the framework of detailed consultations
with the Special Envoy, to advancing the negotiations
on the composition of the middle third list of members,
Equatorial Guinea will continue to maintain its full
commitment to a peaceful resolution of the Syrian
crisis within the framework of resolution 2254 (2015).
With regard to the humanitarian situation, my
Government believes that it is essential to keep Syria
at the top of the international agenda and to generate
financial support for that country, where nearly
12 million innocent people have suffered from atrocities
and other collateral effects of war for the past eight years.
We also welcome the holding of the third Brussels
Conference on Supporting the Future of Syria and the
Region, which succeeded in raising approximately
$7 billion in assistance to finance the United Nations
humanitarian response plan for Syria and the region.
In the face of the bloody offensive in Baghouz, the
last bastion of the Islamic State in Syria, Equatorial
Guinea, can only call on the parties to exercise
restraint and prioritize the protection of civilians in
18/24

27/03/2019

accordance with international humanitarian law. We
must underscore that this offensive, one of the longest
and most deadly of the conflict, has killed thousands
of people — not only fighters, but also many civilians.
In that regard, we stress the need for collective action
and the assistance of international humanitarian
organizations and United Nations agencies to prevent
the situation in the country from deteriorating.
While we appreciate the efforts under way to
ensure that a third humanitarian convoy reaches
Rukban camp, we continue to insist on the need to
evacuate the more than 40,000 people who live there
under appalling conditions. We also remain concerned
about the situation in Idlib, which is why we are calling
for a resumption of hostilities to be avoided at all costs
and for the laying of the foundation for the safe and
voluntary return of refugees to Syria. All parties to the
conflict must ensure full humanitarian access to all
segments of the population and respect international
humanitarian law.
In conclusion, we reiterate once again that we are
aware that the military situation on the ground may
evolve in one direction or another, but what is clear to
everyone is that a political process led by the Syrians
under the auspices of the United Nations is necessary
to achieve peace.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo and Mr. Rajasingham, Director of the
Coordination Division of the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for their
enlightening briefings.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, I refer to
the statement made by Germany on behalf of the three
co-penholders. I will therefore limit myself to a few
brief remarks on the political situation and the situation
on the ground.
First, as the Syrian conflict enters its ninth year, we
lend our support to Special Envoy Pedersen in his efforts
to implement his five objectives, as he outlined in his
first briefing to the Security Council (see S/PV.8475).
We welcome his work on the various dimensions of
resolution 2254 (2015). As I mentioned in my statement
last month, in Belgium’s view, the only lasting solution
will be based on the 2012 Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex) and the full implementation of the
resolution. We underline the role of the Special Envoy
in Sochi and support his efforts to bring together, as
19-08685

27/03/2019

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8493

soon as possible, a credible, balanced, inclusive and
representative constitutional committee that follows
clear procedures and working methods.

Mr. Rajasingham, Director of the Coordination Division
of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, for their briefings.

We note that the common denominator of the
Special Envoy’s objectives is to build trust and
deepen dialogue in order to move the process forward.
However, trust among the parties to the conflict will
not be possible without looking through the lens of
justice. As a concrete measure, we call on all parties
to exercise their influence for the release of those who
have been detained arbitrarily.

We commend the efforts made by the United Nations
and relevant parties to facilitate a political solution and
improve the humanitarian situation in Syria. Years of
conflict in Syria have brought about untold misery for
Syria and its people. The Syrian people yearn for peace
to be achieved as soon as possible so that they can
return, rebuild and resume their lives in tranquillity. In
order to help the Syrian Government and people achieve
those goals, the international community should focus
on the following issues.

The Special Envoy also indicated that the entire
Syrian population must engage and participate in efforts
to build trust and seek peace. The third Conference on
Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region, held in
Brussels in March, underscored the essential role of
civil society. An active civil society that is recognized
at the political level and illustrates its right to assemble
and exercise the freedom of expression constitutes the
backbone of any community. The third Conference also
placed particular emphasis on Syrian women. While
welcoming the Special Envoy’s recent meeting with
the Women’s Advisory Board, we stress the need for
the meaningful participation of Syrian women to the
extent of at least a З0 per-cent representation in all
decision-making bodies.
We call for a national cessation of hostilities in
order to ensure the protection of civilians. As others
before me have highlighted, Belgium is also seriously
concerned about the upsurge in violence in Idlib. It
is imperative that all parties, including the Astana
guarantors, remain fully committed to the agreement
that was signed in September. In Deir ez-Zor, the
last battle against Da’esh has just ended. But the end
of Da’esh as a terrorist organization with a territorial
base does not mean the end of the threat that that group
poses. It is essential that the international community
remain vigilant in order to avoid its resurgence.
Lastly, I would like to say a few words on
reconstruction. Belgium fully supports the European
Union’s position. We will be ready to assist in
reconstruction only when a comprehensive, genuine
and inclusive political transition, negotiated by the
Syrian parties to the conflict on the basis of resolution
2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva communiqué, is
firmly under way.
I

Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and

First, the international community should continue
to push for a political process in Syria. The United
Nations should enhance its coordination with the
Syrian Government to facilitate the early formation of
a constitutional committee that is representative and
acceptable to the parties concerned. At the same time, it
is necessary to take into account the legitimate concerns
of the relevant parties, including the Syrian Government,
in a balanced manner, with a view to setting in motion
a viable, sustainable political process. Security Council
members should maintain unity and speak with one
voice in support of the work of the United Nations and
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General.
Secondly, the international community should
continue the fight terrorist forces. It should strengthen
cooperation on counter-terrorism efforts and adopt a
unified standard to combat all Council-listed terrorist
organizations so as to prevent their return, which would
jeopardize the hard-won security gains achieved on the
ground. In Idlib, there are signs pointing to a resurgence
of terrorist organizations that would threaten the
security and stability of Syria; we must not turn a blind
eye. China supports the efforts by the parties concerned
to find a proper solution to the situation in Idlib.
Thirdly, the international community should
continue efforts to improve the humanitarian situation.
It should enhance its assistance to the country on the
basis of humanitarian needs on the ground. Relevant
operations should be carried out in strict conformity
with relevant resolutions and on the basis of respect for
Syrian sovereignty. China pays close attention to the
humanitarian issue in Syria — through bilateral and
multilateral channels, it has provided the Syrian people,
including Syrian refugees beyond Syria’s borders, with

19-0868519/24

S/PV.8493

The situation in the Middle East

27/03/2019

emergency humanitarian supplies and cash assistance
in the amount of RMB770 million.

tribute to the courage and determination of the Syrian
Democratic Forces.

Fourthly, the international community should
find a proper solution to the question of refugees and
move forward with reconstruction. A fundamental
improvement of the humanitarian situation in Syria
requires that the international community lend active
support to the Syrian Government and people in their
economic and social reconstruction in order to create
appropriate conditions for the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons and to help the Syrian
people rebuild their confidence and resume a normal
life. The return of Syrian refugees would also help to
ease the pressure faced by their host countries.

Let us make no mistake. Just as it would be a
serious political mistake to think that the Syrian
tragedy is behind us, similarly it would be a serious
misapprehension to think that the fight against Da’esh
is over and that we can move on to other things.

China supports the efforts of the United Nations in its
role as a principal mediator to facilitate the engagement
of the Syrian parties in an inclusive political process
in order to arrive at a settlement that is acceptable to
the parties concerned and conforms with the Syrian-led
and Syrian-owned principle and the spirit of resolution
2254 (2015). The sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Syria must be upheld throughout
that entire process. China has consistently supported
a political solution to the Syrian question and stands
ready to enhance its communication and coordination
with the relevant parties, including the United Nations,
in order to play a positive and constructive role in
moving the political process forward.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo and Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham for
their especially insightful briefings. For my part, I would
like to come back to the three points of consensus that
bring us together — first, the fight against terrorism;
secondly, the need to protect civilians; and, thirdly, the
implementation of a political solution.
First, our common priority is to continue to pool
our efforts against terrorism in Syria and ensure
respect for the front lines with a view to achieving a
national ceasefire.
The territorial defeat of Da’esh in Syria, announced
on 23 March, marks, after the retaking of Raqqa
and the fall of the caliphate in Iraq in late 2017, a
new and important stage in the combat against that
terrorist group. Once again, we would like to pay
20/24

This territorial victory should not make us forget
the scope of the challenges we are facing in our efforts to
prevent the resurgence of Da’esh in one form or another.
That terrorist group, which, although it has been driven
underground, continues to have considerable financial
reserves and remains a threat. It is therefore vital to
maintain a robust capacity for action against it and to
continue with our efforts to stabilize the entire region in
order to consolidate the conditions for a lasting victory.
In that regard, the announcement that an American
military contingent will remain in the north-eastern
part of the country is good news. The hold that the Hayat
Tahrir al-Sham terrorist group has on almost all of the
Idlib de-escalation zone also remains a serious source of
concern, as mentioned by several of my colleagues. We
must jointly reflect on the issue in order to respond to
the threat in a coordinated manner, while maintaining
the ceasefire agreement arrived at by Russia and Turkey
and endorsed by the Istanbul Summit. A new offensive
would have tragic human consequences and cause the
fighters involved to disperse, which would pose a threat
to the security of us all.
The recent resurgence of bombings by the regime
and its supporters in violation of these agreements is
in this regard very worrisome, and we call for them to
cease. In that same vein, France wishes to reiterate here
the importance of a nationwide ceasefire, in keeping
with resolution 2254 (2015). Any military action that
would call into question the current front lines would
imperil the peace process, destabilize Syria and the
region, and risk jeopardizing the gains made in the
fight against terrorism. The Syrian people would once
again be the primary victims.
The second priority is a humanitarian one, as the
situation in Syria in this respect remains disastrous.
We once again call on all of the parties to honour their
commitments under international humanitarian law,
which, I would recall, is not negotiable. Here I am
referring to two absolute priorities: on the one hand,
the imperative need to protect civilians, including
humanitarian and medical personnel, and, on the other,
19-08685

27/03/2019

The situation in the Middle East

the need to guarantee immediate, safe, comprehensive,
unimpeded and sustainable access to all of the Syrian
territory, in line with the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council and international humanitarian law.
To cite but a few examples, it is unacceptable for the
regime to continue to deliberately impede humanitarian
access to eastern Ghouta and the south-west so as to
punish the people of that area. Likewise, it is urgent
that a new assistance convoy be deployed to Rukban
camp; that is an immediate and vital priority.
We call on all influential actors to bring pressure
to bear on the regime to authorize such a convoy and
guarantee safe and unimpeded humanitarian access to
the areas it has retaken. It is vital also to ensure that
the return of those who were displaced from Rukban
takes place in line with international humanitarian law
and in close coordination with the United Nations. It is
also imperative to ramp up the humanitarian response
in the north-eastern part of the country so as to handle
the inflow of displaced persons. France is fully playing
its part in this effort and has released considerable
emergency funding in order to support the humanitarian
response in the region.
Support for the Syrian people and those countries
hosting refugees requires the continuing mobilization of
all actors. In that respect, the commitments undertaken
during the third Brussels Conference on Supporting the
Future of Syria and the Region must be implemented
without delay. Nationally speaking, France has
announced a contribution of more than €1 billion for
the period 2019-2021.
In that context, the third central priority is a
political one. Only a political solution based on
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex) can lead to the sustainable stability
of Syria and the region. We have underlined on several
occasions that the constitutional committee, provided
that agreement is reached on its composition and its
rules of procedure, could make a useful contribution to
the political process.
More generally speaking, the Special Envoy, Geir
Pedersen, has our full support in undertaking initiatives
on the implementation of all aspects of the road map.
This will include three elements: a nationwide ceasefire;
the implementation of confidence-building measures
conducive to the creation of the safe and neutral
environment required by the Geneva communiqué; and
the holding of free and transparent elections.

S/PV. 8493

In that regard, the Special Envoy’s resolve to work
on the issues of detained and disappeared persons
seems particularly relevant to us and requires our full
support. The United Nations is the only body that can
ensure that real strides are made in these priority areas.
Similarly, it is clear to all that only tangible advances
in the aforementioned areas will make it possible for
refugees to consider returning home. The political and
security situation is not yet conducive to the voluntary
return of displaced persons and refugees to Syria under
safe and dignified conditions, under the auspices of the
United Nations.
France is very concerned by reports of arbitrary
arrests of returning refugees by the Syrian security
services. In the areas retaken by the regime in particular,
such practices violate the relevant agreements.
We would point to the responsibility of Russia, as
guarantor of these agreements, to bring pressure to
bear on the regime to ensure that the provisions thereof
are respected.
Irreversible and credible advances towards a
political solution will be vital to the rebuilding of the
country, the normalization of relations with the regime
and the lifting of sanctions. It is essential and urgent
for the Syrian regime to commit itself in good faith to
that goal.
Beyond the very real differences that persist
among Council members, today’s exchanges also show
that is a strong convergence of views among us on the
three priorities of the combat against terrorism, the
humanitarian imperative and the quest for an inclusive
political solution based on resolution 2254 (2015).
On behalf of France, I wish to launch an urgent
appeal: let us switch off the automatic pilot and work
tirelessly together in order to build on this convergence
and move together towards peace. This is no longer
a mission impossible. Our conviction is that today,
possibly for the first time in eight years, we have a
narrow window of opportunity to put an end to the
Syrian conflict. So let us together take this opportunity,
despite the immense difficulties ahead; we do not have
a moment to lose.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

19-0868521/24

S/PV.8493

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
French): Allow me at the outset to say a few words
in French.
I wish to recall for Council members quotations from
a former director of the Louvre museum, André Parrot,
and the famous French archaeologist Charles Virolleaud.
Why do I refer to those two persons? It is because both
of them said something of great importance about Syria
a long time ago that should nevertheless be recalled by
all today. Charles Virolleaud was the first archaeologist
to decipher the Ugaritic alphabet — the first alphabet
in the world — discovered in the ancient port of Ugarit
next to the city of Latakia on the Syrian coast, which
inspired the following pronouncement by André Parrot:
“Every civilized person has two homelands — their
own and Syria”.
That leads me to another quote attributed to Diderot,
who purportedly said:
“Politics is not a frivolous anecdote but rather
a responsibility”.
(spoke in Arabic)
My colleagues in the Security Council will perhaps
remember that, from the first day of this terrorist war
led by the Governments of certain countries against my
country, we have been saying that its main goal was to
ensure the Israeli occupation of Arab territories and its
perpetuation, based on the plan set forth by the United
States. The latest decision by the United States President
to recognize what he termed, “Israeli sovereignty”
over the occupied Syrian Golan justifies what we
have been saying. That sheds light on the plan that
targets my country in particular, and the entire region
in general. It is a criminal plan for which the United
States Government and its allies have used every tool at
their disposal to carry out. They used all immoral and
illegitimate tools to ensure the spread of chaos, in and
the destruction of, our region so as to divide it along
religious and ethnic lines in order to create a new reality
like that which was imposed by colonists under the
Sykes-Picot Agreement and the Balfour Declaration.
All of that is adorned with the ideas and theories that
certain politicians have repeated, such as creative chaos
and the new Middle East.
Those States of the new occupation plans have
spared no effort to implement them. They have used
every weapon in their arsenal at their disposal. They
have defamed religion. They have encouraged radical,
22/24

27/03/2019

extremist and takfirist movements. They have applied
political pressure. They have spread disinformation. All
of that has been accompanied by support for terrorists
and foreign fighters in their various groupings, names
and allegiances, the most prominent of which are the
terrorists of Da’esh and the Al-Nusra Front, which
have waged systematic attacks against Syria, its
sovereignty and territorial integrity. They have done
so through individual acts of aggression and through
collective acts of aggression, as well as within the
framework of an illegal international coalition which
committed war crimes and crimes against humanity
in my country. In addition, that illegal coalition waged
economic terrorism against Syria by using unilateral
coercive measures intended to bring down the Syrian
Government and its legitimate institutions.
The illegal coalition that invaded Baghdad in 2003
led to the rise of Al-Zarqawi, who was the head of
Al-Qaida in Iraq, followed by Al-Baghdadi, who was
the leader of the terrorist Da’esh group. The illegal
coalition against my country has given birth to yet
another terrorist personality — Al-Julani — who heads
the Al-Nusra Front, and quite clearly neither Baghdad
nor the Golan have anything to do with those terrorists
and those who share their obscurantist and takfirist
ideology. Someone named Al-Baghdadi, a native of
Baghdad, extended his influence to attack Baghdad.
Today a new personality — Al-Julani — a native of the
Golan, has been created to attack Syria and the Syrian
Golan. There is no coincidence regarding those names.
The Pentagon invented Al-Baghdadi and Al-Julani.
They did not stop there, however. The enemy
Governments of my country have used the humanitarian
situation and the untold suffering of our people to
undermine the credibility of the Syrian Government,
its reputation and the significant efforts that it has
made to support Syrians in overcoming this deplorable
situation. We see the relentlessness of such practices in
the fact that the United States forces and the terrorist
organizations supporting them have taken thousands of
unarmed civilians hostages in the Rukban camp in the
area of Al-Tanf for 1,791 days, without any consideration
for the suffering and disastrous living conditions that
the United Nations itself has observed. In that regard,
we recall that the representative of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs said, when the
second United Nations convoy arrived in the area,
that a survey was taken among the Al-Tanf refugees,
according to which the United Nations realized that
19-08685

27/03/2019

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8493

95 per cent of them wanted to return to their villages
and cities — 95 per cent of those in Rukban camp. I
ask the Council: Why are the Americans keeping
them there?

coast because of Turkish smuggling gangs who put
300 people onto each boat rather than 50. That is why
people used to drown in the Mediterranean because of
the Turkish smuggling gangs.

In that regard, we note that the Syrian Government
has taken all the necessary measures to free those
persons detained in that camp and end their suffering.
We call on the Security Council and the international
community to call upon all illegal forces to withdraw
immediately and unconditionally from the Syrian
territories. We also call on them to apply pressure on
the Americans so that those living in the camp can
move freely and unhindered, guarantee the security
of humanitarian convoys to end their suffering and
dismantle the camp.

With regard to the child Omran, who was on the
front page of The New York Times, the accusation was
that the Government had bombed Aleppo and killed
that child. Later it was proved that that was false and
that the child, Omran, had gone with his father to The
Hague and Geneva and proved that everything people
had seen was a pretence. They had forced him to look
like a child who had been seriously injured and he
was told what to say. That child and his father gave
testimony that it was all a lie.

I stress today before the Council to Israel, the
occupying Power, and its supporters in the United
States Administration, that betting on the war that they
have waged against my country for the past eight years
to destroy Syria and reduce its role as an Arab, Islamic
and regional leader has been a monumental mistake and
great failure.
I reaffirm Syria’s readiness to pursue its cooperation
with the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral so that he can carry out his mission successfully
by facilitating the intra-Syrian dialogue to bring about
a political solution that will serve the interests of
Syrians and ensure the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Syria and its people. That would
lead to eradicating terrorism and ending the illegal
foreign presence in Syria. Those many issues echo what
you said earlier, Mr. President. Syria reaffirms that the
political process must be Syrian-led and Syrian-owned.
The Syrian people have the exclusive right to decide on
the future of their country, their Constitution and all that
relates to national sovereignty, which are the domain
of the Syrian people, without foreign interference, as
provided for under international law, the Charter of the
United Nations and all the relevant Security Council
resolutions on Syria.
In conclusion, my colleague, the representative
of the United States, talked at the beginning of his
statement about killing and burning a 13-year-old boy.
That is an outright lie. There was no killing and burning
of a 13-year-old boy at the beginning of the conflict in
Syria. Let me repeat. That is a lie. With regard to the
child Aylan Kurdi, whom he mentioned, yes, he was
a Syrian child but he died in Turkey on the Turkish

The United States representative mentioned
the killing of persons in Khan Shaykhun. As we say
in Arabic, when there is no shame, people can say
whatever they want. Everyone knows that a commission
of inquiry was supposed to go to Khan Shaykhun but it
refused to go. The site was not examined. The United
Nations mission did not go to Khan Shaykhun despite
our insistence that it should and despite our scores of
repeated requests for it to do so. Our United States
colleague concluded that there were killings in Khan
Shaykhun due to an attack by the Syrian regime, as he
says. That is a lie and a disgrace.
Our United States colleague also said that he wanted
to send a third humanitarian convoy to Rukban. Let me
repeat that the United Nations and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs have attested that
95 per cent of the people in that camp want to leave it.
So why organize a third or fourth humanitarian convoy
unless the real objective is to continue that anomaly?
They want to continue blackmailing Syria and the
international community by using the Syrian refugees
in Rukban. Let them leave. The Syrian Government
wants them to leave the camp. The vehicles are ready to
take them. The Syrian Red Crescent is ready. Let them
go and put a stop to that blackmail.
The United States is imposing economic sanctions
not only on Syria but also on those who assist Syria. The
most recent United States sanctions is that the office
linked to the United States Treasury that controls assets
issued a new circular yesterday threatening ships that
transport humanitarian aid to Syria with an embargo.
But the United States colleague wants to send aid to
Rukban. I say that he sheds crocodile tears regarding the
humanitarian situation of the Syrian people, while his

19-0868523/24

S/PV.8493

The situation in the Middle East

Government is at the same time preventing such ships
from transporting humanitarian assistance to Syria.
Regarding the positions that have been liberated by
the so-called Syrian Democratic Forces and the United
States forces, can the Americans tell us where the
Da’esh leaders are? Where are they? Da’esh has been
eliminated, is that not so? So where is Al-Baghdadi?
Where are the leaders? Where are he and his gang?
Where are the Da’esh fighters? What happened to those
people? What about the investigations? Where does the
information come from? Where did the people come
from? Who sent them? Where is the accountability in
that regard? Who is going to request accountability
for the crimes committed by Da’esh terrorists in Syria
and Iraq? Why are their leaders now hiding or being

24/24

27/03/2019

hidden? They have been transferred to special camps
under American control. Why? Why do we not disclose
the identity of those who have been arrested? Who
are those leaders? Or is the United States planning to
recycle them and send them to another front somewhere
else? I expect answers from my United States colleague
to all such questions.
Syria is a victim of manipulation by the intelligence
services under the auspices of the United States of
America. That is what Hamad bin Jassim Al-Thani,
former Prime Minister of Qatar, said. He noted that
Qatar had spent $137 billion to destroy Syria on the
basis of a directive from Washington. It is a disgrace.
That is all.
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

19-08685
