S/2006/950

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 December 2006
Original: English

Letter dated 7 December 2006 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the decision adopted by the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union at its 40th meeting, held in Addis Ababa on 6 October
2005. I also refer to Security Council resolution 1633 (2005) of 21 October 2005,
which established an International Working Group to assist the Government of Côte
d’Ivoire in the implementation of its programme and to consolidate and strengthen
the existing follow-up mechanisms.
In this regard, I am forwarding the text of the communiqué issued by the
International Working Group at the conclusion of its eleventh ministerial meeting,
held in Abidjan on 1 December 2006 (see annex).
I would be grateful if you would bring this communiqué to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

06-65040 (E) 111206

*0665040*

S/2006/950

Annex
[Original: English and French]

Final communiqué of the eleventh ministerial meeting of the
International Working Group on Côte d’Ivoire
Abidjan, 1 December 2006
1.
The 1st ministerial meeting of the International Working Group after the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1721 (2006) of 1 November 2006 was held
at Abidjan on 1 December 2006 under the joint chairmanship of Rodolphe Adada,
Minister of State, Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Francophonie of the Congo,
and Pierre Schori, Special Representative of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations for Côte d’Ivoire. In attendance were the Ministers of France and Ghana, as
well as the Special Representative of the current Chairman of the African Union, the
African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security, the Executive Secretary of the
Economic Community of West African States, the High Representative for Elections
in Côte d’Ivoire and the representatives of Benin, Guinea, the Niger, Nigeria, South
Africa, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States
of America, the European Union, the International Organization of la Francophonie
and the World Bank.
2.
The Group was briefed by the Prime Minister on the initial measures he has
taken or envisaged to take towards carrying out the immediate tasks spelled out in
Security Council resolution 1721 (2006) and the obstacles he has encountered. The
Group provided the Prime Minister, at his request, with appropriate clarifications
concerning the authority vested in him by the Security Council in its resolution 1721
(2006) over the Defence and Security Forces and the Armed Forces of the Forces
Nouvelles. The Group recalled the obligation bestowed on it to report immediately
to the Security Council any obstacle or problem that the Prime Minister might
encounter in the exercise of his functions and to identify those responsible. The
International Working Group also stated that the Prime Minister, at his convenience,
will judge, in all matters, whether it is opportune for him to take the necessary
decisions either in the Council of Ministers or in the Council of Government.
3.
The Group notes with deep concern the delay already registered in
implementing resolution 1721 (2006) and the deterioration of the political climate,
which is linked largely to the handling of the severe toxic waste crisis. The Group
encourages the Prime Minister to pursue his efforts to fight impunity and promote
good governance and, in this regard, it welcomes the recommendations made by the
National Commission of Inquiry into the dumping of toxic waste and understands
the deep dissatisfaction felt by the population over the reinstatement of officials
who had been suspended by the Prime Minister.
4.
The Group recalls that in resolution 1721 (2006), the Security Council calls for
full compliance by all Ivorian parties and that no legal provisions should be invoked
by them to obstruct the peace process.
5.
The Group also recalls paragraph 21 of the decision of 17 October 2006 of the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union, which “urges all Ivorian parties to
exercise maximum restraint, work together to overcome the current stalemate and
refrain from any unilateral action during the transition period”. In this regard, the

2

06-65040

S/2006/950

Group condemns the dismissal of the directors-general of the Radio Télévision
Ivorienne and Fraternité Matin as well as the dissolution of the Boards of Directors
of the companies concerned. The Group notes that these decisions, which are
contrary to the Pretoria Agreement, undermine the neutrality and impartiality of the
public media, which are guaranteed by the peace agreements, as well as freedom of
expression. The Group therefore considers that it is indispensable to reinstate the
dismissed officials.
6.
Bearing in mind the assessment of the peace process scheduled to be
conducted by 1 February 2007 and while encouraging the Prime Minister in his
determination to fully implement Security Council resolution 1721 (2006), the
Group invites him to take or initiate the following immediate measures:
(a) Relaunching of the process of pre-identification: the Government and
the relevant authorities should immediately relaunch the issuing of substitute birth
certificates and certificates of nationality in the existing jurisdictions. At the same
time, the Government must create the necessary conditions for the pre-identification
process throughout the national territory, including the adoption of the required
regulatory texts to render the process efficient and the assigning of judges to the
new jurisdictions. These measures should be taken by 10 December 2006 at the
latest. The preparations for the identification project, in particular the selection of
the technical operator and a public information campaign, should be aimed at
ensuring that the registration of the population can begin on 1 February 2007.
(b) Identification of the population: the working group on identification
will have to be established by 5 December 2006 at the latest.
(c) Preparations for the elections: the Group requests those political actors
who have not yet done so to nominate their representatives on the local structures of
the Independent Electoral Commission before 15 December 2006. After
15 December 2006, the Independent Electoral Commission must open all its local
structures, including those comprising the nominated members. The Group requests
the Commission to urgently set and publish an electoral timetable, including the
date for the first round of the presidential election.
(d) Disarmament and demobilization of ex-combatants, dismantling and
disarmament of militias: the Group demands that the parties controlling the
militias and ex-combatants fully participate in the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and the dismantling and disarmament of militia processes led by the
Prime Minister. The rehabilitation of the sites must be completed by 15 January
2007.
(e) Reform of the security sector: the Working Group on the reform of the
security sector should also be set up by 5 December 2006 at the latest, and the dates
of the national seminar should be announced at the same time.
(f) Code of Conduct for the Media: pursuant to paragraph 19 of resolution
1721 (2006), the Prime Minister should publish a code of conduct for the media by
15 December 2006 at the latest, and should take immediate measures with a view to
its effective application.
7.
Within this context, the Group feels that the impartial forces should contribute,
as a priority, to ensuring the security of the electoral process, particularly in its

06-65040

3

S/2006/950

pre-identification and identification phases, as well as that of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process.
8.
The Group affirms its determination to continue to work with all the Ivorian
parties with a view to contributing to a rapid resolution of the crisis, in keeping with
its role as guarantor and impartial arbiter of the peace process. The Group
recommends to the African Union mediation to initiate urgently the necessary
actions to restore a climate conducive to ending the crisis.
9.
The Group also reminds all Ivorian parties that it is determined to recommend
to the Security Council the implementation of appropriate sanctions against any
person who might obstruct the effective start-up of the implementation of resolution
1721 (2006), including through incitements to hatred and violence.
10. Recalling the provisions of paragraph 31 of resolution 1721 (2006) concerning
the individual responsibility of the members of the Defence and Security Forces of
Cote d’Ivoire and the Armed Forces of the Forces Nouvelles, whatever their rank, in
the implementation of the peace process, the Group condemns the repeated
impediments to and obstruction of the freedom of movement of the impartial forces
and, in particular, the refusal by the Republican Guard to grant staff of the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire in charge of the security of the Prime Minister
access to the compound of the Office of the Prime Minister, as was the case on
1 December. Those responsible for this inadmissible incident will be reported to the
Security Council Sanctions Committee.
11.

4

The Group will hold its next meeting on 12 January 2007 in Côte d’Ivoire.

06-65040
