TWENTY-SECOND

YEAR

nd
MEETING: 9 JUNE 1967

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1352/Rev. 1)

. .,.., .. .. . . ,.. ..., ... ...

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . a . .
Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and
Denmark addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/7902); , . . . . .
Complaint of the representative of the United Arab Republic in a letter to the
President of the Security Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggressionthreatening peace and security in the Middle East
., ,. ...,. ., .
and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907);
Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/7910) . , . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , I . . .

spi;.1352

1

/
1
! ,
!

I”’

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Suppilements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes, of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED

AND FIFTY-SECOND

MEETING

Held in New York on Friday, 9 June 1967, at 12.30 p.m.
President: Mr. Hans R. TABOR (Denmark).

Republic, Lebanon, Iraq,‘Morocco, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait,
Tunisia and Libya to take the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber in order to participate
without vote in the discussion.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America,

At the invitation of the President, Mr. 6. Rafael(Israel),
Mr. M. A. El Kony (Cmited Arab Republic), Mr. M. H.
El-Farra (Jordan), Mr. G. J. Tomeh (Syria), Mr, S.
Chammas (Lebanon), Mr. K, Khalaf (Iraq), Mr, A. T.
Benhima (Morocco), Mr. J. M. Baroody (SaudiArabia), Mr.
S. Al-Shaheen (Kuwait), Mr. M. Mestiri (Tunisia) and
Mr. W. El Bouti (Libya) took the places reserved for them

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 352/Rev.l)
1, Adoption of the agenda.
2, Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Repro
sentatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902).

2. The PRESIDENT: At one o’clock this morning I was
informed by the Secretariat that the Secretary-General had
just received the following cable from the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Syrian Arab Republic:

3. Complaint of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907).

“In reply to your two telegrams of 6 and 7 June 1967,
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic has decided
to accept the two appeals for a cease-fire contained in the
resolutions of the Security Council (233(1967) and
234 (I967)J, provided that the other party accepts the
cease-fire .“l (Sf 7958.1

4. Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/79 10).

3. At 5.30 this morning I received the following communication from the Permanent Representative of Israel to the
United Nations:

Adoption of the agenda
“During the course of yesterday (8 June) afternoon and
into the night (local time), sixteen Israel villages along the
northern border from Ein Baruch in the north to Tel
Qatsir in the south, were shelled by Syrian artillery. This
shelling was resumed this morning when Syria again
directed heavy artillery fire against these villages. Israel
forces are presently engaged in the process of siIencing
the Syrian gun positions.

The agenda wasadopted.
Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902);
Complaint of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international
peace and security” (S/7907);

“I have brought this to your urgent attention in view of
the fact that I was informed at 1 a.m. (New York time)
this morning by the United Nations communication
centre, acting upon instructions from Mr. Bunche, that
the Foreign Minister of Syria had notified the SecretaryGeneral of Syria’s acceptance of the cease-fire. Heavy
Syrian artillery fire continued to be directed against Israel
villages for many hours after this message was received by
the United Nations.

Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/7910)

“I have the, honour to request that this letter be
circulated immediately as a Security Council document.”

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
previously taken by the Council, I shall now, with the
consent of the Council, invite the representatives of Israel,
the United Arab Republic, Jordan, the Syrian Arab

1 Quoted in French by the speaker.
I

,L

I
,

4, Then at 6 o’clock this morning I received a request
from the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic for an urgent meeting of the Security Council. In
accordance with the understanding upon which our meeting
was adjourned yesterday afternoon, that members would
remain available in the event of any emergency, I have
therefore convened this meeting on short notice.
5. The Council will now continue its discussion of the
three items inscribed on its agenda. I should like to remind
members of the Council of the three draft resolutions
presently pending before it: the Canadian draft resolution
[S/7941 J, the USSR draft resolution [S/7951/Rev. I/, and
the United States draft resolution, which is now in the
process of being reproduced in a newly revised text
(S/7952/Rev.2].

11. General Bull was unable to contact the UNTSO
Tiberias control centre and then contacted the Israel
authorities, recalling to them that both sides had accepted a
cease-fire and expressing his deep concern about the new
developments.
12. At 7.45 a.m. New York time, I received reports from
General Bull based on reports from the Israel-Syrian Mixed
Armistice’ Commission of artillery shelling and air bombing
in the central demilitarized zone at between 0745 and 0755
hours GMT. Further bombardment and aerial activity were
reported by the Tiberias control centre half an hour later,
The Chairman of the Israel-Syrian Mixed Armistice Corn.
mission requested headquarters, UNTSO, to contact Israel
authorities.

13. General Bull also reported at this time that he had
been informed by the Israel authorities that there was
heavy shelling going on in the north near Syria, including
the town of Safad, and that in the early hours of the
morning some sixteen villages and towns had come under
heavy artillery fire.

6, Before giving the floor to the first speaker on my list, I
would ask the Secretary-General to make a statement,
7. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
At thirty-six minutes
past midnight New York time today, I received the message
from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Syrian Arab
Republic which has just been read by you, Mr. President.

14. At 8.21 a.m. New York time, I received through
commercial channels the following message, similar to that
transmitted by the Chairman of the Israel-Syrian Mixed
Armistice Commission, from the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Syrian Arab Republic:

8. The Permanent Representative of Israel was informed
of this message by telephone at five minutes past one
o’clock this morning, New York time. The President of the
Security Council was similarly informed, and the message
was immediately relayed to the Chief of Staff of UNTSO,
with Instructions to inform the Israel authorities in Jerusalem.

“In spite of our acceptance of the two appeals in the
resolutions of the Security Council for a cease-fire, which
was communicated in our telegram of this morning and
broadcast over Radio Damascus at the same time, Israel
continues its aerial aggression over Syrian territory
combined with a general attack by the Israel army and
tanks. We have managed to stay calm so far. We ask
immediate measures to prevent the war from breaking out
afresh.

9. At 7.14 a.m., New York time today, I was advised by
the Chairman of the Israel-Syrian Mixed Armistice Commission that he had received the following messagefrom Syria:
“In spite of our observance of the cease-fire which was
communicated to you at 4 a.m. this morning we are now
being subjected to an Israel attack on the whole length of
the armistice demarcation line and against our towns and
villages which began this morning, and continues at this
moment. Different arms are being employed, aircraft,
tanks, artillery and infantry. We hold the Security
Council and the international conscience responsible for
this criminal aggression. We demand immediately the
convocation of the Security Council, the immediate
cessation of the aggression and the punishment of the
aggressors. Please circulate this document to the members
of the Security Council,

“Ibrahim MAKHOUS
“Minister for Foreign Affairs
“Syrian Arab Republic”
15. At 0930 hours New York time today, I received a
message from the Chairman of the Israel-Syrian Mixed
Armistice Commission stating that the first confirmed
bombing by Israel aircraft north and east of Lake Tiberias
was at 0746 hours GMT on 9 June. The message went on to
say that “Bombing, napalming and strafing have been
continuous up to 1218 hours GMT. The bombing of the
village of Sqoufiye now in progress. Heavy explosions also
heard north of Lake Tiberias.”

“Ibrahim MAKHOUS
‘Minister for Foreign Affairs
“Syrian Arab Republic”

16. At 10.32 a.m. New York time today, I received the
following message through the Israel-Syrian Mixed Armi%
tice Commission in Damascus frop the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Syrian Arab Republic:

10. At 0900 hours GMT-that
is, 5 a.m. New York
time-the Chief of Staff of UNTSO received a message from
the Israel authorities strongly advising against the intention
of the Chairman of the Israel-Syrian Mixed Armistice
Commission to man observation posts on the Syrian side of
the line as this would be a severe risk to the safety of the
military observers, since there was severe shelling and
shooting in the area.

“Israel attack still going on inside our territory, All
enemy air and ground arms assaulting our country, Israel
lying. Did not for a moment respect Security Council ,
resolutions. We request immediate convening of Security
2

Council and prompt
aggression immediately.

compulsion

for Israel to stop

23. Two hours ago I received a copy of a cabIe addressed
by my Government to the Secretary-General, I had intented
to read the text out to the Security Council during this
brief statement, but since the Secretary-General has already
done so, I need not repeat it, It suffices to emphasize that
the report of the Secretary-General, based on the reports of
the Mixed Armistice Commission, confirms what I have
stated so far.

“Ibrahim MAKIIOUS
“‘Minister for Foreign Affairs
“Syrian Arab Republic”

17. At 12.13 p.m. today-just about half an hour ago-I
received the following report from General Bull:

24. I wish also to emphasise that as I proceeded here, I
received the news that two air attacks by a large number of
Israel planes had already taken place over my capital,
Damascus. In fact, the first of them started at 1000 hours
New York time, when the Security Council was scheduled
to meet.

“Following messages received from Chairman, IsraelSyrian Mixed Armistice Commission. Time of dispatch is
indicated before text of each message:
“A. 1246 hours Z. ‘We confirm bombing in vicinity
Damascus. Senior Syrian delegate has requested that
Chief of Staff send a message to U Thant concerning
current development.’
“B. 1248 hours Z. ‘Unobserved explosions and heavy
artillery fire continues far north from Tiberias. Tiberias
Control Centre confirms Israel jet aircraft in the area.
Senior Syrian delegate alleged 200 Israel aircraft in the
area. Considerable movement of troops and targets
engaged as far east as Kuneitra.’
“C. 1401 hours Z. ‘Damascus having an air raid.’ ”

25. What is happening today is tragic confirmation of
what we have been constantly saying to the Security
Council: that Israel planned to invade Syria. My information as of 9.50 this morning wasthat this aggression was
continuing with increasing intensity, and it is not decreasing
in the least as I address you now.
26. The time has come for the Security Council to act
promptly and decisively, I need not go further, for I wish to
facilitate the Council’s task in discharging its responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
For the threat and the aggression are now present, grave
and overwhelming.

18. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker on my list is the
representative of Syrian Arab Republic, whom I invite to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
19. Mr. TOMEI-I (Syria): Mr. President, let me expressmy
delegation‘s deepest appreciation to you and to the
members of the Security Council for having favourably
responded to the request which I communicated to you,
upon instructions from my Government, for an urgent
meeting of the Security Council, The situation is very grave
indeed, and I shall be very brief.

27. No clearer case of aggression could exist than the one I
am presenting to the Security Council. The Israel invasion
of Syria, premeditated and well prepared, is a violation of
the cease-fire and also of the spirit and letter of the United
Nations Charter. This invasion is proceeding against a
Member State, and I respectfully submit that the very
existence of the United Nations will be in jeopardy as long
as this aggression persists.

20. My Government declared its acceptance of the ceasefire as stipulated in the Security Council resolutions of 6
and 7 June f233 (1967) and 234 (1967)]. That acceptance
was officially cabled to the Secretary-General. Early this
morning I personally checked with the competent authorities of the United Nations, and they confirmed that they
actually received that acceptance today at 0036 hours New
York time-that is, during the first hour of this morning.

28. The PRESIDENT: I now invite the representative of
Israel to take a place at the Council table and make a
statement.
29. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel): At 5.30 this morning I asked
Mr. Chai2 to transmit to you, Mr. President, a report which
I had received that very hour from my Government in
Jerusalem. I subsequently confirmed that report in writing
and requested that my letter be circulated to the members
of the Council, The text of that letter was read by you, Mr.
President, to the members of the Council. Shortly after I
had conveyed the information to Mr. Chai, I wascontacted
by a member of the Danish delegation, on behalf of the
President, who confirmed the receipt of the information.
He inquired whether I requested the President to take
action. I replied that Israel had announced its acceptance of
the cease-fire provided that the other Governments involved
would do likewise.

21. The decision of the Syrian Government to accept the
cease-fire was broadcast over Damascus Radio in an official
communiqu&, and all our forces strictly abided by it.
22. One hour later, the Israel military forces unleashed
vast air and land operations, which are proceeding with
increasing intensity at the present time, leaving no doubt
that their aim is the ,total invasion of Syria, As I addressthe
Council now, Israel military aircraft are indiscriminately
bombarding military positions, towns, villages and civilians.
COIU~IIS of heavy armour are destroying every trace of life
and property in their advance inside Syrian territory. The
ruthlessness of the aggressor is indescribable. My country
and people are being subjected, while I speak here, to the
most barbaric slaughter committed by the very forces
whose representative only yesterday before this Council
was advocating peace, co-operation, coexistence and
what-not.

30. The fact that Syria was continuing military operations
was very disturbing, particularly because the Syrian attacks
were directed against the civilian population of no less than
2 D&?ctor

of the Security Council and Political Committees

Division, Department of Political and Security Council Affairs Of
the Secretariat.

3

sixteen villages along the whole length of the Israel-Syrian
frontier. I expressed the hope that the President would take
urgent steps to ensure that the Syrian Government and
army would strictly abide by its acceptance of the
cease-fire. I was given to understand that the President
could not act on his own in this matter, but had to consult
the Security Council.

opened fire on Israel hilltop positions on the Syrian
border eighteen miles north of Tiberias on the Sea of
Galilee. Israel artillery responded promptly.”
36. I wish to reaffirm that my Government is prepared to
observe a cease-fire on this front, as it is doing on the
others, as soon as it is assured that the Syrian Government
has issued the necessary orders to all its fighting forces for
an immediate cease-fire, and that the Syrian firing has
ceased. I have just spoken on the telephone with Jerusalem
and have been told that Syria is still shelling villages and its
artillery fire is directed at the villages of Haon, Tel Qatsir,
Shamir, and Lahavot Habbashan.

31. At the same time as Syria announced its acceptance of
a cease-fire, it opened an attack of unusual vehemence
against Israel villages. It appears now that the Syrian
announcement was nothing else than a camouflage for a
premeditated and planned attack against Israel. The shelling, which was confirmed by the reports read by the
Secretary-General, is still going on and has caused heavy
damage to Israel villages. At this time I have only
fragmentary reports on the events, and it must be assumed
that the shelling has also caused a number of casualties.

37. May I ask you, Mr. President, to take the necessary
steps to obtain assurancesfrom the Syrian Government that
it has given the necessary orders to implement the cease-fire
resolutions of the Security Council. My Government will
act in strict compliance with its acceptance of the cease-fire
resolutions.

32. Israel was the first to welcome the cease-fire resolutions of the Security Council. For two long days the United
Arab Republic withheld its reply. Syria informed the
Secretary-General of its acceptance only in the early hours
of this morning. Yet, at the same time, it increased its
military action against Israel. Syria is proceeding on two
different roads. At the United Nations it announces its
acceptance of the cease-fire, and in the field it is stepping
up its military aggression.

38. The PRESIDENT: The Council has now heard the
statements of the representatives of Syria and Israel, I have
consulted all members of the Council, and it is my
understanding that there is agreement that, before we
proceed with our business, we ought, in the present
situation, to adopt urgently a resolution demanding that
hostilities ceaseforthwith.

33. As in the past, Syria continues to carry out acts of
aggression and violence while seeking shelter behind the
United Nations. When the recent hostilities began, it was
Syria which proclaimed all-out war against Israel, But long
before that it had organized, planned and carried out a long
series of hostile acts against Israel. It propagated false
allegations of Israel troop concentrations along the Syrian
border. All this was done to involve other States in a serious
obsessive campaign against Israel. That aim it has achieved,
with the well-known results. Although all its partners in this
adventure have by now faced up to the reality, Syria, in
spite of its professed acceptance of the cease-fire, is still
blindly pursuing, without restraint, its aggressive military
policy. All its radio broadcasts, emanating from Syrian
stations, are still full of the usual bombast and threat.

39. Therefore, in my capacity as President of the Council,
I have the honour to present a draft resolution [S/7960],
the text of which reads as follows:

34. This morning, at 2.30, Damascus Radio broadcast the
following call : “Your hour of action has come. Strike,
destroy, blast, Act now; do not hesitate”. At 10.55 local
time today, Damascus Radio announced that the war was
continuing, that it would continue and that it would be
long, Yesterday evening, at 7.45, Damascus Radio called on
El-Assefa, the terrorist band organization to which the
Syrian Deputy Foreign Minister referred a few days ago, to
strike at Israel. There are more transcripts of broadcasts
available, but this is an hour when we have to act swiftly
and therefore I do not want to delay action by the Security
Council.
35. I just want to add one piece of information. We have
here a news item coming from Hans Benedict, Associated
Press correspondent with Israel forces at the Syrian border.
His dispatch says:

“1. Confirms its previous resolutions about immediate
cease-fire and cessation of military action;

“The Secun’ty Council,
“‘Recalling its resolutions 233 (1967) of 6 June and 234
(1967) of ‘7 June 1967,
“Noting that the Governments of Israel and Syria have
announced their mutual acceptance of the Council’s
demand for a cease-fire,
“Noting the statements made by the representatives of
Syria and Israel,

“2. Demands that hostilities should ceaseforthwith;
“3. Requests the Secretary-General to make immediate
contacts with the Governments of Israel and Syria to
arrange immediate compliance with the above-mentioned
resolutions, and to report to the Security Council not
later than two hours from now.”
A vote wastaken by a show of hands.
The draft resolution wasadopted unanimously. 3
40. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): The
United States voted for the draft resolution presented by

“The heavy artillery duel between Syrian and Israel
batteries broke a shaky cease-fire Friday. Syrian mortars

3 Seeresolution 235 (1967).

4

1
/

the President of the Council
because of the extreme
urgency of the situation and because, ever since this grave
conflict broke out, we have consistently favoured an
immediate end to all fighting. Indeed, before the conflict
broke out, we sought by every possible means to avert it,
We were prepared to vote for such a cease-fire when we
walked into the Council before 10 o’clock this morning. We
only regret that over two hours were lost before the
Council was able to come to this decision. This delay was
no fault of yours, Mr. President. Throughout your handling
of this grave affair, YOU have acted with extreme expedition
and have made every effort to ensure that the Council
would act urgently and energetically in the interest of
stopping the fighting and bringing about more stable
conditions in the area.

its decisions. Part of our problem here has been the. fact
that some members of this Council have not been willing to
authorize the appropriate officials of the United Nations to
take action in implementation
of the Council’s resolutions.
It is not a high mark in the history of this Organization -that
a simple draft resolution offered a few days ago by the
representative of Canada [S/7941] was not promptly acted
upon but was thought to be something that required study
and consideration. What kind of study, what kind of
consideration, when what was called for wasall the energies
and resources of this Organization in the interest of
bringing the fighting to an end so that the Council could
then proceed to deal with the underlying causes of the
conflict, to pacify the situation and to help bring about a
durable peace.

41. I would be less than candid if I did not also say that
the delay was not due to the parties involved. Both parties
involved were ready for us to proceed at 10 a.m. Now, what
is the delay due to? It is, in my opinion, more than time to
call a spade a spade. The delay is due to the fact that other
members of the Council insist upon attempting to inject
into our discussions matters which should be handled next.
It is because some members of the Council do not
adequately, in my view, understand the extreme urgency of
bringing the fighting to an end and because they inject
into our discussion matters, important matters, which
should and will require the Council’s consideration after
we bring the fighting to an end.

45. Now we are finally using the Secretary-General, We
should have done so before. We should have followed the
suggestion made by the representative of Canada and
utilized the resources of this Organization for the purpose
of restoring peace to the area.
46. We are not doing credit to the United Nations by the
manner in which we have been proceeding. I say this with
the greatest regret, because I have great faith in this
Organization. This Organization is no stronger than the will
of its Members, and it has no magic wand unless its
Members are prepared to give it the magic wand that will
enable it to perform its duties.
47. If we go back, as we shall have to go back at the
appropriate time, and consider what happened in this
situation, we shall see that it has been a lack of ability to
concert our actions here once conflict has broken out, to
stop the fighting so that there can then be a sorting-out of
the problems that develop whenever fighting takes place.
This has been consistently our problem, and this morning
we were once more witnesses to the difficulty of doing the
minimum that is required for the purpose of containing a
very dangerous, situation.

42. It is only fair to recall that the same sort of
unfortunate delay took place on Monday and Tuesday. If
all of the members of the Council had been prepared, as we
were, to demand a cease-fire the moment the fighting broke
out, perhaps a great deal of bloodshed and many complications could have been avoided. Indeed, if all members of
the Council had been prepared on 24 May to support the
resolution [S/7905] that you, Mr. President, offered on
behalf of your country, joined by the representative of
Canada, perhaps no conflict would have taken place.

48. Because of our delay, people have lost their lives. That
is something for which we have to assume the responsibility
before the conscience of the world.

43. Now we have a grave conflict, and we must do
everything within our power to bring the fighting to an end,
to bring an end to the bloodshed and the hardship and the
loss of life that have occurred in the area. We have joined
other members of the Council, for the third time now, in
saying that there must be a cease-fire. And there must be a
cease-fire on the part of alI in practice, and not only in
words. The cease-fire must promptly be made fully effective and enduring in all sectors, That is our most urgent
task. Every minute that the fighting continues in the
present tense situation poses further dangers to peace.
Further delay in the full implementation of the cease-fire
resolutions of this Council is not acceptable-not acceptable, I think, to any member of the Council. All hostilities
must stop promptly and the cease-fire must be scrupulously
and continuously observed by all parties. Also, it must be
accepted by the combatant States that have not yet done

49. I believe that this type of manoeuvering ought to stop
h this brunch. I say this very plaiiily and very categorically. My Government is willing to concert its actions with
every member of the Council so that we can bring the
fighting to an end, so that we can start consideration of all
that we need to consider, so that we can make a major
contribution towards the restoration of peace in the area.
We are ready at any time to do this, we are ready under any
circumstances. We feel very strongly that when we delay
and when we engage in elaborate and unnecessary negotiations, quibbling about words, quibbling about ideas that are
not relevant to the particular problem at hand, which is to
stop the fighting, we do not do a service to the cause of
peace.

SO.

50. We have now acted. Had we acted before, we could
have had by now the report of the Secretary-General that
would have enabled us to see what has happened, and
hopefully his intervention would have brought about full
implementation of the cease-fire resolution.

44. My delegation is pleased that, to bring about this result
and to ensure that the cease-fire, once achieved, is strictly
adhered to, the Council has now acted to request the
Secretary-General to make energetic efforts to implement
5

5 1. I hope and trust that as we proceed in the handling of
this grave affair we shall all be conscious of our responsibilities to humanity, and that we shall proceed in such
fashion that this Council can act with expedition, in the
spirit of the Charter and with all its great force, to bring an
end to the fighting. Once this is achieved, I pledge, on
behalf of my Government, that we will do everything in our
power to act together with members of the Council in
dealing with all the other problems that will remain before
us. It was in that spirit that we offered our draft resolution
yesterday fSf7952/Rev.I].
But we must take care of first
things first, and the very first thing, as is apparent from the
conflicting reports we have received this morning, is that
the fighting should stop-and stop now.

taken by the Soviet Union was. Israel, the aggressor,has not
stopped its intensive military operations; it continues
cynically to flout the decisions of the Security Council aad
is acting in flagrant violation of the United Nations Charter,
60. AS can be seen from the document on the subject
which is available to the members of the Security
Council, and as has been repeated today, the Syrian
Government has accepted the Security Council’s decjsjon
concerning a cease-fire and the cessation of military
operations. Earlier, the Governments of Jordan and the
United Arab Republic had agreed to conform to the
decisions of the Security Council. But what course has
Tel-Aviv followed? The representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic, Mr. Tomeh, has just informed the members of
the Council that at this very hour, at this very minute,
while the Security Council is meeting, the Israel forces are
continuing their invasion of the territory of the Syrian Arab
Republic. The aggressor is becoming constantly bolder, aad
now-as, indeed, before-no further proof is needed fist
Tel-Aviv’s expansionist schemes know no limits.

[S/7958/

52. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republic} (translated from Russian): The Security Council,
convened at the request of Syria, has just taken, as an
extraordinary, urgent and provisional measure, a decision
concerning the continuing aggression of Israel, in this case
against the Syrian Arab Republic. The decision is a further
condemnation of Israel’s aggression, which continues in
defiance of the Security Council’s already adopted decisions.

6 1. Having seized a part of the territory of Jordan and the
United Arab Republic, the aggressor, taking advantage of
the fact that those two countries are complying with the
decision of the Security Council, has decided to strike a
blow at Syria, which has also accepted the Security
Council’s decision concerning a cease-fire. But the forces of
aggression dp not even bother to seek a pretext, They t&e
their weapons of argument from the same garbage heap of
history, from the arsenal of the most shameless criminals.
They are following in the bloody footsteps of the Hitlerike
executioners, who, in the same way, always charged their
victims with aggression. But the facts are inescapable; it is
the troops of Israel which are now developing their attack
on Syrian territory.

53. It is clear from the Secretary-General’s communication, which we have just heard in the Council, that
Israel’s armed forces are carrying out extensive military
operations against Syria, in which large numbers of aircraft
are taking part. Damascus, the capital of Syria, has also
been bombed.
54. Thus, the ruling circles of Tel-Aviv are continuing their
provocationist
and adventurist activities in pursuit of
carefully laid plans for expansion at the expense of the
Arab countries.
55. As in the past, efforts have continued to shield the
aggressor, to put the aggressor and the victim of aggression
on the same footing, The United States representative in his
statement tried to justify and defend Israel, despite the
irrefutabie fact that it is precisely the Israel interventionists
who have invaded Syrian territory. Such attempts by
professional lawyers must be categorically rejected as
fraudulent and completely devoid of substance.

62. In our statement to the Security Council we drew the
attention of the members to the fact that the Israel
representative, in his wordy statement, avoided answering
the most important and urgent question, which all peoples
in the world must inevitably be asking themselves, namely,
when will the Israel Government cease its aggression against
the Arab peoples’? When will Israel withdraw its troops from
the territories it has seized by its criminal attack on the
territories of Jordan and r-he United Arab Republic and,
now, of Syria?

56. We note that Washington continues to give the forces
of Israel aggression every assistance in their criminal
attempt to seize Arab lands by armed force.

63. We have had no answer to this question. Instead, we
have been told that Israel, despite the unanimous decisions
of the Security Council, continued to extend its aggressive
action to the territory of another Arab country, Syria,
which has long been the object of constant provocation bY
the extremist circles of Tel-Aviv.

57. Yesterday, as we all know, the Soviet Union delegation, on the instructions of its Government, requested an
urgent discussion in the Security Council of the question of
the cessation of Israel’s military activities and the withdrawal of its troops from the territories of the United Arab
Republic and Jordan, which had been seized as a result of
aggression.

64. Yesterday, my delegation drew attention to the fact
meeting] that in Tel-Aviv demands and claims
amounting to ultimatums are being put forward, and that
statements are being made to the effect that Israel will keep
part of the territory of the Arab countries seized as a res&
of aggression. None other than General Moshe Dayan, as
was stated at yesterday’s meeting of the Council, has
bluntly said that Israel’s forces will not withdraw from the
part of Jerusalem which they have seized. The insatiable

f1351st

58. The Soviet Union delegation, as members of the
Security Council will of course recall, presented a draft
resolution on the subject f5’/795I/Rev.l],
to which we
would again draw the Security Council’s attention.
59. The events of the last few hours show beyond
question how timely, important and urgent the initiative
6

of the aggressors seems to be increasing in this
bloodthirsty adventure; but, as is well known, not even an
earthworm can swallow the whole earth.

72. Is ‘it not significant that the United States representative continues to speak in the Security Council of
anything and everything except the fact that Israel has
committed aggression and that Israel has seized Arab lands
by force in violation of all the principles and standards of
internationa1 law and of the provisions of the United
Nations Charter?

appetite

65, It is clear that the forces of expansionism enjoy not
only the blessing but the support of Washington, in
particular, We are constantly receiving new reports to the
effect that Israel intends to put forward political and
territorial claims, taking advantage of the aggression it has
committed. As we know,
the Prime Minister of Israel,
Mr, Eshkol, declared last night that the situation resulting
from the conflict “has created a new political reality in the
Near East.”

73. Some speakers have shown a great desire to obscure
matters and to create a smoke-screen, by trying to give the
impression that the true circumstances of the aggression are
not clear, that the situation has to be studied, investigated,
clarified.

66. Tel-Aviv has already abandoned its hypocritical references to principles, the Unned Nations Charter and
international law. It does not need these any more. Its
policy and its claims are now based on the “new reality” to
which Mr. Eshkol referred. We also have information that
Israel is also taking practical measures, by expelling the
Palestinians from Jerusalem.

74. The circumstances are crystal-clear, and the attempts
of the United States representative to divert the Security
Council from the main problem must be unmasked here.
The Security Council cannot remain inactive, Israel’s
aggression must be severely condemned, and we have no
doubt that the aggressor will be punished.
75. My delegation insists that the Security Council should
firmly demand that Israel cease its aggressive activities, in
conformity with the decisions which the Security Council
has already adopted. Israel must not only cease military
operations against Syria and other Arab countries but must
also immediately and unconditionally withdraw its troops
from their territories.

67, We have just seen the representative of the United
States hasten to make a speech which, as always, abounded
with professions of “love of peace”, a desire to see the
conflict “settled” and efforts to create the impression that
it is Washington, more than anyone else, that wants to see
peace restored in the Near East. It is highly significant,
however, that the United States representative found not
one word to say in condemnation of those who unleashed
the criminal aggression in that part of the world and who
are now ignoring the decisions of the Security Council
concerning an immediate cessation of military action.

76. In this Council chamber and outside it, many demagogic statements have been made, including those by the
representatives of Israel and some of its allies. But we want
a direct and unequivocal answer from them to our
question: by what right is Israel not only not withdrawing
its troops from the territories which it has seized from the
United Arab Republic and Jordan but is even seizing new
territory in Syria?

68. We ask, is this an accident? Is it an accident that the
United States, instead of using its influence over Israel to
put an end to that country’s aggression, to ensure that its
criminal actions cease in fact and not, just in words, does
not deem it possible to support here in the Security Council
the just and legitimate demand that the aggressorshould be
condemned and that the forces of the aggressor should be
immediately and unconditionally
withdrawn from the
territory seized from the neighbouring Arab States?

77. We ask the question: at what moment will Israel begin
to withdraw its troops from the territory of the United
Arab Republic, Jordan and Syria, which have accepted the
decision of the Security Council concerning the cease-fire
and the cessation of military operations? Or has Israel
decided all by itself to create new principles whereby, inter
alia, it would resuscitate in international law the principle
that foreign territory can be seized by armed force? We are
waiting here now for an answer to this question, and we
hope that you, Mr. President, will co-operate with the
Council in this connexion,

69. Is this not sufficient ground for considering that
Washington’s policy is merely to encourage its ally, Israel,
to commit further acts of conquest?
70. It is also noteworthy that the United States representative has seen fit even now, while the bombings are still
going on without interruption, to urge that this is not the
time to deal with such matters as condemnation of the
aggressor and the immediate withdrawal of the interventionist forces from the territories they have seized.

78. In conclusion, my delegation considers it its duty to
draw attention to the question which, by instruction of the
Soviet Government, it has brought before the Security
Council. The forces of aggression cannot be allowed to
remain in the territories they have occupied. This matter
will brook no delay, and my delegation wishes to express its
conviction that the Security Council will perform its duty
in conformity with the United Nations Charter.

71. In his statement, he developed the thesis that we
should now speak only of the cease-fire. But has the
Security Council not taken a number of decisions calling
for the immediate and unconditional cessation of firing and
of all military operations
? Why then is it that Washington,
which has sufficient means at its disposal, has not lifted a
finger to stop the unleashed forces of Israel aggression?
Whom is the United States representative trying to hypnotize-the Security Council, perchance?

79. The PRESIDENT: I can assure the representative of
the Soviet Union that the President is willing to co-operate
to reach any decision which it is the general wish of
members of the Council to adopt.
7

80. Mr. COX (Canada): Canada welcomes the resolution
which has just been adopted unanimously, Once a cease-fire
call is made by this Council and accepted in official
declarations by the parties concerned, that cease-fire must
be fully and immediately respected. This is the first step
that must be taken and, of course, other steps must follow.

by Israel, even though the Foreign Minister of Israel twice
in as many days declared before this Council his Govern.
ment’s acceptance of the cease-fire, and even thou& Syria
ceased fire last night.
86. My delegation has closely and carefully f&wed the
events of the last three weeks and has actively participated
in informal consultations with members of the Council.
Attempts were made by some members to passa resolution
supporting one party’s claims of the passageof ships
through the territorial waters of another State. The
endeavour of my delegation, as of several others, was to
work for a resolution that would have provided for a
breather and which would have enabled a modus vivendi
within the framework of the United Arab Republic’s
sovereignty.

81. An important part of this resolution is operative
paragraph 3, because it is, in our view,. essential that
responsibility for steps to bring about immediate compliance with the Council’s resolution be clearly established.
We hope that subsequent resolutions which we may
consider will, as appropriate, contain a clear provision or
provisions for concrete practical action implementation of
the Council’s decisions.
82. Mr. PARTHASARATHI
(India): Before I turn to the
most dangerous situation in the Middle East may I, with
your permission, Mr, President, say a few words about the
further killing by Israelis of Indian soldiers serving with the
United Nations Emergency Force (UNEF). The SecretaryGeneral has informed the Council that another Indian
soldier has been killed and seven others wounded. In
addition, it is reported that twelve Indian soldiers are
missing, bringing the total casualties to forty-one: nine
killed, twenty’wounded and twelve missing.

87. We regret that a largely juridical dispute on shipplag
rights was allowed to spark off a tragic conflagration.
Attempts were made here-and all of us know that those
attempts continued right up to the day of the outbreakof
hostilities-to
pass a resolution in the Council that was
meant mainly to support Israel’s claims for passageof its
ships through the Gulf of Aqaba. The main purposeof such
a resolution was to deny, albeit in oblique terms, the
sovereignty of the United Arab Republic over its territorial
waters.

83. There can be no doubt that the strafing and shelling
by Israelis of Indian soldiers serving with UNEF was
unprovoked and deliberate. What other conclusion can we
draw from the series of cowardly attacks on the defenceless
Indian contingent except that they have a purpose known
only to the attacker? The least that this Council can do is
vigorously to support the Secretary-General’s protest to the
Government of Israel and censure Israel for these dastardly
attacks on Indian soldiers serving the cause of peace.

88. Some of us tried hard to bring a modicum of reality
and fair play into the discussions, but our efforts were
blocked by those who, for their own reasonsof policy,
were bent upon asserting claims which their most ardent
supporters cannot claim to be sanctioned by international
law, but only occasionally conceded in international practice. In a word, their effort was to acknowledge the
sovereignty of the United Arab Republic, but to deny to it
its exercise.

84. I take this opportunity to offer my most sincere
condolences to the Government of Ireland for the loss
which it has sustained in the death of a valiant and
dedicated member of its armed forces who was also servtig
the cause of peace in the area. Our condolences also go to
the Government and the people of the United States, in
connexion with the ship which yesterday was the target of
an Israel attack, resulting in heavy casualties. We share the
grief of the United States. While the Government of Israel
has promptly apologized to the United States, my delegation still awaits a sincere and clear apology to the
Government and the people of India.

89. There are many disputes among nations. There are also
disputes between Israel and its Arab neighbours which have
existed for many years. It should not be impossible to settle
them, given time. The point, however, is not the existence
of disputes, but how they are settled-through the use of
arms or through the means of peaceful negotiations. But
today we witness a different situation. Unleashing offensive
armed action, indeed a blitzkrieg, Israel has occupied vast
territories in the United Arab Republic, Jordan, and now
within Syria too. Can anyone in this Council claim that this
action is in accordance with the principles of the Charter,
of international law and practice, or even of international
morality? The central issue before us today is this: can a
country first invade and occupy the territory of other
countries and then demand a new settlement on its own
terms?

85. Only a few days ago we had fervently hoped that
peace in West Asia would be preserved. We raised our voice
in support of the Secretary-General’s efforts to gain a
breathing spell during which the Council could work for a
dt;tente and seek ways and means of consolidating peace in
West Asia. Instead of getting a breather, peace has been
choked. Our hopes were rudely smashed by Israel’s move to
start massive military action in the air and on the land,
action which is war, stark and naked. The Council has
deplored this in all but a formal statement, and it is clear
that the responsibility for the grave situation presently
prevailing in the Middle East is that of Israel. The Council
finds itself confronted with yet another fait accompli on
the heights of Galilee, through a sudden and surprise attack

90. It is over sixty hours since we adopted resolution 233
(1967) asking for an immediate cease-fire in the Middle
East, It is nearly forty hours since the secondresolution,
resolution 234 (1967), was passed by the Council and the
time-limit imposed by the Council has expired. It is almost
eighteen hours ago that we heard the Secreta+eneral
make the welcome announcement that the Government of
the United Arab Republic had accepted the cease-fire. Last
night, Syria made a similar announcement. This morn@
8

news has come of the massive invasion of Syria by Israel. As
I have already mentioned, their objective obviously wasthe
heights overlooking the Sea of Galilee and taking over the
supporting terrain.

outbreak of hostilities in the Middle East and when,
according to the most eminent practice of the Council
itself, the issue had to be one of simultaneous cease-fire and
withdrawal, the Council found itself faced with a most
obstinate refusal on the part of those very members to deal
with the question of withdrawal. India, among others,
would have preferred-and events have vindicated our stand
since-to follow the established practice of the Security
Council and ask for a cease-fire and withdrawal to positions
occupied by the respective forces at the outbreak of
hostilities, that is to positions held on 4 June 1967. That is
the issue on which the informal consultations among the
members of the Security Council came to be deadlocked
for quite some time,

91, Why is it that despite assurances that the aggressorwill
stop his predatory moves and cease further action, the
cease-fire has not become fully effective in the Middle
East? Is it not perhaps because the original resolution
adopted at 8 p.m. on Tuesday was unrealistic? There were
delegations here which had said in the Chamber that a
simple resolution calling for cease-fire could have been
adopted on Monday morning and that the Council had
been involved in an unnecessary waste of time-nearly
thirty-six hours-before such a resolution was passed.There
is an attempt to put the blame on those, including India,
who would have preferred, and who indeed worked very
hard for ensuring, that any resolution passedby the Council
should contain a provision for withdrawal to positions prior
to the outbreak of hostilities.

97. There was a piece of paper which some people called
the Indian draft. That in fact enjoyed the support of many
members of this Council. It contained a provision for a
simultaneous withdrawal. Other members of the Council,
however, felt, indeed insisted, that the Council must do no
more than ask for a simple cease-fire, We were told that a
provision for withdrawal in a cease-fire resolution would
complicate matters and prevent the cease-fire from being
implemented. We argued that in our judgement a call for
cease-fire, without there being a simultaneous provision for
withdrawal of armed forces, would make the acceptance of
a cease-fire much more difficult, if not impracticable. Our
judgement was based not only on the realities of the
situation, but on the well-known and time-honoured
principle that the aggressor must not be allowed to enjoy
the fruits of aggression, The spectacle we are all watching
now-and some of us had even expected that this would or
might happen-is one of the aggressor quickly occupying
positions of military vantage and then offering to negotiate
with and talk to his victims.

92. My delegation categorically refutes those insinuations.
Indeed, the fact that the cease-fire has not so far become
effective is due to the attempts, successful attempts, of
those who wanted a favourable solution of the question of
the Gulf of Aqaba through a resolution whose primary
purpose was to bring the conflict to an end; I mean, of
course, a solution favourable to themselves.
93. The course of events in the last three days, the
statements made by the leaders of Israel, for which, it is
evident, there is not only a great deal of sympathy but even
overt support outside, amply prove that the aggressive
action taken by Israel was motivated by a desire to occupy
positions on the field which would enable it to impose a
new status quo more favourable to its claims. Is that a fair
and proper way of dealing with the urgent problem we face
of stopping the war and restoring peace in the area? Would
it not have been appropriate first to take steps to end the
war and provide for the withdrawal of forces of both sides
behind the armistice demarcation lines, and then discussthe
other probIems relating to the so-called underlying causes?
This is a course of action my delegation has continued to
urge consistently, both in the Council Chamber and in
informal consultations.

98. You, Mr. President, and all my colleagues in the
Council here, have read enough history to know what to
expect next. The aggressor, having occupied all its military
vantage positions, all its objectives-Sharm El Sheikh, Gaza,
Jerusalem, the western bank of the Jordan River, and now
the heights of Galilee-will, after a show of reasonableness
in negotiations, offer to split these gains half and half,
perhaps.
99. Indeed, there would be little meaning in Article 51 of
the Charter if all the Council were expected to do in such
circumstances wasmerely to ensure a cessation of hostilities
even while the aggressor sat astride the territory of the
victim of aggression, That really would be an acquiescence
by the Council, and more particularly by the great Powers,
in the continuance of aggression by allowing the aggressor
to continue to enjoy the fruits of aggression.

94. The responsibility for the grave situation now prevailing in the Middle East must be placed squarely on Israel.
The Prime Minister of India, speaking in the Indian
farliament on 6 June 1967, said:
“I do not wish to utter harsh words or strong language.
But on the basis of information available there can be no
doubt that Israel has escalated the situation into an armed
conflict which has now acquired the proportions of a
full-scale war.”

100. What is happening today is that the Arab States,
having received setbacks due to the surprise attacks and
having lost territory to the Israelis, will naturally have to
insist that there be the full backing of the Council to
withdraw to positions occupied by various armed forces on
4 June 1967. No purpose would be served by putting the
blame on those who have resisted and are resisting
aggression despite the call for a cease-fire by the Council.
The Council should ponder on whether the prescription
which it has given is an adequate one.

95. The nature of the war unleashed on the morning of 5
June, especially the air strikes made by Israel, confirm, if
confirmation is necessary, that Israel’s design wasto launch
a surprise attack and face this Council with a fait accompli.
96. Early in the morning of 5 June, when all of us were
summoned here to deal with the situation created by the
9

for the casualties among the Indian contingents in UNEF.
We wish also to extend our condolences to the delegations
of the United States and of Ireland in connexion witi the
lamentable events which have occurred. My delegation
firmly hopes, moreover, that these events will not be
repeated.

101. On questions of war and peace India’s attitude has
been clear and is unwavering, Only recently I reiterated it in
meetings of the Council. For this reason we have supported
and will continue to support resolutions calling for a
cease-fire; the flames of war must be put out. It is with this
objective that we have supported resolution 235 (1967)
that the Council has just adopted, However, it seems to us
that even at this stage the Council should deal with the
problem in a practical manner, that is, link the cease-fire
with withdrawal to positions occupied by the respective
armed forces prior to the outbreak of hostilities. Such an
approach, we are confident, will lead to the desired result:
the restoration of peace.

107. Mr. de CARVALHO SILOS (Brazil): Since the
adoption by the Security Council of the two resolutions
demanding an immediate cease-fire in the Middle East, we
have been informed by the Governments of Israel, Jordan,
Syria and the United Arab Republic of their respective
acceptance of the cease-fire, provided that the other party
also accepts the cease-fire. That is encouraging news, which
my delegation whole-heartedly welcomes as being full ~1”
promise for the ultimate establishment of peace in the area.
We have at the same time, however, been informed that,
unfortunately, hostilities are still continuing between
Syrian and Israel forces, in spite of their readiness to
comply with the Council’s requests.

102. If I may briefly indicate the views of my delegation:
First, the Council should reinforce its call for cease-fire and
immediately
order withdrawal of all armed forces to
positions they occupied before the outbreak of hostilities.
Second, it would be necessary to reactivate and strengthen
the United Nations machinery in the area to enforce the
cease-fire and secure withdrawal on the lines proposed by
the Secretary-General in his report of 26 May [S/7906].
Third, the Council should consider whether the SecretaryGeneral should not be requested to depute a personal
representative to the area to help in reducing tension and
restoring peaceful conditions. The special representative
should also ensure the safety and security of the civilian
Arab population in the areas overrun by Israel. Fourth,
when withdrawals have been completed and the aggression
has been vacated the Council should consider earnestly the
steps to be taken to stabilize peace in the area, Solutions to
be worked out would have to be within the framework of
the sovereignty of the States concerned and the just and
immemorial rights of the Arab people.

108. It is clearly our responsibility to pressfor the urgenl
and effective implementation of the cease-fire by the Syr%n
and Israel Governments, taking advantage of the concrele
opportunity opened to us by their expressions of con4~nl
to stop fighting. To bring military operations forthwith traa
halt must indeed be our primary concern at this stage,le:t
the continuation of the hostilities bring to naught both Lhr’
efforts of the Council and the disposition of the parties DO
abide by our recommendations.
109. It was in that spirit and with that purpose in mind
that the delegation of Brazil voted in favour of the drzati
resolution just adopted by the Council.
1 IO, Mr , TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated jkrz
French); Mr, President, the Chairman of the delegation oi
the People’s Republic of Bulgaria voted in favour UT the
resolution [S/7960/ introduced by you, which can[iPms
the previous Security Council resolutions about the ce&e*
fire and demands the immediate cessation of Israel’s
hostilities against Syria.

103. It is in the light of the views and the considerations I
have just stated that my delegation will take its position on
the three draft resolutions which are still before the
council.
104. Mr, RUDA (Argentina) (translated porn Spanish):
My delegation was gratified by the mutual acceptance by
the Governments of Israel, Jordan, the United Arab
Republic and Syria of the Council’s demand for a cease-fire
contained in its resolutions 233 (1967) and 234 (1967).
Unhappily, despite this acceptance and the time that has
since elapsed, events show that the Council’s demand has
not been complied with along the Israel-Syrian frontier.

11 I. My delegation would have preferred the SccurigyCouncil to condemn the aggressor, who has again flagrdntila.
violated the Council’s resolutions as well as the elemenaa~
rules and morality of international law, and to call on Isr:rdsl
to cease all military action immediately, in accordance ~5th
previous Security Council resolutions. Nevertheless, as \ve
are a small country in close proximity to the Middle I&t,
the vote which we cast in support of the Security Council’s
action was intended to meet the more urgent needs of aire
situation,

105. My delegation voted for resolution 235 (1967)
because of its concern, as the hours have slipped by, over
the continuance of the hostilities between Israel and Syria
and the resulting loss of life and property. We trust that the
fighting will soon stop and that we shall be able to turn to
the consideration of other equally urgent steps which will
help us to create the atmosphere of calm and tranquillity
necessary for the discussion of lasting solutions, We place
all our faith in the good offices of the Secretary-General in
bringing about grrangements for immediate compliance
with the cease-fire on the part of Israel and Syria, as
repeatedly requested by this Council,

112. In the absence, however, of an explicit condemnatiorl
of those who are the aggressors and who have laurlehcd
military action and attacks against the Arab countries, 1 do
not believe that we are giving a good example becaus in
the very calm atmosphere which appears to prevail in Rae
Security Council we consider that both sides are guilti;
whereas there is one aggressor. There have been Q&QC
speakers here who could certainly congratulate thena&ej
on being neutral as between the aggressor and the victim.
My country and my delegation do not believe that we C&R

106. Before concluding, my delegation would like once
again to offer its condolences to the representative of India
10

be neutral in the face of aggression. We are in favour of
condemning aggression from whatever source, particularly
when the aggressor is one who began his activities a long
time ago and is continuing them with impunity-possibly
because of friendships which he enjoys in certain countries
and in certain imperialist circles.
113. The complaint by the Syrian representative which
was brought to the attention of the Security Council this
morning, is an alarming development in the present
situation. After the two Security Council resolutions of 6
and 7 June I.233 (1967) and 234 (1967/l, after the solemn
statements in this Council by the Foreign Minister of Israel
and after the Syrian Government had accepted the ceasefire, we have learned, with indignation, that Israel troops
have taken advantage of the cease-fire which Israel had
accepted-stressing that it did so with great relief-to
continue their military attacks against Syria and invade that
country.
114. This is a blatant violation of all the tenets of morality
and shows an arrogant contempt for the Security Council
and its resolutions. The Security Council’s appeal was clear;
its request was categorical and without reservations or
conditions,
115. It now appears that although the Government of
Israel accepted the cease-fire, it is continuing its aggression;
it is taking advantage of the acceptance of the cease-fire by
the Arab countries to continue its advance and pursue its
aggression. Thus, despite all its statements concerning the
cease-fire, Israel’s aggression and invasion is continuing.
This attitude of the Government of Israel cannot be passed
over in silence. The Security Council cannot henceforth
refrain from condemning this aggression or remain indifferent to it,
116, In its statement yesterday (1351st meeting/, my
delegation recalled that the Government of Israel had
shown a similar contempt for Security Council and General
Assembly resolution in the past. Israel has not complied
with the resolutions calling for a cease-fire and the
withdrawal of the troops that have penetrated the territory
of the Arab countries which also in 1956 were the victims
of aggression.

we have heard nothing of all this from the Mixed Armistice
Commission; we have heard nothing from the observers on
the spot. We have merely heard about it from the Israel
representative. Yet, a concerted attack has been launched
against this country. How can the victim of aggression be
expected not to resist such attacks? How can it hold its fire
when fired upon? How can the victim of aggression stop
defending itself’? Such a thing is impossible.
119. At the same time, we are truly astonished to note
that the pretext of attacks allegedly made by certain
parties, who are actually the victims of aggression, should
have been advanced. Such pretexts have been used and
abused in the past, and usually the action taken against the
country in question is military action, This stratagem was
invented a long time ago, It was used to launch the Second
World War, which caused innumerable victims, a war in
which millions of men and women perished. Yet, this
practice, used by the Nazis to launch the Second World
War, is now being employed as part of the design in the
Middle East. It appears that some people, or at least their
leaders, who were truly-and this must be emphasized-the
victims of Nazism, are beginning to learn or are trying to
learn the methods of Nazism. This development is certainly
by no means consoling.
120. The representative of the Soviet Union has already
reminded us of that, and since we are on the subject, I
would like to dwell on another aspect of it. All information
media are already reporting that the Prime Minister of
Israel, Mr. Eshkol, appears to believe that the new de facto
situation which has been created in the Middle East must
serve as a basis for the settlement of affairs and for the
settlement of the situations that will subsequently arise.
What does this mean? It has nothing in common with the
United Nations Charter, the rights of peoples or historical
precedent but is an attempt to remould history on the basis
of de facto situations brought about by acts of aggression.
121. Is this not that same Realpolitik to which one
representative referred not so long ago in the General
Assembly? Is it not the very stratagem used at the time of
the Second World War by those who wanted to conquer the
world? My delegation and my country are truly astounded
by such designs on the part of a country wishing to profit
from the present sufferings of more than 100 million Arabs.

117. This morning, we learned from the SecretaryGeneral’s report-not from press dispatches, as the representative of Israel tried by quoting from unknown sources
to make us believe, but from the Secretary-General himself
and his representatives on the spot-that Israel had
launched a concerted attack against the Syrian positions.
While I do not wish to quote all the information which the
Secretary-General gave us, at the very moment when he was
making his report, or shortly before, 200-and perhaps
more-Israel aircraft, as well as troops and mortars, had
gone into action to destroy villages, towns like Damascus
and entire groups of people in Syria. What are we to take
this to mean?
118. I do not wish to dwell on what the Syrian representative has reported to us, but the representative of Israel
has told us-and this is interesting-that Israel wasresponding to attacks made against certain Israel villages. Thus far,

122. As an example of the intention, to which I have just
referred, of bringing about new de facto situations, I need
only refer to what is happening now in the Middle East, and
more particularly in Israel. On page 18 of today’s edition of
The New Yorlc Timeswe read:
“The first thing on everyone’s mind at the moment is
the future of Jerusalem, and the Israelis, in their present
or any foreseeable mood, are not willing to bargain or
compromise on the Holy City”.4
Further on we read that Mr. Dayan, the Minister
Defence, has said:

Of

“We have returned to the holiest of our holy places,
never to depart from it again.“4
4 Quoted in English by the speaker.

11

,

That is a first example by way of illustration”

128. My delegation does not accept certain proposals
submitted here which were purportedly based on a desire to
help create an atmosphere favourable to a cease-fireand the
cessation of hostilities. Thus, one draft resolution submitted to us would have given the President of the Council
and the Secretary-General certain rights to take immediate
action. We are opposed to this type of proposal because,
like certain other representatives, and among them the
representative of the United States, who have said that they
want our Organization to be able to carry on its work, we
too want the same thing. We too are very solicitous for our
Organization, and we too set great store by it. This explains
why we could have doubts about certain ideas for improvised action which have been developed here and which, in
our opinion, would threaten not only the efficacy of the
United Nations but even, in the long-term, its existence. We
do not want our Organization to be used as a tool by those
who would like to bring about a fait accompli by means of
improvised action. We do not intend to let our Organization
be used as an instrument to facilitate the future actions of
certain imperialist circles. On the contrary, my delegation
would like the United Nations to act according to the
principles and provisions of the Charter. That is why we
oppose the improvisation which I mentioned a moment ago
and which would endanger the United Nations. We therefore wanted to have a little time because what was needed
was not to introduce changes in our Organization but to
adopt a genuinely satisfactory resolution.

123. Another example, if we are to believe the reports we
have received, is the statement that the Gaza Strip is never
again to be evacuated, We are hearing it said: “We have no
intention of repeating the errors of the past and leaving the
Gaza Strip now that we have conquered it”.
124. Then again, as I have previously said and as the
representative of India has just said again in much greater
detail, an attempt is being made to establish rights, and here
too it is appropriate to speak of Realpolitik, What has
happened at Jerusalem, where, as the representative of the
Soviet Union pointed out, many Arabs have already been
expelled, seems also to be in store for Jordan. Steps are
apparently being taken to expel part of the population of
that country in order to create new de facto situations
there and also because the intention, indeed the design, is
to destroy the State of Jordan.
125. Such, then, is the de facto situation which they
would have us accept and which certain delegations would
like the Council to recognize by means of the draft
resolutions which they submit referring to consultations for
the withdrawal of troops. I am thinking’ here more
specifically of the United States proposal under which
conversations would be held in the light of the results of
the military aggression,

129. We believe that, as long as the aggressorhas not been
condemned for his aggression, as long as the troops which
have penetrated into foreign territory have not been
withdrawn and as long as the Security Council has not
taken steps to reinstate all the organs of the United Nations
which, as the Secretary-General pointed out and as the
representative of India has just said, must facilitate the
implementation of all the provisions of the armistice-in a
word, as long as conditions allowing peace to prevail in the
Middle East have not been created-we shall not achieve
that peace, the life of our international Organization will be
threatened, and the world will continue to be troubled.

126. The representative of the United States, in the
statement which we have just heard, referred not only to
the Indian delegation but to our own as well, for we have
opposed the adoption of certain resolutions at decisive
moments so that there would not be any fait accompli,
whether with regard to the problem at present before the
Council or to other questions concerning the United
Nations in general, Mr. Goldberg said that if it had not been
for the opposition of certain delegations, we would have
had a cease-fire a long time ago. That is true; we would have
had a cease-fire by now. However, certain parties apparently wanted to obtain the fruits of aggression even
before the aggression was committed,
and it was that
intention which emerged in the draft resolution. By way of
a rebuttal, we shall perhaps be told: “Yes, but after the
aggression you find you have exactly the same result”. That
may be so, but in that case why did the countries which
knew the aggression was to take place do nothing to
prevent it? Why did those who ar_efriends of the aggressor,
and must therefore have known something, take no action?

130. We accordingly urge the Security Council not to lose
sight of these various factors in considering the proposals to
be submitted to it.
13 1. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of the United States, but he has yielded to
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, who wishes
to make an important statement. I now invite the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to take a place at the
Council table and to make a statement.

127. To talk merely of a cease-fire-as certain delegations,
and especially that of the United States, would wish-is not
sufficient. It has been possible for the cease-fire to be
accepted, but the aggressor has not held his fire. The
aggressor is trying to continue the hostilities under the
cloak of hollow declarations about a cease-fire. In these
circumstances it is not easy for the cease-fire to become
effective. What is needed, as the Indian representative has
said, is not only a cease-fire but also measures to ensure the
withdrawal of the aggressor’s forces and the restoration of
the conditions indispensable for establishing a lasting peace
in the Middle East.

132. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): Thank you, Mr. President, and I
wish also to express my thanks to the representative who
was courteous enough to allow me to take the floor to
make this very brief statement.
133. As soon as the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution S/7960, I called my Foreign Minister in
Damascus and talked with him over the telephone; that was
at 2.15 p.m. He instructed me to inform the Security
Council of the acceptance by our Government of this
resolution adopted today. The Foreign Minister of the
12

Syrian Arab Republic also gave me the following information, and asked me to place it before the Security
Council.
134. First, the attack by Israel forces is increasing in
intensity and gravity by the minute. Secondly, Israel
paratroopers have been dropped over Kuneitra, which is 30
kilometres inside Syrian territory beyond the armistice
demarcation line. Kuneitra, which was mentioned in the
cables read to the Security Council by the SecretaryGeneral, is 65 kilometres from Damascus. Thirdly, besides
the paratroopers that have been dropped over Kuneitra,
Israel armed columns in large numbers are on their way to
Kuneitra. Fourthly, the Israel air force is still continuing air
raids and bombing our capital, Damascus. The number of
civilian victims is increasing, as this attack increases.
135. Immediately after I spoke to my Foreign Minister,
which was at 2.15 p.m., I called the office of the
Secretary-General and informed him officially, on behalf of
my Government, of our acceptance of the Security Council
resolution,
136. The timing here is quite important. This resolution
was voted upon at 1.5 p.m. Both I and the Israel
representative were immediately called by the SecretaryGeneral and requested to convey to our respective Governments the text of this resolution. This I did, and I presume
that the Israel representative did so also. It is now 2.35
p.m., that is, one-and-a-half hours have elapsed of the two
hours mentioned in operative paragraph 3 of the resolution.
As I said in the four points which I mentioned-after having
talked directly with Damascus-the attack by Israel regular
armed forces on Syrian territory is now proceeding inside
Syrian territory, and this is happening while the Council is
meeting.

representatives with an ever-increasing vehemence which is
matched in the annals of the United Nations only by
certain Arab spokesmen. Mr. Fedorenko reached the
heights of his crescendo today, when he compared Israel’s
fight for its existence to Hitler’s aggression, This is unheard
of. It appears that Mr. Fedorenko believes that, representing a powerful country, he has the right to trample on the
honour of a small State and a people which suffered more
from Hitlerite aggression than any other nation, a people
one third of which was exterminated by Hitler. I believe
that the Soviet representative, in his rage, indeed has
overstepped the limits of the permissible,
141. Neither Israel nor the Jewish people concluded a pact
with Hitler’s Germany, a pact which encouraged Nazi
Germany to unleash its aggression against the world. It was
not Israel which proclaimed that the victims of this Nazi
aggression were imperialist aggressors. The people of Israel
volunteered frcm the first minute of that war to take up
arms against the enemy of mankind while others stood by
watching the developments. We are dismayed but not
astonished that the Soviet representative should also confuse the issue in the present conflict and present the victim
of aggression as the aggressor.
142. In advancing his allegations, he finds himself in
singular isolation. Statements are pouring in from’all over
the world which hail Israel’s deliverance from the avowed
threat and the actual attempt to strangle and extinguish it.
Personalities and organizations which usually show great
sympathy, support and comprehension for the Soviet
Union and its policies, the so-called progressive circles, have
enthusiastically expressed their support of Israel in its hour
of anguish and rescue. They have clearly agreed-and with
them the great majority of nations-that Israel had been
subjected for many long years to Arab aggression, which in
the last few weeks culminated in direct attempts on Israel’s
security.

137. The PRESIDENT: I now call upon the United States
representative, who wishes to exercise his right of reply.

143, Did Israel first concentrate forces along the Egyptian
border? Did Israel impose a blockade, a warlike act, against
any of the Arab States? Did Israel proclaim that it
intended to destroy the Arab States? Did Israel prepare
and organize a liberation war against the Arab States?

138. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): The
innuendo of the Soviet representative that the United
States did not use its influence with Israel and the adjacent
Arab States to exercise restraint and avoid recourse to force
is totally unfounded. The Council is aware of the public
record of our efforts, and the Soviet Government, perhaps
more than any other Government, knows of our private
diplomatic efforts to this end. I only wish that our efforts
had been matched by others with influence upon the
parties at a time when such efforts perhaps could have
prevented the grave consequences. I assure you, Mr. President, and the members of the Council that the United
States is using its influence and will continue to do so in the
interest of an immediate end to the military conflict and a
stable peace in the Near East.

144. Where was the voice of the Soviet Union then? Did
we ever hear the representative of the Soviet Union take the
slightest exception to those threats and war preparations?
On the contrary. The representative of the Soviet Union
spoke of a war psychosis. Who inflamed that war psychosis
in the Arab countries? Who excited the Arab passions?
Who supplied them with the arms to wage war against
Israel? The record speaks for itself.
14.5. The Soviet representative has stated that the Council
has proclaimed Israel to be an aggressor. That is as false as
his other statements, There has not been a single resolution
adopted by the United Nations which has labelled Israel as
an aggressor. The first and only time the Council applied
Chapter VII was in 1948, when it referred to the Arab
aggression against the new State of Israel.

139. The PRESIDENT: I now invite the representative of
Israel to ,take a place at the Council table and to make a
statement.
140. Mr, RAFAEL (Israel): The representative of the
Soviet Union has deemed it fit, in the course of the last few
days while this debate has been going on, to hurl insult
after insult and vituperation at my Government and its

146. The representative of the Soviet Union has done
nothing in the past to allay passions and to reduce tensions.
13

From his statement today and from his statements made on
previous days, it is clear that he does not intend to do so in
the future either.

whole world from the Hitlerite plague? Has Mr. Rafael
forgotten these historic facts? Can he have forgotten at
what price and with what sacrifices the world, and with it
the people of Israel, were saved, primarily by the country
and people represented here by the delegation of the Soviet
Union? It would be well to advise the Israel representative,
who is using every shift and dodge in an effort to justify
Israel’s aggression against its Arab neighbours, that such
trifling with the facts of history and reality is inadmissible,

147. The representative of Syria has announced his Government’s acceptance of the cease-fire resolution which was
adopted by the Council a short time ago. I am in
communication
with my Government and hope to have a
reply in due time. But I can repeat here what I said this
morning: that Israel immediately announced its acceptance
when the first two cease-fire resolutions were passed. We
stand by our undertaking, and it will become effective as
soon as Syria has completely, unreservedly and sincerely
implemented its undertaking to cease fire.

153. My delegation, in its statement here, has vehemently
protested against Israel’s perfidious action against Syria,
Despite the officially proclaimed agreement of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to respect the Security
Council’s decision concerning a cease-fire, the Israel hordes,
in a frenzy of depredation and banditry, are treacherously
taking advantage of this position which Syria has adopted
to engage in offensive military action against that country,
thereby imparting an even more brazen quality to Israel’s
systematic violation of the Security Council’s decisions and
demonstrating the aggressivenature of its policy.

148. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): In my statement at this
meeting of the Council 1 asked a direct question, which I
shall repeat. We should like to have a direct and unequivocal answer from Israel to this question: Why is the Tel-Aviv
Government not withdrawing its troops from the territory
which it has occupied in the United Arab Republic and
Jordan; and, furthermore, why is it seizing new territory in
Syria? We put this question: When will Israel begin to
withdraw its forces from the territories of the United Arab
Republic, Jordan and Syria, which have accepted the
Security Council’s decisions?

154. We categorically condemn these acts of Israel. The
Soviet Union denounces them with anger and indignation
and calls for the immediate adoption by the Security
Council of decisive measures to secure Israel’s compliance
with its decisions, Israel’s military operations against Syria
must cease immediately,

149. We have just heard the statement of the United
States representative, who hastened to take the floor in
order to be the first to answer our question, which was
addressed to Israel, to the Israel representative who is
present here, Instead, we again heard the voice of America.
This, needless to say, is not mere irony. This can only lead
us to the conclusion that it is precisely Washington which at
all times and in all cases knows best how to answer the
question when and if the armed forces of the Israel
aggressor will be withdrawn from the lands that have been
seized.

155. We have just heard a very important statement by the
representative of Syria, in which he informed us that Israel
is continuing its military operations, its aggression, despite
the decision adopted today by the Security Council, He
also informed the Council that the Syrian Government
accepts the decision which the Council has just adopted.
156. We do not consider it possible to adjourn the
Security Council’s meeting until we have heard from the
Israel representative that his Government respects the
decision which we have just adopted and that it is ceasing
its military operations against Syria,

1.50, It would appear that United States diplomacy has
gained some experience from the recent dramatic situation
which arose in connexion with the statement by the Israel
Ambassador to London, who, it will be recalled-we are
referring to a reliable United States communicationacknowledged that it was none other than Tel-Aviv that
launched the aggression against the Arab countries.

157. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
United States in exercise of his right of reply.
1.58. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): We
have heard and we welcome the declaration by the
representative of Syria accepting the cease-fire resolution
adopted by the Council this morning. The Council has the
right to expect, within the time allowed, a similar affirmative response by Israel, I note that the Israel representative
is in touch with his Government. The Council awaits his
reply.

15 1, We then heard the statement of the representative of
Israel, And what did he speak about.here, after taking his
cue from the appropriate stage manager? Instead of
replying to the direct question which we have just repeated,
he embarked upon a discussion of an entirely different
subject. He tried to justify Israel’s aggression. Once again,
completely ignoring the question put to him, he tried to
divert the Security Council’s attention from the issue. He
even complained to us about the comparison with the
demagogic arguments formerly used in Hitler’s propaganda
to justify what had been done. He unabashedly depicted
himself as virtually the victor in the fight against Hitler’s
invasion.

159. The PRESIDENT: I now invite the representative of
Syria to take a place at the Council table and to make a
statement.
160. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): Thank you, Mr. President, for
allowing me to address the Council once again. I would not
hhve done so had it not been for the necessity to reply to
some of the distortions directly concerning Syria and the
other Arab States that were contained in the invective
statements made by the representative of Israel. However, I

152. But surely we know who it was that, covered with
blood, saved not only their own country and people but the
14

deeply regret to note that at this very hour when a Member
State of the United Nations is being invaded, when civilians
are being killed and property is being damaged, the
Iepresentative of Israel finds time for theatricals. This is
proved by the fact it seems he is not addressing the Security
Council alone, because from the applause coming from the
audience it is quite certain that he is also addressing the
public outside the Security Council, However, I shall not
indulge in such trivialities.

have now received is that the Israel army is at the doors and
the entrance to Damascus, the capital of Syria, the oldest
inhabited city in the world, Syria, which has seen many
hordes and conquerors, Tamerlane and Ghengis Khan, is
now witnessing the conquest by the Zionist hordes. But
they will be repelled.
166. In his closing statement, the representative of Israel
challenged the Syrian Government to answer concerning its
acceptance of the Security Council resolution which was
adopted a short while ago. I stated before the Council, after
speaking with my Foreign Minister in Damascus, that we
accept the resolution of the Security Council.

161. In his rather lengthy reply, the representative of
Israel posed many questions about the crisis, about the
turmoil that is taking place in the Arab world, in the Middle
East, now-turmoil which continues to constitute a threat
to the peace and security not only of the area but of the
world, I have followed very closely the statements made by
the representative of Israel today, as well as the statements
that were previously made by his Foreign Minister and
other speakers from Israel. Never once have they mentioned
the aggression committed by the Arabs against Israel in this
crisis. What words did the representative of Israel use
today? “Attempts” at aggression and “threats”. But who
committed the aggression? The party that committed the
aggression, the party that is definitely the aggressorin this
whole crisis is Israel and Israel alone. Israel started the
attack on Egypt. Israel on 7 April attacked Syria with large
forces, with its Air Force, and destroyed property and
killed civilians. I quoted in this Council the reports of the
Mixed Armistice Commission which prove our point of
view. I challenge the representative of Israel to deny those
facts.

167. Furthermore, I have addressed a letter to the
Secretary-General conveying to him the acceptance of the
Syrian Government. With the President’s permission, I shall
read out the text of that very brief letter addressed to the
Secretary-General:
“Concerning the information which I transmitted to
your office at 2.15 this afternoon, I have the honour to
inform you, on instructions from my Government, after a
telephone conversation with my Foreign Minister in
Damascus, Mr. Ibrahim Makhous, that he has instructed
me to convey to you officially and to the Security
Council the acceptance of the Syrian Government of
Security Council resolution S/7960.”
168. It is over two hours now since the Security Council
resolution was adopted. I challenge the representative of
Israel to read out to the Security Council a similar
statement stating acceptance of the Security Council
resolution and showing respect for the highest Council of
the United Nations, as I have done.

162. Strangely enough, the representative of Israel said, if
I heard him correctly, that the Security Council and the
United Nations had never condemned Israel, I wish to reply
to that statement by saying that no other State Member of
the United Nations has ever been condemned or censured
by the Security Council and the General Assembly so often
as Israel has been condemned and censured. Suffice it to
mention the last condemnation of Israel by the Security
Council during the last part of November 1966 for its
treacherous, dastardly, criminal and wanton attack on As
SEUIIUin Jordan. It certainly does seem to me, after hearing
the statement of the representative of Israel, that he is
suffering from a lapse of memory.

169. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Israel, whom I invite to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
170. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel): I assume that at this stage the
Council is more interested in our reply with respect to the
resolution that was adopted a short while ago than in
continuing this sterile debate of answering false accusations
made by various representatives. I shall have the opportunity to refer to those false accusations at a later stage.

163. The representative of Israel communicated the resolution of the Security Council to his authorities before I
did, and yet I received an answer before he did. It is
certainly noteworthy that when the Israelis want to
communicate something quickly to the Security Council,
they do so, and when they do not want to, then
communications fail,

171, At this time, I shall announce that Israel accepts the
cease-fire resolution which was adopted this afternoon,
providing that Syria accepts that cease-fire resolution and
that Syria implements the cease-fire. That is our reply to
the resolution which has been communicated to the
Government of Israel.

164. It is certainly a tragic occurrence that Syria-from
which Palestine wassevered and from the territory of which
Israel was created-which had given refuge to the Jews
when the world, and Europe in particular, was persecuting
them, should be rewarded by its cousin Semites as it is
being rewarded now, When the world persecuted the Jews,
they found a homeland in my country, Syria-they
established their State,

172. I wish at this time to inform the Council that when I
received these instructions from my Government, I aho
received a report that Syrian armed forces have extended
the front of their attacks and that they are continuing to
shell our border villages on a larger and more extended
front line than before. We assume that the acceptance by
Syria of the cease-fire will be sincerely and unreservedly
implemented. If that is so, the implementation of Israel’s
undertaking is fully assured.

165. In addition to the information that I have already
given to the Security Council, the latest information that I
15

173. The PRESIDENT:
Council requested:

Under resolution 235 (1967), the

182. It is to be observed that in Syria’s response to I
appeal of the Security Council regarding the immediatb
application of the above-mentioned resolutions we heard a
clear and definite answer unaccompanied by any condi.
tions. And we also note that it is precisely the Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic which immediately responded
to the Security Council’s appeal in connexion with the
resolution, and was the first to do so.

“ . . . the Secretary-General to make immediate contacts
with the Governments of Israel and Syria to arrange
immediate compliance with the above-mentioned resolutions, and to report to the Security Council not later than
two hours from now.”
174. I now invite the Secretary-General to report to the
Council.

183. We have also heard the representative of Israel, who,
unfortunately, did not make such a clear statement
concerning the willingness of the Israel Government to
abide by the Security Council’s decision as set forth in
resolution 235 (1967). Instead of a direct and unequivocal
answer, he put forward a whole series of conditions subject
to which Tel-Aviv might accept the Security Council’s
decision.

175. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
The cables to the
two Governments of Israel and Syria, conveying the
Security Council resolution of today [23.5 (1967)], were
dispatched immediately after the adoption of that resolution, Ambassador Daoudy of Syria informed me orally at
2.15 p.m. today that he had just spoken to Damascus and
relayed the latest Security Council resolution. According to
Ambassador Daoudy, Syria accepts the terms of the
resolution and is ready to stop immediately
military
operations on Syrian territory.

184. We are compelled to draw the Security Council’s
attention to the position adopted by Israel, which once
again provides evidence of the criminal role of the Israel
aggressors.

176. Just a few moments ago, I received this communication in writing from the Permanent Representative of the
Syria to the United Nations:

185. The PRESIDENT: We have now received the reply
from Israel, in writing, I would ask the Secretary-General to
read it out to us.

“Concerning the information which I transmitted to
your office at 2.15 p.m. this afternoon, I have the honour
to inform you on instructions from my Government,
after a telephone conversation with my Foreign Minister
Mr. Ibrahim Makhous, that he has instructed me to
convey to you officially the acceptance of the Syrian
Government to Security Council resolution S/7960.

186, The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Mr. President, I have
just received a communication from the Permanent Representative of Israel to the United Nations. The text of the
communication reads as follows:

“(Signed) George J. TOMEH

“I have the honour to confirm what I said in the
Security Council on 9 June, that I have been instructed
by telephone to announce that Israel accepts the ceasefire resolution adopted by the Security Council
[235 (1967)], provided that Syria accepts it and will
implement the cease-fire.

“9 June 1967
“1505 hours

“Permanent Representative”

177. Mr. President, I have just been informed that the
response of Israel was that given by the Permanent
Representative of Israel in his statement to the Council a
moment ago.
178. The PRESIDENT:
his statement.

“(Signed} Gideon RAFAEL
“Permanent Representative”

I thank the Secretary-General for

187. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the Soviet
Union has drawn the attention of the Council to the fact
that Syria in its reply has accepted the resolution, while
Israel has accepted the resolution provided that Syria
accepts it and will implement the cease-fire.

179. Members of the Council have now heard the statement of the Secretary-General to the effect that the
Governments of Syria and Israel have both accepted to
comply with the resolution adopted by the Council today,
resolution 235 (1967), calling for a cessation forthwith of
hostilities,

188. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): Mr. President, I am very
grateful to you for giving due attention to our statement.
Nevertheless, we consider it essential once again to point
out that the position reflected in the Israel reply is not
clear.

180. I am sure that I express the feelings of all members
when I say that this is indeed encouraging news. Hopefully
it means that the fighting in the Middle East can now
finally be brought to an end and peace restored to the area.

189. As we have just heard, the Syrian Government was
the first to answer, accepting the Security Council’s
decision without attaching any conditions; and it made a
statement here in the Security Council, through its representative, and also through the corresponding communisetion from the Secretary-General.

181, Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): My delegation would like to
draw the attention of the members of the Council to the
communications
which we have just heard from the
representatives of Syria and Israel,
6

190. Yet, seeing and hearing the statement by Syria, the
Israel representative is nevertheless laying down conditions
in his statement. What is the logic of this? What basis is
there for making Israel’s position conditional upon something?

199. I am glad to hear that the representative of Syria has
now repeated that Syria is accepting the cease-fire. I have
said clearly that Israel is accepting the cease-fire in
accordance with the resolution adopted this morning. It is
natural that this cease-fire can become effective only when
it is implemented by orders of commanders in the field to
cease fire. The Government of Israel, by its acceptance, has
of course undertaken to issue such orders and it expects
that similar orders have been given by the Syrian military
authorities.

19 1. We deem it necessary once again to draw the Security
Council’s attention to what can only be regarded as either
casuistry or mockery.
192.

The PRESIDENT:

I wish to draw the attention of

the representative of the Soviet Union to the fact that the

representative of Israel conveyed the information upon
instruction from his Government. I am not aware whether
his Government was aware of the statement made in this
Council when it instructed the Israel representative. But the
Israel representative has asked to make a statement, which
may perhaps clarify the situation.

2 00.

Mr . TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated from
I apoiogize for speaking again at this late hour,
but the events which are taking place are really of capital
importance. I yielded my turn to the representative of
Israel in the hope that I would not have to speak, but I find
that the situation compels me to do so.
French):

193. The representative of Bulgaria had asked for the
floor, but has yielded to Israel. However, the representative
of the Soviet Union has asked for the floor, and I now call
on him.

201. Let me say first, before explaining why I am speaking
in the debate at this late hour, that the representative of
Israel who addressed us just a moment ago seems not only
to have had some difficulties of communication with the
representative of the Soviet Union but also to have
considerable difficulty in communicating with his own
Government, particularly when the matter is urgent and the
Security Council has requested him to do so. Communications facilities in Israel are apparently too occupied with
the transmission of military orders for contact to be
established with the representative of Israel at the United
Nations.

194. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): Mr. President, we have
asked to speak only to say that we are, of course, grateful
for your interpretation
of the position of the Israel
Government. As President, you are naturally observing
impartiality
and objectivity, but you will doubtless agree
that an explanation of the position of the Israel Government can best be made by the official representative of the
Israel Government,
195.

The PRESIDENT:

ante by Syria of the cease-fire resolution. While that
telegram was sent, Syria was engaged in heavy fighting and
artillery shelling of civilian populations in villages along the
Israel border.

May I say that I did not try to

interpret, I merely drew attention to the statement made
by the representative of Israel.

202. The representative of Israel also said here that the
resolution calls for an immediate but mutual, cessation of
hostilities. In the resolution, however, there is no reference
to any kind of “mutual” action. The resolution is specific,
and there is no question of “mutuality”. The first requirement is that hostilities should cease, and of course it is
primarily the aggressor who must stop; it is not the victim
of the aggression who must stop resisting.

196. I now invite the representative of Israel to take a
place at the Council table and make his statement,
197. Mr, RAFAEL (Israel): I confess that in recent days I
have had some difficulties of communication with the
representative of the Soviet Union, But I will certainly try
again to make our position clear. I am sure it is clear to
him. I fail to understand the purpose of his repeated
interventions. My reply to the Security Council resolution
was given orally here in my statement and in writing, in a
letter which I just presented to the Secretary-General and
which wasread out by him.

203. The representative of the Soviet Union raised the
question of the objections and conditions which have been
advanced here. I have already had conversations with my
colleagues here who felt that there were too many
conditions, The Soviet representative has already referred
to two, The Government of Israel was ready to accept a
cease-fire if the Syrian Government also agreed to do so.
The representative of Israel waspresent, however, when the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic informed the
Security Council, without any reservations, that his Government accepted the cease-fire and accepted the resolution.

198. The meaning of this letter is crystal clear for all
people who want to understand that meaning and who do
not want to obscure the situation, The Security Council
resolution speaks about “their mutual acceptance of the
C~~ncil’s demand for a cease-fire”. I think that is natural,
There cannot be a cease-fire by one side alone. But I wish
to draw the attention of the representative of the Soviet
Union and of the other members of the Council to the fact
that it was Israel which was the first to announce its
acceptance of the Security Council resolutions on a
cease-fire. Many hours passed, until the early hours of this
morning, when a telegram wassent by the Foreign Minister
of Syria to the Secretary-General announcing the accept-

204. A second condition was laid down: “provided that
Syria . . . implements the cease-fire”. In other words, “if
you do not cease fire”- and members know how many
interpretations could be given to this-“we will not cease
fire”. Thus speaks the representative of Israel, although
Israel is the aggressor.
17

205. However, what is still more important-what
amazes
us and, I believe, causes the members of the Council great
anxiety-is the fact that the representative of Israel, in his
statement, informed us that his Government accepted the
cease-fire on the conditions which had already been set out
and, in particular, on condition that it was implemented,
but he went on to say that Syria was not implementing the
cease-fire and that, instead of ceasing fire, the Syrians had
begun to attack the Tsraelis along a broad front so that in
actual fact there was no cease-fire.

presence in the area. I have in mind particularly
functions of UNTSO in reporting to the Security Council
on the observance by the parties of the cease-fire, in
accordance with the resolution we adopted today,
213. I would conclude by saying that we hope to hear
from our distinguished Secretary-General in due course
what measures can be taken in this direction, that is, in
both reactivating and strengthening UNTSO’s activities, SO
that the observance of the cease-fire may be duly and
promptly reported.

206. The facts are quite the opposite; we are being told
that there is a Syrian attack so that the aggression can
continue.

214. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): We have listened attentively
to the explanation given by the Israel representative, but it
fails to satisfy us. The Council has not obtained as clear-cut
and direct an answer as that given by the Syrian Government.

207. Is the Security Council going to continue to toIerate
such
a situation? Are we not going to take steps to ensure
that military action on this front really ceases and are we
going to continue to tolerate this aggression which merely
seeks pretexts so that it may perpetuate itself? This is a
matter that the Security Council will have to consider, one
on which it must take a decision or about which it must at
least do something.

215. We share the view that what is important is not what
is said here-and this includes what is said by the Israel
representative-but what is being done by the Israel armed
forces on Syrian territory.

208. The PRESIDENT: Perhaps I could briefly summarize
the situation before we proceed with our debate.

216. We consider that to be the voice of reason as uttered
by our colleague, the United Kingdom representative; but,
Lord Caradon, we will be silent here only when the guns of
the Israel aggressor fall silent.

209. We have heard the official replies from the representative of Syria and Israel, according to which Syria accepts
the resolution contained in document S/7960 and Israel
accepts the resolution provided that Syria accepts it and
will implement the cease-fire. We have heard additional
explanations from the representative of Israel.

217. My delegation therefore deems it necessary to present for consideration the following observation.
218. We adopted today resolution 235 (1967) regarding
the attainment of an agreement on immediate compliance
with the decisions mentioned in the resolution, and we
attached a condition, namely, that the report to the
Security Council should be presented within two hours. We
believe that the decision that has been adopted must be
carried out on the understanding that the Security Council
should lay down a certain time-limit-for
example, one
hour-for compliance with the resolution after the receipt
of replies from the parties. We base ourselves in particular
on the unanimous decision adopted by the Security Council
in relation to another situation in which a specific
time-limit was laid down for compliance with our decision.

210. A question has been raised by the representative of
the Soviet Union concerning the implementation by Israel
of the terms of the resolution; he has stated to the Council
that the resolution called for an unconditional cessation of
hostilities. This is the question we are considering, whether
the two replies we have received are to be regarded as
indicating compliance with the decision contained in
document S/7960, in which the Council demanded that
hostilities cease forthwith.
211. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I would merely
wish to say that what matters now is not what happens here
but what happens on the borders of Syria and Israel. We
can do no more here for the moment than we have already
done. We trust that the wishes of the Council will not be
flouted and that our efforts will now be finally successful.
But at the same time we very sincerely hope that both the
guns and we will soon be silent. ,

219. In this connexion, Mr. President, we would request
you to consult the members of the Security Council now to
see whether they have any objection to such an understanding and we should then of course request the SecretaryGeneral to inform the parties of this decision and to repo.rt
to the Council, taking the time-limit decided on intO
account.

212. Mr. IGNATIEFF
(Canada): The remarks of my
friend, the representative of the United Kingdom, have
almost silenced me. I hope it will be as effective in relation
to the guns in the Middle East. I agree with him that the
exchanges here as to the state of the cease-fire are less
important than the two factors which have been brought
out by, I think, most of the members. The first one is
SCrUpUlOUS
RSpeCt
for the cease-fire by those who have now
accepted it. The second-and here I refer to one of the ideas
that were mentioned by the representative of India-is the
need to strengthen and reactivate the United Nations

220. The PRESIDENT: In view of the importance of the
statement which has just been made by the Soviet
representative, I should like to have the consecutive
interpretation of his statement.
The consecutive interpretation into French and English of
the statement of the representative of the Soviet Union was

given.
18

I

-

221, The PRESIDENT: If I understood the representative
of the Soviet Union correctly, after having listened to his
statement three times, he suggested that we prolong by one
hour the time-limit provided for in the resolution contained
in document S/7960; that we should have the replies within
that hour; and that meanwhile I should consult the
members of the Council to see whether they agree with this
understanding.
222. Mr. MAKONNEN (Ethiopia): I agree with my noble
friend, the representative of the United Kingdom, that what
matters is what happens on the spot, but, a.t the same time,
my delegation feels that the message that will go out from
this hall should be in as clear terms as we can possibly make
it, I think that the debate which has taken place has
created, and could not but help to create, some confusion
in the minds of those who are looking on at these
proceedings, because the impression may be given that we
are in fact departing from the decision that we have made,
3ut I believe that that actually is not the case, because to
me the situation appears very clear,
223, We have demanded a cessation of hostilities, and
both the parties concerned, Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic, have accepted this demand for the cessation of
hostilities. The difficulty and the debates that have followed are due to the fact that in the communication of the
Government of Israel a sentence appears which gives the
appearance of laying down conditions for the acceptance of
the cessation of hostilities,
224, You, Mr. President, in an attempt to be helpful have
tried to point to the possibility that the Israel message may
have been relayed to the representative of Israel at a time
when the reply of Syria was not known, If that is the case,
the word “if’ is correct and proper because there is
mutuality involved in this resolution that we have agreed
upon,
225. But since Syria now has accepted the cessation of
hostilities, it seems to me that the simplest thing to do is
for the Government of Israel to change the word “if’ to
“therefore”, in the sense of saying that since Syria has
accepted, therefore Israel also accepts. I think that the
matter is as simple as that, and I appeal to my friend, the
representative of Israel, to spare us the trouble of having to
hoid consultations on a point which is already past, when
we have so much work awaiting us. I would ask him to
come to the Council table and make this clarification,
which is a clarification we expect of him and which I am
sure he is in a position to make,

228. The representative of the Soviet Union spoke about
conditions, and that was repeated by the representative of
Bulgaria. May I draw the attention of the representatives to
documents S/7953 and S/7958. The former is a letter dated
8 June 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Arab Republic addressed to the Secretary-General.
It states:
“I have the honour to inform you, upon instructions of
my Government, that it has decided to accept the
cease-fire call, as it has been prescribed by the resolutions
of the Council on 6 and 7 June 1967 [233 (1967) and
234 (1967/j, on the condition that the other party ceases
the fire ,” [S/79.53.]
229. The second document is a teIegram dated 9 June
1967 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Syrian
Arab Republic. It states:
“In reply to your two telegrams of G and 7 June
1967”-and may I draw your attention to the fact that
the Secretary-General had to send two telegrams before
he received a reply-“the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic has decided to accept the two appeals for a
cease-fire contained in the resolutions of the Security
Council f233 (1967) and 234 (1967/l, provided that the
other party accepts the ceaseXrre,“[S/7958.]
230. I really fail to understand what this discussion is all
about. Do we want a cease-fire or do we not want a
cease-fire? I have the definite impression that the members
of the Council want to see a cease-fire implemented as soon
as possible.
231. My Government has tried to be as helpful aspossible.
In my first intervention this morning I repeated our
position that not only was Israel the first Government to
welcome the cease-fire, but also that it had accepted the
cease-fire-and I have repeated that position. Now the
representative of the Soviet Union apparently, while the
shelling of our villages is still going on at this minute, wishes
to issue an ultimatum to this Council or to Israel-I do not
know to whom. There is no need whatsoever for that
because the Council has taken note of the statements made
by the representatives of Syria and the representatives of
Israel. Both have announced, upon instructions from their
Governments, that they have accepted the cease-fire resolution.
!c32. Since the representative of the Soviet Union is so
interested in acceptance of the cease-fire resolutions, may I
inquire of the Secretary-General whether he has received a
reply from the Government of Iraq to his notification letter
to that Government, asking it to give its reply on the
cease-fire resolutions. It would be helpful to have that reply
on record also.

226. The PRESIDENT: I now invite the representative of
Israel to take a place at the Council table and make a
statement.
227. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel): I have hesitantly come to the
conclusion that the representative of the Soviet Union does
not seem to be too happy with Israel’s acceptance of the
cease-fireresolution, He accused us of casuistry. I leave it to
those who will scrutinize the records to determine who is
practising casuistry. My statement is clear; it is on record
and there is nothing unusual in it.

233. In addition to that, I should like to state that we had
one reply from the Government of Kuwait which stated
bluntly that it would not accept the cease-fire resolution. I
have not heard one word of blame from the representative
of the Soviet Union in regard to that defiance by the
Government of Kuwait.
19

234. In conclusion, I should like to repeat that my
Government has accepted the cease-fire resolutions and
that, of course, they can become effective only if the other
side also will issue the necessary order for a cease-fire, I
really cannot contribute more to the clarification of this
situation-not
now, not in an hour, not in five hour’s time.

been fulfilled, or the demand by the Security Council that
“hostilities should cease forthwith”?

235. The PRESIDENT: I now invite the representative of
Syria to take a place at the Council table and make a
statement.
236. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): I ask the forgiveness of the
President and the members of the Council for asking to
speak again, but you are aware that I am a party that is
directly concerned.

242. In the circumstances, I, as a party to the dispute,
wish to emphasize to the Security Council that in view of
the development that has been taking place sincewe began
this debate-and it is now four hours, not two-the Israelis
have one objective in mind, and that is to continue their
aggression against Syria. And I think that it is the
imperative duty of the Security Council to be aware of
these tactics and to call things by their names, namely, that
what the Israel representative has been indulging in is an
exercise in casuistry. If the word “casuistry” is not enough,
the word “sophistry” could be used.
243. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): I think
it should be obvious that what is now required above all
things is practical action on both sides to issueimmediately
the necessary orders to commanders in the field for a
cease-fire, to which both now have committed themselves. I
suggest that we can best contribute to this process by
adjournment. If the fighting does not stop immediately, we
shall have to meet again urgently to ensure that it does, and
I suggest that we keep ourselves available today at the call
of the President for that purpose.

237. Right at this very moment, as I have informed the
Council, the situation is graver than words can convey. At
this time when we are discussing very critical points,
inn0cen.t civilians are being killed by the Israelis and blood
is being shed in my own country, in our villages, on our
land, in our cities. Our thinking should be very clear and we
should be very aware of everything that is taking place here,
238. The Israel representative said in his last sentence that
he could not give clatification beyond what he had already
stated-not in one hour, not in five, not in five days, He
really made it very clear that Israel’s only intention is to
continue the aggression against Syria. This is proved by the
following. The whole argument of the Israel representative
is based on tIie condition stated in the second preambular
paragraph of the resolution as follows: ‘Noting that the
Governments of Israel and Syria have announced their
mutual acceptance . . ,” [S/7960]. He picked out the word
“mutual”
and he said that unless Syria signifies its
acceptance, the condition of mutuality is not fulfilled.

244, Mr. TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated from
French): I have no objection to the suggestion made a
moment ago by the representative of the United States. I
likewise had no objection to the well-chosen remarks made
earlier by Lord Caradon, the representative of the United
Kingdom, for it is true that the situation cannot be altered
by any amount of fire-power that is brought to bear in the
Security Council. What must concern us above all is that
the guns stop firing on the battlefield. Of course, both we
and they must stop.

239. But here again this whole discussion has been taking
place within the Council. To refresh the memory of the
representative of Israel, I signified my acceptance first,
orally to the Council and in a very cIearly written answer to
the Secretary-General. In my answer, no conditions whatsoever were contained; merely the acceptance in full and in
toto of Security Council resolution S/7960. Therefore,
since I, before the representative of Israel, have signified the
acceptance of my Government of the resolution of the
Security Council, the condition of mutuality stipulated in
paragraph 2 of the preamble has already been fulfilled. To
put conditions can mean only one thing: that the party
putting the conditions, when those conditions have already
been fulfilled, has something in mind, and that something is
the design to continue aggression against Syria. When we
say “cease-fire accepted”, it means that it is accepted.

245. I should like, however, to go back to a suggestion
made by the representative of the Soviet Union, because it
is a very important one. As I understood it, the Soviet
representative’s suggestion was not what the representative
of Israel has said; he did not suggest an extension of the
time-limit, ai some might wish, for the implementation of
the cease-fire. In actual fact, there never wasany extension
of a time-limit. There were not two different times; the
time for compliance was indicated in the resolution, which
contains the word “forthwith”. The representative of Israel
has tried to interpret the word “forthwith” asmeaning “as
soon as possible”. That, however, is erroneous. The text
clearly states what is meant; it says “forthwith”, not “as
soon as possible”. I shall not, however, dwell on linguistic
discussions of this kind; they are of no immediate importance. What is needed is that the Council, having taken the
decision to order an immediate cease-fire, should have time
to verify whether the cease-fire is being complied with.

240. The Israel representative, in his previous reply, went
on to say that the Syrians were continuing to shell, and so
on and so on. But we are in a legitimate state of
self-defence. The Israel armies, as I stated, are on the land
of Syria.

246. Consequently, while agreeing that the meeting should
be adjourned, I believe that a minimum period of time must
be fixed or that the President must be given the possibility
of reconvening the Council when he has information
enabling him to inform us that the cease-fire has been
complied with or, on the other hand, that it has not been
complied with and that the Council should take other
measures, under other chapters of the Charter if necessary.

241. As pointed out by the representative of Bulgaria,
operative paragraph 2 “Demands that hostilities should
cease forthwith”, What about “forthwith”?
Which is more
important, the condition of mutuality, that has already
20

247. 1 am not at the moment making a proposal; I am
making a suggestion. The President might perhaps wish to
accept it and to enable us to remain in readiness, even
though we would adjourn the meeting of the Security
Council for the time being.
248. Mr. PARTHASARATHI
(India): There is a point of
great importance in what we have been discussing. I
propose that we ask Israel and Syria to confirm within two
hours that the necessary orders have been issued to their
forces to cease fire. If there is no such confirmation, the
Council should meet after the two-hour period ends.
249. Mr. IYALLA (Nigeria): When I last intervened in this
debate on the situation in the Middle East I prefaced my
remarks by pointing out that we in Nigeria have had a fairly
long history of friendly relations with all the States in the
area, and I trust that the few remarks which I shall make
now will be taken by all parties in the same spirit.

the news which is reaching us at this very moment is
becoming more and more disturbing, and it seems to me
that the first thing to be done, as has already been stated, is
to find out whether the Secretary-General, with the
machinery at his disposal for observation, could within as
short a time as possible-a period of two hours has been
mentioned-give us the reply that we want. If it would not
be inconvenient for the Secretary-General to give the
Council some information on that point now, we would be
grateful if he could tell us the time which would be needed,
taking into account the technical factors, for him to give us
this reply. That would help us to fix the time for our next
meeting.
25.5. The PRESIDENT:
Before proceeding, I would ask
the Secretary-General to reply to the question just raised by
the representative of France.
256. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
The information
desired by the representatives of India and France can be
made available, to the best of my knowledge, in two hours.

250. As a result of the developments of the last few days,
my delegation joined with others in considering the urgent
necessity to stop and to contain the rapidly spreading
hostilities in the Middle East. Consequently, all other
considerations and all other matters ancillary to the
consideration, were set aside for the moment, and we
subscribed to a resolution designed first and foremost and
as a first step to stop the fighting.
25 1, It is very sad that thrice in three days the Security
Council passed formal resolutions calling for a cease-fire
and the fighting is still continuing. I agree with the
representative of the United Kingdom that perhaps the
Security Council could not at this time and in this situation
be reasonably called upon to pass any more resolutions
immediately without hearing further developments. It
would be a sad situation in the world if the Security
Council continued to pass resolutions which would continue to be ignored, without any result.
252. I said that we regard all the States in the area and the
peoples of that area as our friends. I hope, therefore, that
they will not mind my merely saying, in the name of the
people of Nigeria, that, in this very difficult and delicate
moment, we appeal to them, especially to those who have
themselves been involved collectively, and in some cases
personally, in the awesome drama of history. We hope that
they will appreciate far more than we ourselves can that
sometimes success and advantage of circumstances demand
the terrible burdens of statesmanship and perhaps the
courage of magnanimity. The calls of the Security Council,
according to my delegation’s understanding, have been
unconditional, and we, as their friends, expect all the
parties to accept those calls unconditionally.
253. Finally, may I add my own appeal to those that have
already been made in the course of these debates with
respect to the necessity for treating the civilian and other
population of the areas involved in this conflict with
humanity,
254. Mr. SEYDOUX (France) (translated from French):
After what has been said by my colleagues, and particularly
by my neighbour on the left, I have very little to add. But

257. The PRESIDENT: I have no further speakers on my
list. Members of the Council have now heard suggestions
made by the representatives of the Soviet Union, the
United States, Bulgaria and India. With the permission of
members, I should Iike to make the following suggestionthat we adjourn now, and that the time and date of the
next meeting will be decided after consultations with
members, it being understood that members will hold
themselves available for an urgent meeting at any time
should we be faced with an emergency situation, and also
on the understanding that if we have not within two hours
had confirmation that the necessary orders have been issued
for the cessation of hostilities, we shall meet again within
two hours. Is that suggestion acceptable?
258,

Mr. TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated
f?om
I am in full agreement with what the President has
just suggested, provided, of course, that we are not going to
wait two hours merely to find out whether the orders have
been issued, for we have just heard the representatives of
Israel and Syria tell us that orders have been issued, If,
therefore, we are to meet again, the reason would not be to
receive information on that point but to learn what the
situation is and whether the cease-fire has become a fact.
That is what we want to find out. Otherwise, I have no
difficulty in accepting the President’s suggestion,
French):

259. The PRESIDENT:
Would members of the Council
agree to my suggestion with the addition of the following
phrase “and that fighting has actually stopped”? I shall
read out the suggestion with the change-that the Council
will now adjourn, and that the time and date of the next
meeting will be decided after consultations with members,
it being understood that members will hoId themselves
available for an urgent meeting at any time should we be
faced with an emergency situation, and on the understanding that if we have not had confirmation within two hours
that the necessary orders have been issued for the cessation
of hostilities and that fighting has actually been stopped,
the Council will then meet within two hours.
260. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialst Republics) (translated from Russian): In expressing our opinion

21

regarding the establishment of a time-limit for compliance
with the Security Council’s decision, we had in mind
effective compliance, or, in other words, a cease-fire.

the other speakers want to speak on my proposal. I call c.,
the representative of France.
266. Mr. SEYDOUX (France) (transzated from French):
The President has given us an extremely useful clarification,
I merely felt, for the sake of convenience and if only to
ensure that representatives could be brought together very
quickly, that it would be preferable, whatever the reply
that is received, if, in any event and taking into account the
reply given to us just now by the Secretary-General, we
were to meet here again in two hours, at about 6.20 p.m.,
providing that this proposal is agreeable to the President.

261. It is regrettable that the Israel representative has
again provided some rather confused explanations, and is
only aggravating the situation. Such a position on the part
of the Israel representative can only be regarded as
deliberate procrastination, since the most recent information shows that events are taking a very serious course.
Damascus, the capital of Syria, is being subjected to air
attacks, with serious damage and casualties.
262. How can we reconcile ourselves with the position
presented by the Israel representative, who continues to
repeat the same conditions? This is no longer merely
casuistry but mockery, The war is going on, people are
losing their lives, but the Israel representative cannot tell us
clearly whether Israel does or does not accept the Council’s
decision, Although many members of the Security Council
have suggested that he state this clearly, as we see, he
evades answering. Hence, we are bound to heed the voice of
the representative of Syria, who has drawn the Security
Council’s attention to the fact that this is being done
deliberately, consciously, and intentionally.

267.

Mr. TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated from
My purpose in asking to speak is not to prolong
the debate but simply to shorten the procedure.

French):

268. I believe the statement made here by the representative of Israel that the Israelis have issued a cease-fire order,
Since I believe that statement, I do not ask for confirmation that that order has in fact been issued. I also believe
the Syrian representative’s statement that the Syrian
Government has issued a cease-fire order.
269. What I would rather know is whether the orders have
already been carried out, not whether they have been
issued, because if we are to meet again in order to find out
whether the orders have been issued, we are extending the
time that we are allowing for this to be done.

263, We share the view expressed by the representatives of
India and France, but it is not entirely clear to us from
your statement, Mr. President, as it was phrased in somewhat imprecise terms, who is to gather information on the
situation on the spot and who is to inform us, the members
of the Council, within the next two hours. We should like
to have a clearer explanation of this.

270. I agree with the President’s suggestion, but what we
must find out is whether the orders have already been
carried out. I would therefore ask, in these circumstances,
that another meeting should be convened in two hours’
time.

264. The PRESIDENT: In reply to the question raised by
the representative of the Soviet Union, I should like to
make the clarification that if we have not received
confirmation within two hours that orders have been issued
for the cessation of hostilities and the fighting has actually
stopped-information
which should be collected by the,
Secretary-General-I shall then convene the Council within
two hours. Is that acceptable?

271. The PRESIDENT: I made my suggestion in order to
save the time of the members of the Council in case it was
not necessary to meet again. However, the representative of
France has suggested that in any event we should meet
again in two hours. Would it be agreeable to the members
of the Council that we meet again at 6.30 p.m.?
It was so decided.

265. I see that the representative of Bulgaria is asking for
the floor, but if we are to proceed with this procedural
debate, I shall have to call all the speakers in the order in
which they have been inscribed in the list. I suppose that

The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m

22
Litho

in U.N.

Price:

$U.S.

0.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

09738-December

1970-2,100
