A/61/PV.107

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-first session

107th plenary meeting
Thursday, 13 September 2007, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Al-Khalifa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Bahrain)

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of Ms. Angie BrooksRandolph, President of the twenty-fourth session of
the General Assembly, and Mr. Gaston Thorn,
President of the thirtieth session of the General
Assembly
The President: It is my sad duty to inform
members of the Assembly of the passing on 9
September 2007 of Ms. Angie Brooks-Randolph,
former diplomat of Liberia and President of the
General Assembly at its twenty-fourth session, and on
26 August 2007 of Mr. Gaston Thorn, former Prime
Minister of Luxembourg and President of the General
Assembly at its thirtieth session.
Ms. Brooks-Randolph was the first Associate
Justice of Liberia and had a distinguished career in
Government administration, legal education and the
promotion of gender equality. In 1969, she became the
first African woman to be elected President of the
General Assembly.
Mr. Gaston Thorn had a long and prominent
career as a politician and businessman of his country
and also served as Chairman of the European
Commission from 1981 to 1985.
As Presidents of the General Assembly, both Ms.
Angie Brooks-Randolph and Mr. Gaston Thorn played
outstanding roles in this Organization and made a
major contribution towards the achievement of the
objectives set out in the Charter of the United Nations.

On behalf of the General Assembly, I should like
to convey our deepest condolences to the Government
and the people of Liberia and Luxembourg,
respectively, and to the bereaved families of Ms.
Brooks-Randolph and Mr. Thorn.
I now invite representatives to stand and observe
a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of Ms.
Angie Brooks-Randolph and Mr. Gaston Thorn, former
Presidents of the General Assembly.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.
The President: I call on the representative of
Zimbabwe, who will speak on behalf of the Group of
African States.
Mr. Chidyausiku (Zimbabwe): The African
Group wishes to express through you, Madame, to the
people and Government of Liberia and to the
Government of Luxembourg its deepest condolences as
we pay tribute on this solemn occasion to the
illustrious life-time achievements attained by two of
your predecessors, Ms. Angie Brooks-Randolph,
Liberia’s first Associate Justice and the first female
President of the General Assembly, and Mr. Gaston
Thorn, Prime Minister, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Foreign Trade of Luxembourg and the President of
the General Assembly at its thirtieth session.
Angie Brooks-Randolph’s achievements are best
captured in the statement released by President Ellen
Johnson-Sirleaf of Liberia, herself a trailblazer and
continental pace-setter, who described her as a woman

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

07-50429 (E)

*0750429*

A/61/PV.107

of great substance whose unmatched characteristics
and sterling qualities illuminated Liberia’s and, indeed,
Africa’s image on the international stage at the United
Nations, where she chaired with distinction in several
capacities in the 1950s and 1960s. Africa joins the rest
of the world in paying tribute for the loss of such a
quintessential talent.
The President of the General Assembly at its
thirtieth session, Mr. Gaston Thorn, was a man of
unmatched talent, possessing exceptional leadership
qualities that saw him hold the posts of Prime Minister
of Luxembourg and Chairman of the European
Commission. The Africa Group also pays homage to
his achievements and valuable contributions to
humanity in general. May their souls rest in peace.
The President: I now call on the representative
of the Philippines, who will speak on behalf of the
Group of Asian States.
Mr. Davide (Philippines): On behalf of the Asian
Group, which I am chairing for the month of
September, I wish to express, at this moment of great
sorrow, my most sincere and deepest condolences to
the Government, the Permanent Mission and the people
of Liberia on the passing away of Ambassador Angie
Brooks-Randolph on 9 September and to the
Government, the Permanent Mission and the people of
Luxembourg on the passing away of Ambassador
Gaston Thorn on 26 August.
Being the first Liberian female lawyer — who
became Vice-President for Africa of the International
Federation of Women Lawyers and, later, the
Federation’s President — and obtaining two doctor of
laws degrees were only two of the many trailblazing
accomplishments of Ambassador Brooks-Randolph. I
need not stress that she was an inspiring leader in
global strides in the areas of gender rights and
empowerment of women. She served the United
Nations in various capacities: as Vice-Chairperson and
eventually Chairperson of the Committee dealing with
Trust and Non-Self-Governing Territories, VicePresident of the Committee on Information from NonSelf-Governing Territories, Chairperson of the
Commission for Rwanda-Burundi, Chairperson of the
United Nations Visiting Mission to the Trust Territory
of the Pacific Islands and Vice-President and then
President of the Trusteeship Council. Enthusiastic in
her conviction and steadfast in her beliefs, she held
positions that demonstrated a singular passion for and

2

commitment to the ideals of democracy, independence,
justice and the rule of law.
As the international political arena was mired in
the conflicts in South-East Asia and the Middle East in
1969, it was only fitting that this warm, nurturing and
powerful soul, the mother of two sons and the delight
of 47 other youngsters, should bring order to chaos and
preside over the General Assembly at its twenty-fourth
session. Always brimming with hope, she said that the
United Nations could and should remain the best
means of international cooperation that has ever been
at mankind’s disposal, but that we have to nourish,
cherish and cultivate it. Prophetically, those words
apply to us now.
We also honour today the memory of Ambassador
Gaston Thorn, another lawyer, who also obtained a
doctor of law degree and whose passion for law and
justice, democracy and liberalism became a way of life.
Indeed, he became President of Liberal International, a
non-governmental organization whose main objective
is to promote liberal ideas and liberalism as a political
philosophy.
Ambassador Thorn was a complete diplomat
whose skills in conciliation and whose refined
knowledge of various cultures and languages were well
known. Presiding over the General Assembly during its
thirtieth session, he courageously guided the United
Nations through the difficult issues of terrorism,
colonial independence, the exodus of refugees and
migration with much aplomb. We are saddened by his
demise, and Luxembourg has lost one of its finest
diplomats.
Thus, the passing away of Ambassador Angie
Brooks-Randolph and Ambassador Gaston Thorn is, in
fact, their journey to immortality. In death, they now
live forever in the hearts and minds of the Members of
the United Nations. As we honour their memory, we
also pay tribute to the Government and the people of
Liberia for sharing with us their beloved daughter and
to the Government and the people of Luxembourg for
sharing with us their beloved son and to both
Governments and peoples for bestowing on this
institution, the United Nations, the legacy of the
presidencies of Ambassador Angie Brooks-Randolph
and Ambassador Gaston Thorn.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Montenegro, who will speak on behalf of the Group
of Eastern European States.

07-50429

A/61/PV.107

Mr. Kaludjerović (Montenegro): The Group of
Eastern European States is deeply saddened by the
passing away of two remarkable and outstanding
persons: Ms. Angie Brooks, former President of the
General Assembly, and Mr. Gaston Thorn, former
Prime Minister of Luxembourg, European Commission
President and President of the General Assembly. Their
deaths have profoundly distressed us all, for their lives
and
personalities
enormously
influenced
our
contemporary world.
Ms. Angie Brooks, President of the General
Assembly, served during the twenty-fourth session, in
1969 — a year of challenging times for the United
Nations — and as the representative of Liberia, a
country that has the privilege of having been the first
sovereign African republic. She was the second woman
and the first African woman to assume the esteemed
post of General Assembly President. It is without doubt
that that position was the zenith of her career. Ms.
Brooks’s long fight to promote the ideals of the United
Nations, where she had served in a number of bodies
since 1954, was clear evidence of her unyielding
energy and dedication.
Mr. Gaston Thorn was a renowned man — one of
the great politicians during important times and events
in his own country, in the European Union and in the
United Nations. Early in his life, he demonstrated
tireless energy in fighting tyranny during the Second
World War — energy that he later channelled into
guiding and consolidating his country’s political
development and finally into enlarging the membership
of the European Union and, at the same time,
deepening its single market and economy. As President
of the General Assembly at its thirtieth session, he
demonstrated his exceptional humanism and his
devotion to achieving the principles and ideals of the
United Nations, by which he was guided. With his
passing, we in the United Nations have lost a true
global politician, diplomat and humanist.
In their own ways, both of these eminent
personalities attached great importance to the ideas of
peace, freedom, understanding, tolerance, equality and
development, cherishing an extraordinary affection for
multilateralism as well as for the States that they
represented.
Ms. Brooks and Mr. Thorn are no longer with us,
but they will be remembered for the examples that they
set throughout their lives of hard work and dedication

07-50429

to the goals of the United Nations. On behalf of the
Eastern European Group, I express our sorrow to the
Government and the people of Liberia and to the
Government and the people of Luxembourg, as well as
to their families, friends and colleagues.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Paraguay, who will speak on behalf of the Group of
Latin American and Caribbean States.
Mr. Buffa (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): It is an
honour to address the General Assembly on behalf of
the Latin American and Caribbean Group on this
occasion, when we are paying posthumous tribute to
two outstanding former Presidents of the Assembly. I
am referring to Ms. Angie Elisabeth Brooks and
Ambassador Gaston Thorn, Presidents of the Assembly
at its twenty-fourth and thirtieth sessions, respectively.
They had a distinguished role before this Assembly
during significant times with regard to the existence of
the Organization.
Ambassador Angie Elisabeth Brooks, who was
born in Liberia and who earned a doctorate in law, was
the first African woman to hold the post of President of
the General Assembly, at its twenty-fourth session.
Before that she had a distinguished career in academia,
the law, her country’s supreme court and the vicepresidency of the International Federation of Women
Lawyers during the 1950s, presiding over the
Federation in the 1960s. In addition, Ms. Brooks
distinguished herself as Vice-President of the National
Political and Social Movement of Liberia in the 1960s.
Ambassador Gaston Thorn of Luxembourg, who
held a doctorate in law, presided over the Assembly at
its thirtieth session, following an accomplished
political career. He was serving as Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade of Luxembourg
when he was elected President of the Assembly. Mr.
Thorn also held the post of Minister of Physical
Education and Sport until 1974. Beginning in 1961, he
served as president of the Democratic Party of
Luxembourg, and in 1970 became President of the
Liberal International movement.
Both of these distinguished persons, who
contributed to the strengthening of multilateralism,
took leave of the international community in August
and September. September is the month of the General
Assembly’s annual general debate. We shall remember
them during that time, following their great example.

3

A/61/PV.107

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland, who will speak on
behalf of the group of Western European and other
States.
Mr. Baum (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
have the honour and sad duty to address the General
Assembly today on behalf of the Group of Western
European and other States to pay tribute to two former
Presidents of the Assembly, Ms. Angie Elisabeth
Brooks of Liberia, who served as President at the
twenty-fourth session, and Mr. Gaston Thorn of
Luxembourg, who presided over the thirtieth session,
both of whom passed away recently.
Ms. Angie Elisabeth Brooks overcame poverty to
study law in the United States and London. Having had
an excellent career as a jurist, she became Liberia’s
first woman lawyer, then a professor of law and the
first woman to be a member of her country’s Supreme
Court. In her second career, as a diplomat, she was
given great responsibilities. She was Assistant State
Secretary for Foreign Affairs and served as Liberia’s
Permanent Representative to the United Nations.
During her career, she was particularly concerned
about non-self-governing territories and trusteeship
territories. Her commitment in that area culminated in
her becoming Chairperson of the Fourth Committee
and President of the Trusteeship Council. In 1969, she
became the second woman, and the first African
woman, to preside over the General Assembly.
Mr. Gaston Thorn was an eminent statesman from
Luxembourg. As a young man, he was involved in
resistance to Nazi occupation during the Second World
War, for which he was imprisoned. Following studies
in France and Switzerland he was admitted to the
Luxembourg bar association. Entering into politics, he
represented liberal thinking. He held numerous
ministerial posts, eventually serving as Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Prime Minister. He was a polyglot
and a great European. As a member of the European
Parliament, and in particular as President of the
European Commission in the early 1980s, he left his
mark on the construction of the continent. He was
elected President of the General Assembly in 1975.
The memory of the great figures we are
honouring today take us back to another era, one that
already seems remote and which was perhaps both
more simple and complicated than our own. What has
not changed is the concept of multilateralism, which all

4

Member States share and which is reflected in our
commitment to the United Nations. In that sense, the
commitment of the Presidents of the twenty-fourth and
thirtieth sessions of the General Assembly deserves our
deep respect.
On behalf of the Group of Western European and
other States, allow me to convey my sincere sympathy
to the Governments and peoples of Liberia and
Luxembourg at this painful time. In particular, we
extend our condolences to the families and close
friends of Angie Elisabeth Brooks and Gaston Thorn.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liberia.
Mrs. Osode (Liberia): Death has once again
claimed a victim from among us. It is with deep
emotion that I stand at this rostrum to pay tribute to
Ms. Angie Elisabeth Brooks, whose passing away on
Sunday, 9 September 2007, brought profound grief to
her family, colleagues and friends. The world has lost a
woman who was so able and so vigorous as a
representative of our country.
In 1969, Miss Brooks became the twenty-fourth,
and second female, President of the General Assembly.
Her election was a moving tribute to Africa, to a
sovereign republic, Liberia, and to her personal
distinction. She had boldness, humour and the capacity
to take on the points which suited her purposes. Her
colleagues saw her as a woman who rendered the most
faithful service to her Government. She never lost faith
in the usefulness and purposes of the United Nations.
In paying tribute to Ms. Brooks on her passing on
Monday, Madame Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, President of
the Republic of Liberia, hailed Angie Elisabeth Brooks
as a true trailblazer and a continental pace-setter, a
woman of great substance whose unmatched
characteristics and sterling qualities illuminated
Liberia’s image on the international scene through the
able representation of the country at the highest
international stage — the United Nations, where she
served with distinction in the 1950s and 1960s. The
President went on to say that undoubtedly the passing
of this most distinguished trailblazer from the African
and world scene will not only be recorded in the
history books, but that her memory would be
immortalized by the work that other women do to
promote gender equality and international peace.

07-50429

A/61/PV.107

Ms. Brooks was always focused and determined.
She often told the story of how the late President
William V.S. Tubman of Liberia, realizing her tenacity
and responding to her personal entreaty of him, granted
her repeated requests for funding to study in the United
States, thus fulfilling her dream.
After working with the Justice Department of
Liberia, Ms. Brooks was appointed to the Liberian
delegation to the United Nations in 1954. Starting in
1954, Ms. Brooks had an illustrious career with the
United Nations and served in the following capacities.
In 1956 she served as Vice-Chairman of the
Assembly’s Fourth Committee, which monitored Trust
and non-self-governing Territories. In 1961 she became
that Committee’s Chairman. She was chairman of the
United Nations Commission for Ruanda-Urundi in
1962, Chairman of the United Nations Visiting Mission
to the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands in 1964,
Vice-President of the Trusteeship Council in 1965 and
President of the Trusteeship Council, the watchdog of
the Trust Territories, in 1966. She was the first woman
and first African woman to serve in that capacity.
Ms. Brooks served as Ambassador Extraordinary
and Plenipotentiary, Permanent Representative of
Liberia to the United Nations from 1975 to 1977 and I
was very pleased to serve under her leadership. Ms.
Brooks held several degrees, including a Bachelor of
Arts degree in social sciences from Shaw University,
Raleigh, North Carolina, obtained in 1949; a Bachelor
of Law degree and Master of Science degree in
political science from the University of Wisconsin,
obtained in 1952; and Doctor of Law degrees from
Shaw University and Howard University, obtained in
1962 and 1967 respectively. In 1952, Ms. Brooks
completed graduate work in international law at
University College Law School of London University
and obtained a Doctor of Civil Law degree from the
University of Liberia in 1964.
Ms. Brooks was admitted as counsellor-at-law at
the Supreme Court of Liberia in August 1953 and
served as Attorney-General of Liberia from August
1953 to March 1958. She served as Associate Justice of
the Supreme Court of Liberia from 1977 to 1980. From
1956 to 1958, she was Liberia’s Vice-President of the
International Federation of Women Lawyers. She
served as the Federation’s Vice-President for Africa
from 1959 to 1960 and as President of the Federation
from 1964 to 1967. In 1958, she represented Liberia

07-50429

and the Federation at the first session of the United
Nations Economic Commission for Africa.
Ms. Brooks served as Ambassador Extraordinary
and Plenipotentiary of Liberia to the Republic of Cuba
from 1976 to 1977. She also served as ambassador-atlarge for the Government. For two years, Ms. Brooks
was Vice-President of the National Liberian Political
and Social Movement, and for many years she served
as the special assistant to the Executive Secretary of
the Lott Carey Baptist Foreign Mission Convention.
Ms. Brooks demonstrated straightforwardness
and tenacity in her approach to the most pertinent
issues of her time, which won her praise. During her
opening speech to the General Assembly, she did not
spare the Organization her criticism, stating that the
United Nations had suffered a decline in prestige in
recent years because of its lack of dynamism. She said
that
“our weakness seems to lie in the fact that we all
too often view world affairs somewhat
parochially, as if they were being played out at
the Headquarters on the East River of New York.
We have sometimes failed to realize that neither
oratory nor agreements between delegates, nor
even resolutions or recommendations have had
much impact on the course of affairs in the world
at large.” (A/PV.1753, para. 54)
I should like to stress that Ms. Brooks was
significant not only because of the Government she
represented, but because she was very much a
personage in her own right. In her death, Liberia
suffers the loss of a great patriot and a stalwart fighter
for the causes she believed in for most of her life. It
cannot be denied that her colleagues at the United
Nations, during her tenure here, whether we agreed or
disagreed with her, were under the permanent spell of
her dynamic personality, the quickness of her smile,
her brilliant wit and her great charm in her personal
contacts.
In conclusion, having worked with Ms. Brooks at
the Mission during her period as Liberia’s Permanent
Representative, I wish to recall that she was one of the
most caring, gentle and honest persons I have come
across, all one could wish for in a colleague and a
friend. Ms. Brooks never ceased to be a simple person.
She will be missed just as much for her charm and
natural elegance as for her candid manner with people
at all levels, from those in high office to her most

5

A/61/PV.107

junior colleagues. To Ms. Brooks, who has today gone
to rest, we can pay no loftier tribute than to offer in
remembrance of her the great memory Africans bear in
common and the hopes for peace which all of our
people share. May her soul and all the souls of the
faithful departed, through the mercy of God, rest in
peace.
The President: I give
representative of Luxembourg.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Olinger (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
should like to express my deep appreciation to you,
Madam President, for having paid tribute to the
memory of Mr. Gaston Thorn, honorary Minister of
State of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg and
President of the General Assembly at its thirtieth
session. The condolences you have extended and those
extended by the representatives of the regional groups
are deeply touching.
It was with great sorrow that the people of
Luxembourg learned, on 26 August, of the death of
Gaston Thorn, a great statesman who left his mark on
Luxembourg and European politics in the 1970s and
1980s. His death is a great loss for my country.
After several terms as a Liberal Deputy in the
Luxembourg and European parliaments, Gaston Thorn
served with commitment and energy as Minister for
Foreign Affairs from 1969 to 1979, as Prime Minister
from 1974 to 1979 and as President of the European
Commission from 1981 to 1985.
As President of the European Commission at a
difficult time in the mid-1980s — described as a time
of Euro-sclerosis — Gaston Thorn faced one of the
major crises in the process of building Europe. Amidst
the disorder and imbroglio of national interests,
President Thorn worked to ensure that the common
interest and the European cause prevailed. His strong
commitment to bringing Europe closer to Africa also
remains in our memory.
As Prime Minister, Gaston Thorn led the
Luxembourg Government with great vision and
undertook important economic and social policy
reform, combining modern liberalism with social
responsibility. It is notable that in 1979 under his
leadership the death penalty was abolished in
Luxembourg.

6

During his time as Luxembourg’s head of
Government, Gaston Thorn had the honour to serve as
President of the General Assembly at its thirtieth
session, in 1975 and 1976. The debate at that session
was marked by controversy. To date, Mr. Thorn has
been the only Luxembourg national to preside over the
General Assembly; this was a source of pride for the
people of Luxembourg, who are committed to the
ideals of the United Nations, as our country was among
the founding Members of the Organization. Gaston
Thorn lent great political impetus to the work of the
Assembly, a body in which he had great faith and
which he held in high esteem. He devoted his life to
pursuing the ideals of the United Nations: improving
human well-being and working for the cause of
international peace and security, development and
human rights. His commitment to bringing about
understanding among peoples was a leitmotif of his
political career.
Permit me once again to thank you, Madam
President, and all others who have taken the floor in
tribute to the memory of a humanist, a man of culture,
an outstanding figure in Luxembourg’s contemporary
history, a great European and an ardent defender of the
United Nations and of the noble purposes that inspire
it.
Agenda item 11
Prevention of armed conflict
Draft resolution (A/61/L.68)
The President: Members will recall that at its
2nd plenary meeting, held on 13 September 2006, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda of
the sixty-first session.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/61/L.68. May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt the draft resolution?
Draft resolution A/61/L.68
(resolution 61/293).

was

adopted

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 11?
It was so decided.

07-50429

A/61/PV.107

Agenda item 15
Zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic
Report of the Secretary-General (A/60/253 and
Add.1)
Draft resolution (A/61/L.66)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly, by its decision 60/509 of 25
October 2005, deferred consideration of this item as
well as of the report of the Secretary-General to the
sixty-first session. The Assembly also decided to
maintain biennial consideration of this item thereafter.
I give the floor to the representative of Angola to
introduce draft resolution A/61/L.66.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Madam
President, as we approach the conclusion of the sixtyfirst session of the General Assembly, please accept my
delegation’s utmost appreciation for your able
leadership and hard work during this session. Under
your leadership, the General Assembly engaged in
difficult but necessary discussions on the items on its
agenda. Such was the case with regard to reforming the
Economic and Social Council, the increasing threat
posed by climate change, the challenge of achieving
internationally agreed development goals including the
Millennium Development Goals, and the difficult
issues of reforming the Security Council and of
system-wide coherence. While we must remain
engaged on some of those issues, your stewardship of
the General Assembly reignited the discussions when
some of us thought that it was time to quit. Your
innovative approach and persistent optimism have
brought us closer to making the decisions necessary to
revamp the Organization with a view to improving its
effectiveness and its responsiveness to the challenges
of today and of tomorrow.
I take the floor this morning in my capacity as
Chair of the Permanent Committee of the Zone of
Peace and Cooperation of the South Atlantic. It is my
privilege and honour to introduce draft resolution
A/61/L.66, under agenda item 15, entitled “Zone of
peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic”.
As members may recall, a little over two decades
ago, the United Nations General Assembly, through its
resolution 41/11, declared the South Atlantic a zone of
peace and cooperation among its members: Angola,
Argentina, Benin, Brazil, Cameroon, Cape Verde,

07-50429

Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, the Gambia, Ghana,
Guinea, Guinea Bissau, Liberia, Namibia, Nigeria,
Senegal, Sao Tome and Principe, Sierra Leone, South
Africa, Togo and Uruguay. Today, the zone is an
effective interregional mechanism for cooperation in
the areas of development, peace and security among its
24 member States.
In the area of development, members of the zone
are committed to contributing to the eradication of
poverty through the establishment of partnerships for
sustainable development, trade, investment and tourism
by increasing the exchange of knowledge and
technology; promoting closer ties among business
enterprises; promoting cooperation in the fields of
science, technology and human resources; further
developing transportation and communication; and
promoting greater interaction among the civil societies
of its members.
In the areas of crime prevention and combating
drug trafficking, the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons and transnational organized crime, including
piracy, members of the zone are committed to
cooperate, including for the full implementation of the
relevant United Nations programmes of action and by
ensuring the exchange of information, experiences and
lessons learned related to the reinforcement of border
security and arms control policies and systems.
While recognizing the United Nations primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the members of the zone are also
committed to cooperating in the areas of peace,
stability and security, including conflict prevention and
peacebuilding within the zone. That cooperation is
geared towards improving the capacity of zone
members to participate and engage in peacebuilding
and peace support operations by increasing cooperation
with the international community and among the
members of the zone on issues such as capacitybuilding, logistics and information exchange, as well as
by promoting the use of existing training schools and
the international and regional peacekeeping training
centres. Furthermore, the members of the zone are also
engaged in the area of scientific research,
environmental and marine issues with a view to
strengthening human and institutional capacities for the
protection and responsible management of their marine
resources.

7

A/61/PV.107

The introduction of today’s draft resolution
comes on the heels of the sixth ministerial meeting of
the zone, held in Luanda on 18 and 19 June, at which
its members adopted the Luanda Declaration and an
action-oriented Plan of Action. Those documents are
available to the membership in document A/61/1019.
The Plan of Action is the embodiment of the collective
efforts of all States members of the zone that
participated actively in the three thematic preparatory
workshops in New York, Montevideo and Buenos Aires
prior to the meeting in Luanda.
The draft resolution before the Assembly is the
result of an inclusive, constructive dialogue and
represents the consensus reached in open and
transparent informal consultations, to which the entire
membership was welcomed. The draft resolution
welcomes the holding of the sixth ministerial meeting
of the zone and takes note with appreciation of the
adoption of the Luanda Declaration and Plan of Action.
Furthermore, it requests relevant organs and bodies of
the United Nations system and invites relevant
partners, including the international financial
institutions, to render all appropriate assistance that
States members of the zone may seek in their joint
efforts to implement the Luanda Plan of Action.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank
Member States for their participation in the
consultation process and, in particular, those that
sponsored the draft. It is my expectation that the draft
resolution will enjoy the consent of all Member States.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/61/L.66.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the vote, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
I now call on the representative of the United
States for an explanation of vote.
Mr. Hagen (United States of America): Angola’s
efforts in sponsoring the draft resolution are to be
commended, and the United States appreciates
Angola’s efforts in promoting the principles declared
by the members of the South Atlantic community.
Nonetheless, the United States will disassociate
itself from consensus or abstain if there is a vote on the
draft resolution because of its belief that internationally
recognized zones should be created through

8

multilateral regional forums and not through United
Nations resolutions. Additionally, the United States
does not support the concept set out in the Luanda
Declaration concerning the characterization of marine
genetic resources in areas beyond national jurisdiction,
nor does the United States provide legally binding nonuse assurances to States within a nuclear-weapon-free
zone unless its ships and aircraft may pass through the
zone without having to declare whether or not they are
carrying nuclear weapons.
The President: We have heard the only speaker
in explanation of vote.
Before we proceed to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that, since its
introduction, Cameroon, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon,
Gambia, Honduras, Liberia, Namibia, Nepal and
Timor-Leste have become sponsors of draft resolution
A/61/L.66.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/61/L.66. A similar draft resolution was
adopted without a vote at the fifty-eighth session. May
I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to adopt
draft resolution A/61/L.66?
Draft resolution A/61/L.66
(resolution 61/294).

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote after adoption, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
I now call on the representative of the United
Kingdom, who wishes to explain her delegation’s
position on the resolution just adopted.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the continuing cooperation
between States in the zone of peace and cooperation of
the South Atlantic. However, with reference to the
Luanda Declaration issued by those States, the United
Kingdom would like to reiterate its position on the
issue of sovereignty of the Falkland Islands. The
United Kingdom’s position on this issue is well known
and was last set out in detail by the United Kingdom’s
Permanent Representative to the United Nations, Sir
Emyr Jones Parry, in a letter to the Secretary-General
on 15 January 2007.

07-50429

A/61/PV.107

The United Kingdom has no doubts about its
sovereignty over the Falkland Islands. There can be no
negotiations on the sovereignty of the Falkland Islands
unless and until such time as the islanders so wish.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 15?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 26
Report of the Peacebuilding Commission
Letter from the Acting Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission (A/61/1035)
The President: Members will recall that, at its
2nd plenary meeting on 13 September 2006, the
Assembly decided to include agenda item 26 on the
agenda of the sixty-first session.
In connection with this item, the Assembly now
has before it a letter dated 16 August 2007 from the
Acting Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
addressed to the President of the General Assembly
(A/61/1035). In her letter, the Acting Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, on behalf of the members
of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission, suggests that the first annual report of the
Peacebuilding Commission, which has been issued in
document A/62/137, be considered by the Assembly
during the main part of the sixty-second session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of this item and to
include it in the draft agenda of its sixty-second
session?
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
its consideration of agenda item 26.
Agenda item 33 (continued)
Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Report of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Working
Group on Assistance and Support to Victims of
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (A/61/1044)

07-50429

The President: In connection with this item, the
Assembly has before it a draft decision contained in
paragraph 14 of the report of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on Assistance and Support to Victims of Sexual
Exploitation and Abuse (A/61/1044).
The Assembly will now take action on the draft
decision recommended by the Ad Hoc Open-ended
Working Group on Assistance and Support to Victims
of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse in paragraph 14 of its
report. May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
the draft decision?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 33?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 152
Report of the Secretary-General on the
Peacebuilding Fund
Letter dated 7 September 2007 from the
Secretary-General to the President of the
General Assembly (A/61/1042)
The President: Members will recall that at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 13 September 2006, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda of
the sixty-first session.
In connection with this item, the Assembly now
has before it a letter dated 7 September 2007 from the
Secretary-General to the President of the General
Assembly (A/61/1042). In his letter, the SecretaryGeneral suggests that his first annual report on the
Peacebuilding Fund, which has been issued under the
symbol A/62/138, be considered by the Assembly
during the main part of the sixty-second session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of this item and to
include it in the draft agenda of its sixty-second
session?
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
its consideration of agenda item 152.

9

A/61/PV.107

Agenda item 68 (continued)
Report of the Human Rights Council
Draft resolution (A/61/L.67)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly held a debate on this item at its 51st
plenary meeting, on 10 November 2006, and adopted
resolution 61/177, entitled “International Convention
for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance”, on 20 December 2006.
In connection with this item, the Assembly now
has before it a draft resolution entitled “United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples”,
issued as document A/61/L.67.
I now give the floor to the representative of Peru
to introduce draft resolution A/61/L.67.
Mr. Chávez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): It is an
honour for the delegation of Peru to introduce
document A/61/L.67, which contains the text of the
draft resolution whereby the General Assembly would
adopt the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples. The draft resolution is sponsored
by Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Denmark, the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary,
Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Nauru,
Nicaragua, Panama, Portugal, Serbia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and Timor-Leste.
Today, the General Assembly faces the enormous
responsibility and challenge of bridging a significant
gap in the area of promoting and protecting human
rights: the protection of indigenous peoples. As attested
by the various human rights protection mechanisms,
such peoples are among the most vulnerable groups.
The process that brings us here began in 1982,
within an expert group of the SubCommission on
Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of
Minorities. Thirteen years later, that group submitted to
the former Commission on Human Rights a first draft
declaration on the rights of indigenous peoples.
Beginning in 1995, the draft was submitted for
consideration to a working group of the Commission. I
must stress that, for the first time in the history of the
United Nations, representatives of indigenous peoples,
who would enjoy the rights cited in the Declaration,

10

actively participated in such a working group, lending
unquestionable legitimacy to the document.
The working group concluded its work in 2006
with a draft text adopted that year by the Human
Rights Council and submitted to the General Assembly
for consideration during the present session. In our
sphere of competence, the Third Committee decided
last November to postpone its consideration of the
Declaration so as to have more time to continue
consultations in that regard. It also decided to conclude
its consideration of the item during the present session.
Pursuant to those decisions, various efforts were
made in recent months to address the concerns that a
number of Member States expressed about the draft
Declaration adopted by the Human Rights Council. As
a result of those efforts and the will to find areas of
agreement, a revised draft version was elaborated that
made several clarifications to the text, which we now
present to the General Assembly for adoption. Those
clarifications have been duly communicated to Member
States and to representatives of indigenous peoples. On
the basis of our consultations, we are convinced that
the changes do not undermine the substantive aspects
of the protection of indigenous peoples and, at the
same time, that they guarantee adoption of the
Declaration at the present session.
Now that this 25-year process is concluding, I
wish to particularly thank you, Madam President, and
your facilitator, Ambassador Davide of the Philippines,
for your efforts to bring the parties together. I also
express my gratitude for the flexibility shown by our
interlocutors, both governmental representatives and
representatives of indigenous peoples. We are certain
that this text will lay the foundations for a sound new
relationship between the world’s indigenous peoples
and the States and societies in which they live and with
which they coexist.
In that connection, we call upon all delegations to
join in this human rights and development initiative
and to adopt the draft resolution without a vote.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/61/L.67.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the voting, may I remind members that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by representatives from their seats.

07-50429

A/61/PV.107

Mr. Hill (Australia): Australia has actively
worked to ensure the adoption of a meaningful
declaration. We have seized every opportunity within
the Commission on Human Rights Working Group on
the draft declaration on the rights of indigenous
peoples, the Human Rights Council and the further
consultation process mandated by resolution 61/178 to
engage constructively in the elaboration of the
declaration. Within that process, Australia and others
repeatedly called for a chance to participate in the
negotiations on the current text of the declaration.
We are deeply disappointed that no such
opportunity has been afforded to us. Having an
opportunity to negotiate the text would have allowed
us to work constructively with the entire membership
of the United Nations to improve the declaration, and
might have resulted in a text that enjoyed consensus.
Australia wanted to ensure that any declaration could
become a tangible and ongoing standard of
achievement that would be universally accepted,
observed and upheld. In our view, the text of the
declaration before us fails to reach that high standard.
Australia continues to have many concerns with the
text. I would now like to touch upon a few of them.
The first has to do with self-determination. The
Australian Government has long expressed its
dissatisfaction with the references to self-determination
in the declaration. Self-determination applies to
situations of decolonization and the break-up of States
into smaller States with clearly defined population
groups. It also applies where a particular group within
a defined territory is disenfranchised and is denied
political or civil rights. It is not a right that attaches to
an undefined subgroup of a population seeking to
obtain political independence. The Government of
Australia supports and encourages the full and free
engagement of indigenous peoples in the democratic
decision-making processes in their country, but it does
not support a concept that could be construed as
encouraging action that would impair, even in part, the
territorial and political integrity of a State with a
system of democratic representative Government.
Secondly, with regard to lands and resources, the
declaration’s provisions could be read to require
recognition of indigenous rights to lands without
regard to other existing legal rights pertaining to land,
both indigenous and non-indigenous. It is important to
stress that any right to traditional lands must be subject
to national laws, otherwise the provisions would be

07-50429

both arbitrary and impossible to implement, with no
recognition being given to the fact that ownership of
land may lawfully vest in others — for example,
through grants of freehold or leasehold interests in
land. Many national legal systems, including
Australia’s, also provide for lawful compulsory
acquisition of interests in land. Australia will read the
lands and resources provisions of the declaration in
line with its existing domestic laws, including the
Native Title Act, which includes provisions for the
compulsory acquisition of native title rights and
interests with an entitlement to compensation.
Thirdly, with regard to free, prior and informed
consent, Australia has concerns that the declaration
expands any right to free, prior and informed consent
too far. For example, the declaration provides that
States shall obtain the free, prior and informed consent
of indigenous peoples before adopting or implementing
certain measures that may affect them. The scope of
that proposed right is too broad. It could mean that
States are obliged to consult with indigenous peoples
about every aspect of law that might affect them. That
would not only be unworkable, but would also apply a
standard for indigenous peoples that does not apply to
others in the population. Australia cannot accept a right
that allows a particular subgroup of the population to
be able to veto legitimate decisions of a democratic and
representative Government. The provisions relating to
free, prior and informed consent are also potentially
inconsistent with, and go well beyond, any concept of
free and informed consent that may be developing in
other international forums.
With regard to intellectual property, Australia
does not support the inclusion in the text of intellectual
property rights for indigenous peoples. Australia
extends protection to indigenous cultural heritage,
traditional knowledge and traditional cultural
expressions to the extent that it is consistent with
Australian and international intellectual property law.
However, Australia will not provide sui generis
intellectual property rights for indigenous communities
as envisaged in the declaration.
With regard to third-party rights, in seeking to
give indigenous people exclusive rights over property,
both intellectual, real and cultural, the declaration does
not acknowledge the rights of third parties — in
particular the rights of third parties to access
indigenous land, heritage and cultural objects where
appropriate under national law. The declaration fails to

11

A/61/PV.107

consider the different types of ownership and use that
can be accorded to indigenous people and fails to
consider the rights of third parties to property.
With regard customary law, Australia is also
concerned that the declaration places indigenous
customary law in a superior position to national law.
Customary law is not law in the sense that modern
democracies use the term; it is based on culture and
tradition. It should not override national laws and
should not be used selectively to permit the exercise of
practices by certain indigenous communities that
would be unacceptable in the rest of the community.
Australia will read the whole of the declaration in
accordance with domestic laws as well as international
human rights standards.
In conclusion, with regard to the nature of the
declaration, it is the clear intention of all States that it
be an aspirational declaration with political and moral
force but not legal force. It is not intended itself to be
legally binding or reflective of international law. As
this declaration does not describe current State practice
or actions States consider themselves obliged to take as
a matter of law, it cannot be cited as evidence of the
evolution of customary international law. This
declaration does not provide a proper basis for legal
actions, complaints or other claims in any
international, domestic or other proceedings. Nor does
it provide a basis for the elaboration of other
international instruments, whether binding or nonbinding.
Nevertheless, the text contains recommendations
regarding how States can promote the welfare of
indigenous peoples. Clearly, while the declaration will
not be binding on Australia and other States as a matter
of international law, we are aware that its aspirational
contents will be relied on in setting standards by which
States will be judged in their relations with indigenous
peoples. Accordingly, the Government of Australia has
been concerned throughout the negotiations to ensure
that the declaration is meaningful, is capable of
implementation and enjoys wide support in the
international community. We believe that this
declaration unfortunately fails in all those respects.
Australia therefore cannot support it.
Mr. McNee (Canada): Canada has long
demonstrated our commitment to actively advancing
indigenous rights at home and internationally. We
recognize that the situation of indigenous peoples

12

around the world warrants concerted and concrete
international action. We have strongly supported the
establishment and ongoing work of the Permanent
Forum on Indigenous Issues and the Special
Rapporteur on the situation of the fundamental
freedoms and human rights of indigenous peoples, and
have promoted the consideration of indigenous issues
within a variety of international conferences. We have
a constructive, far-reaching international development
programme targeted specifically at improving the
situation of indigenous peoples in many parts of the
world.
Canada continues to make further progress at
home, working within constitutional guarantees for
aboriginal and treaty rights, and with negotiated selfgovernment and land claims agreements with several
aboriginal groups in Canada. Canada also intends to
continue active international engagement, both
multilaterally and bilaterally. It is therefore with
disappointment that we find ourselves having to vote
against the adoption of this Declaration as drafted.
Since 1985, when the United Nations expert
Working Group on Indigenous Populations decided to
produce a declaration on indigenous rights, Canada has
been an active participant in its development. Canada
has long been a proponent of a strong and effective
declaration that would promote and protect the human
rights and fundamental freedoms of every indigenous
person without discrimination and recognize the
collective rights of indigenous peoples around the
world. We have sought for many years, along with
others, an aspirational document that would advance
indigenous
rights
and
promote
harmonious
arrangements between indigenous peoples and the
States in which they live.
However, the text that was presented at the
Human Rights Council in June 2006 did not meet such
expectations and did not address some of our concerns.
That is why Canada voted against it. We also expressed
dissatisfaction with the process followed in Geneva.
Canada’s position has remained consistent and
based on principle. We have stated publicly that
Canada has significant concerns with respect to the
wording of the current text, including the provisions on
lands, territories and resources; on free, prior and
informed consent when used as a veto; on selfgovernment without recognition of the importance of
negotiations; on intellectual property; on military

07-50429

A/61/PV.107

issues; and on the need to achieve an appropriate
balance between the rights and obligations of
indigenous peoples, Member States and third parties.
The recognition of indigenous rights to lands,
territories and resources is important to Canada.
Canada is proud of the fact that aboriginal and treaty
rights are given strong recognition and protection in
Canada’s constitution. We are equally proud of the
processes that have been put in place to deal with
aboriginal claims respecting those rights and are
working actively to improve these processes to address
such claims even more effectively. Unfortunately, the
provisions in the Declaration on lands, territories and
resources are overly broad and unclear and are
susceptible of a wide variety of interpretations,
discounting the need to recognize a range of rights over
land and possibly putting into question matters that
have already been settled by treaty in Canada.
Mr. Wali (Nigeria), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
Similarly, some of the provisions dealing with the
concept of free, prior and informed consent are unduly
restrictive. Provisions such as article 19 provide that
the State cannot act on any legislative or administrative
matter that may affect indigenous peoples without
obtaining their consent. While there are already strong
consultation processes in place, and while Canadian
courts have reinforced these as a matter of law, the
establishment of a complete veto power over
legislative and administrative action for a particular
group would be fundamentally incompatible with
Canada’s parliamentary system.
In Geneva, leading up to the Human Rights
Council’s adoption of the text, and in New York
throughout this session of the General Assembly,
Canada has been very clear in proposing that further
negotiations take place in an open and transparent
process with the effective involvement of indigenous
peoples. Over the past year, had there been an
appropriate process to address these concerns, and the
concerns of other Member States, a stronger
declaration could have emerged, one acceptable to
Canada and other countries with significant indigenous
populations and which could have provided practical
guidance to all States. Very unfortunately, such a
process has not taken place. The few modifications
presented to the General Assembly at the last minute
did not arise from an open, inclusive or transparent

07-50429

process and do not address key areas of concern of a
number of delegations, including Canada’s.
It is particularly unfortunate that a number of
States, such as Canada, with significant indigenous
populations, cannot solidly support the adoption of this
particular text as a meaningful and effective United
Nations declaration on the rights of indigenous
peoples.
(spoke in French)
However, allow me to reiterate that Canada will
continue to take effective action, at home and abroad,
to promote and protect the rights of indigenous peoples
based on our existing human rights obligations and
commitments. Such effective action, we must be clear,
would not be undertaken on the basis of the provisions
of this Declaration.
By voting against the adoption of this text,
Canada puts on record its disappointment with both the
text’s substance and the process leading to it. For
clarity, we also underline our understanding that this
Declaration is not a legally binding instrument. It has
no legal effect in Canada, and its provisions do not
represent customary international law.
In conclusion, for the reasons stated today,
Canada will vote against adoption of this text.
Ms. Banks (New Zealand): New Zealand is one
of the few countries that from the start supported the
elaboration of a declaration that promoted and
protected the rights of indigenous peoples.
In New Zealand, indigenous rights are of
profound importance. They are integral to our identity
as a nation-State and as a people. New Zealand is
unique: a treaty concluded at Waitangi between the
Crown and New Zealand’s indigenous people in 1840
is a founding document of our country. Today, we have
one of the largest and most dynamic indigenous
minorities in the world. The Treaty of Waitangi has
acquired great significance in New Zealand’s
constitutional arrangements, law and government
activity.
The place of Maori in society, their grievances
and the disparities affecting them are central and
enduring features of our domestic debate and of
Government action. Furthermore, New Zealand has an
unparalleled system for redress, accepted by
indigenous and non-indigenous citizens alike. Nearly

13

A/61/PV.107

40 per cent of the New Zealand fishing quota is owned
by Maori as a result. Claims to over half of New
Zealand’s land area have been settled.
For those reasons, New Zealand fully supports
the principles and aspirations of the Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples. New Zealand has been
implementing most of the standards in the Declaration
for many years. We share the belief that a declaration
on the rights of indigenous peoples is long overdue and
the concern that, in many parts of the world,
indigenous peoples continue to be deprived of basic
human rights.
New Zealand is proud of our role in improving
the text over the past three years, with the objective of
turning the draft declaration into one that States would
be able to uphold, implement and promote. We worked
hard to the very end to narrow our concerns and to be
able to support this text. We appreciate the efforts
made by others, in particular the African Group.
It is therefore a matter of deep regret that we find
ourselves unable to support the text before us today
annexed to draft resolution A/61/L.67. Unfortunately,
we have difficulties with a number of provisions in the
text. Four provisions in the Declaration are
fundamentally incompatible with New Zealand’s
constitutional and legal arrangements, with the Treaty
of Waitangi and with the principle of governing for the
good of all our citizens. These are article 26 on lands
and resources, article 28 on redress and articles 19 and
32 on a right of veto over the State.
The provision on lands and resources simply
cannot be implemented in New Zealand. Article 26
states that indigenous peoples have a right to own, use,
develop or control lands and territories that they have
traditionally owned, occupied or used. For New
Zealand, the entire country is potentially caught within
the scope of the article. The article appears to require
recognition of rights to lands now lawfully owned by
other citizens, both indigenous and non-indigenous and
does not take into account the customs, traditions and
land tenure systems of the indigenous peoples
concerned. Furthermore, that article implies that
indigenous peoples have rights that others do not have.
In addition, the provisions on redress and
compensation, in particular in article 28, are
unworkable in New Zealand despite the unparalleled
and extensive processes that exist under New Zealand
law in this regard. Again, the entire country would

14

appear to fall within the scope of the article. The text
generally takes no account of the fact that land may
now be occupied or owned legitimately by others or
subject to numerous different, or overlapping,
indigenous claims. It is impossible for the State in New
Zealand to uphold a right to redress and provide
compensation for value for the entire country. And
indeed, financial compensation has generally not been
the principal objective of most indigenous groups
seeking settlements in New Zealand.
Finally, the Declaration, in particular its article 19
and paragraph 2 of article 32, implies that indigenous
peoples have a right of veto over a democratic
legislature and national resource management. We
strongly support the full and active engagement of
indigenous peoples in democratic decision-making
processes. Seventeen per cent of our parliament
identifies as Maori, compared to 15 per cent of the
general population. We also have some of the most
extensive consultation mechanisms in the world, where
the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi, including the
principle of informed consent, are enshrined in
resource management law. But these articles in the
Declaration text imply different classes of citizenship,
where indigenous people have a right of veto that other
groups or individuals do not have.
Unfortunately, those are not the only provisions
that cause us difficulties. For example, we also have
concerns about article 31 concerning intellectual
property. But I have focused today on the provisions of
central concern to New Zealand.
New Zealand takes international human rights
and our international human rights obligations
extremely seriously. But we are unable to support a
text that includes provisions that are so fundamentally
incompatible with our democratic processes, our
legislation and our constitutional arrangements. These
provisions are all discriminatory in the New Zealand
context. This text is also clearly unable to be
implemented by many States, including those that will
be voting in favour of its adoption today.
The Declaration is explained by its supporters as
being an aspirational document intended to inspire
rather than to have legal effect. New Zealand does not,
however, accept that a State can responsibly take such
a stance towards a document that purports to declare
the contents of the rights of indigenous people. We take
the statements in the Declaration very seriously. For

07-50429

A/61/PV.107

that reason we have felt compelled to take the position
that we do.
Lest there be any doubt, we place on record our
firm view that the history of the negotiations on the
Declaration and the divided manner in which its text
has been adopted demonstrate that this text,
particularly in the articles to which I have referred,
does not state propositions which are reflected in State
practice or which are or will be recognized as general
principles of law.
In our experience, the promotion and protection
of indigenous rights requires a partnership between the
State and indigenous peoples that is constructive and
harmonious. That is the foundation of New Zealand as
a nation-State. It is with genuine regret and
disappointment, therefore, that New Zealand is unable
to support the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples and must dissociate itself from that text.
Mr. Hagen (United States of America): We regret
that we must vote against the adoption of the
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,
annexed to draft resolution A/61/L.67. We worked hard
for 11 years in Geneva for a consensus declaration, but
the document before us is a text that was prepared and
submitted after the negotiations had concluded. States
were given no opportunity to discuss it collectively. It
is disappointing that the Human Rights Council did not
respond to calls we made, in partnership with Council
members, for States to undertake further work to
generate a consensus text. This Declaration was
adopted by the Human Rights Council in a splintered
vote. That process was unfortunate and extraordinary
in any multilateral negotiating exercise and sets a poor
precedent with respect to United Nations practice.
The Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples, if it were to encourage harmonious and
constructive relations, should have been written in
terms that are transparent and capable of
implementation. Unfortunately, the text that emerged
from that failed process is confusing and risks endless
conflicting interpretations and debate about its
application, as already evidenced by the numerous
complex interpretative statements that have been
issued by States at its adoption in the Human Rights
Council. We cannot lend our support to such a text.
Our views with respect to the core provisions of
the text can be found in a separate document, entitled
“Observations of the United States with respect to the

07-50429

Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples”,
which will be available in the Hall and posted on the
Web site of the United States Mission to the United
Nations, and which will be circulated as an official
United Nations document. That document is
incorporated by reference herein and discusses the core
provisions of the Declaration, including but not limited
to self-determination, lands and resources, redress and
the nature of the Declaration. Because the flaws in the
text run through its most significant provisions, the text
as a whole is rendered unacceptable.
Although we are voting against this flawed
document, my Government will continue its vigorous
efforts to promote indigenous rights domestically.
Under United States domestic law, the United States
Government recognizes Indian tribes as political
entities with inherent powers of self-government as
first peoples. In our legal system, the Federal
Government
has
a
government-to-government
relationship with Indian tribes. In that domestic
context, this means promoting tribal self-government
over a broad range of internal and local affairs,
including determination of membership, culture,
language, religion, education, information, social
welfare, maintenance of community safety, family
relations, economic activities, lands and resources
management, environment and entry by non-members,
as well as ways and means for financing those
autonomous functions.
At the same time, the United States will continue
its work to promote indigenous rights internationally.
In its annual human rights report, the United States
Department of State reports on the situation of
indigenous persons in communities throughout the
world. In our diplomatic efforts, we will continue our
opposition to racial discrimination against indigenous
individuals and communities, and continue to press for
full indigenous participation in democratic electoral
processes throughout the world. We will also continue
with our international assistance programmes involving
indigenous peoples.
We are deeply disappointed that, in seeking to
make a practical difference in the lives of indigenous
peoples around the globe, the international community
has not been presented with a text that is clear,
transparent or capable of implementation. Those
fundamental shortcomings, unfortunately, mean that
the document cannot enjoy universal support to
become a true standard of achievement.

15

A/61/PV.107

Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation attaches great
importance to the protection of the rights of indigenous
peoples and to the strengthening of international
cooperation in that area. From the very outset, we
adopted a responsible approach to the process of
developing a United Nations declaration on the rights
of indigenous peoples. We believe that the adoption of
the declaration by consensus would represent a
significant step forward in ensuring the interests and
rights of indigenous peoples.
The President returned to the Chair.
Many provisions of the draft declaration are
appropriate and acceptable to us. Russia is convinced
that such an all-encompassing document as the United
Nations declaration on the rights of indigenous peoples
should be a balanced, carefully weighed and
authoritative international text.
Unfortunately, we are obliged to note that the
draft declaration before the Assembly for adoption is
not such a text. We note with satisfaction that the
declaration was supplemented at the last minute with
provisions on the non-impairment of the integrity and
political unity of sovereign and independent States.
However, in our opinion that and other useful
amendments are not in themselves sufficient to make
the declaration a truly balanced document. As we have
noted, we cannot agree with the document’s provisions
relating in particular to the rights of indigenous
peoples to land and natural resources, and to the
procedure for compensation and redress.
The text clearly does not enjoy consensus
support. It has not been duly endorsed by all interested
parties. Furthermore, in the course of this session, a
non-transparent format was chosen for work on the
document. That ensured that a group of countries, on
the territory of which live a significant number of those
who may be considered indigenous peoples, was
excluded at a decisive stage from the negotiation
process. Such an approach is a source not only of
regret to us, but also of fundamental disagreement. We
hope that the manner in which the declaration is to be
adopted will not set a negative precedent for the
General Assembly’s activities or for the United Nations
work in developing new norms and standards.
Having assumed a responsible approach to this
important aspect of the United Nations work, the
Russian Federation nevertheless notes with regret that,

16

in the light of the foregoing, we cannot support the
draft United Nations declaration on the rights of
indigenous peoples and shall abstain in the voting on
draft resolution A/61/L.67. However, we intend, as in
the past, to make every effort to foster international
cooperation in the promotion and protection of the
rights of indigenous peoples.
Mr. Ehouzou (Benin) (spoke in French): My
country supports the text of the draft United Nations
declaration on the rights of indigenous peoples before
the General Assembly for adoption. I recall that Benin
has been a sponsor of the draft from the very outset
because we are convinced that it represents progress in
the field of human rights and in particular the rights of
indigenous peoples.
During the negotiating procedure, countries
raised legitimate concerns and, for the sake of
solidarity, my delegation supported the African
position so that we might take into account the
misgivings expressed by the continent. Throughout the
discussions on the document within the African Group,
Benin continuously called for an approach of limited
openness on the text in order not to engage in endless
debates.
My
delegation
therefore
welcomes
the
compromise achieved and it is with true pleasure that
Benin opts to vote in favour of the text before us,
despite the flaws that have been stressed by some
delegations, in the hope that the opportunity will arise
for the declaration to be improved. It is most important
to note that the text has numerous imperfections, but
that it remains desirable for it to be implemented on an
interim basis while improvements are introduced so
that it can be endorsed by all delegations.
Mr. Montoya (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
The Colombian State has incorporated into its legal
system a broad range of rights aimed at recognizing,
guaranteeing and implementing the rights and
constitutional principles of pluralism and national
ethnic and cultural diversity.
In the framework of its 1991 Constitution,
Colombia has distinguished itself as one of the most
advanced countries with regard to the recognition of
the collective rights of indigenous peoples. According
to the indigenous legislation index of the InterAmerican Development Bank, Colombia is first in
terms of the quality of its legislation in the sphere of
cultural, economic, territorial and environmental rights,

07-50429

A/61/PV.107

as well as in terms of the overall quality of its
indigenous legislation.
Our diversity is reflected in the existence of 84
indigenous peoples. According to the 2005 census,
some 3.4 per cent of Colombians identify themselves
as belonging to indigenous communities. For the
Colombian State, the recognition of the traditional
territories of those communities is fundamental. Today
there are 710 reservations occupying an area of
approximately 32 million hectares, corresponding to 27
per cent of the national territory. By the end of 2007,
that area should extend to 29 per cent of the national
territory. Those properties cannot be proscribed, seized
or transferred. Indigenous peoples’ access to collective
or individual land ownership is regulated by legal and
administrative provisions guaranteeing that right, in
keeping with the State’s objectives and with principles
such as the social and ecological functions of
ownership and State ownership of the subsoil and nonrenewable natural resources.
In these territories, indigenous peoples carry out
their own political, social and legal organization. By
constitutional mandate, their authorities are recognized
as public State authorities having a special nature. As
far as the legal area is concerned, a special indigenous
jurisdiction is recognized, which is significant progress
compared with that made by other countries in the
region.
Reservations
participate
in
the
central
Government’s budgetary transfer system. It should also
be noted that all members of these communities are
covered by the State-subsidized health service. In
addition, the law establishes that indigenous peoples
are exempt from compulsory military service — an
essential provision aimed at preserving their cultural
identity. And there are special electoral districts for
indigenous peoples in national political elections.
In the international context, Colombia has been a
leading country in implementing the prior-consultation
provisions of International Labour Organization (ILO)
Convention 169, to which our country is a party. Since
2003, 71 prior-consultation proceedings have been
undertaken for natural resource prospecting and
extraction projects and other development projects in
established indigenous territories.
Cooperation with indigenous communities is a
priority for the State. In this area, there are permanent
forums such as the national coordination board, the

07-50429

national rights commission, the Amazon regional board
and the national territories board. Those forums have
made it possible to jointly elaborate norms and policies
concerning indigenous communities from a multiethnic and inclusive perspective.
In order to continue these activities over the long
term, the State, with participation by indigenous
experts, is currently developing a comprehensive
policy for indigenous communities, crucial aspects of
which are related to, inter alia, territories, human rights
and self-government.
In the General Assembly, Colombia has
reaffirmed its commitment to the rights of indigenous
communities. My delegation nevertheless supported
the initiative to postpone a decision on the Declaration,
because we believed that it was important to seek an
agreement enabling us to adopt a Declaration
acceptable to all countries — a text that would be
adopted by consensus and would conform to general
international and national normative frameworks. We
even supported the establishment of a forum that would
have enabled indigenous communities to participate in
the discussion. Regrettably, the most recent
consultative process in the Assembly was characterized
by a lack of transparency, a lack of willingness to
negotiate and a lack of openness, which did not permit
such a consensus to be reached.
The Colombian constitution and body of law, as
well as the international instruments ratified by our
country, conform with most provisions of the
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.
However, while the Declaration is not a legally binding
norm for the State and in no way constitutes the
establishment of conventional or customary provisions
that are binding for Colombia, my delegation finds
some aspects of the Declaration to be in direct
contradiction with the Colombian internal legal system,
which obliged us to abstain in the voting. I shall refer
briefly to some of these.
For example, article 30 of the Declaration
provides that effective consultations must be held with
indigenous communities prior to using their lands or
territories for military activities. Under the mandate set
out in our constitution, the State security forces must
be present throughout the national territory to provide
and guarantee to all inhabitants protection of and
respect for their lives, honour and property, both
individual and collective. Protecting the rights and

17

A/61/PV.107

integrity of indigenous communities depends to a great
extent on security in their territories. In that
connection, instructions have been issued to the
security forces to fulfil their obligation to protect the
rights of such communities. Nevertheless, this
provision of the Declaration contradicts the principle
of the necessity and effectiveness of the State security
forces, preventing the fulfilment of their institutional
mission. That is not acceptable to Colombia.

against the dispossession of such resources, are also
recognized. It is important to stress that many States,
including Colombia, constitutionally stipulate that the
subsoil and non-renewable natural resources are the
property of the State in order to protect and guarantee
their public use for the benefit of the entire nation.
Therefore, accepting provisions such as those I have
cited would run counter to the internal legal order,
which is based on the national interest.

Moreover, articles 19 and 32 of the Declaration
refer to consultations to obtain the free, prior and
informed consent of indigenous communities before
adopting measures that may affect their lands or
territories and other resources. In particular, the
development, utilization or exploitation of mineral,
water or other resources is mentioned.

Moreover,
the
Declaration
refers
to
archaeological and historical sites as well as to lands
and territories, without clearly defining the concept of
indigenous territories, which is relevant to achieving
effective protection in terms of the rights of peoples
and the obligations of the State.

The right of these communities to prior
consultation is defined in our constitution and in ILO
Convention No. 169. In that regard, Colombia’s
Constitutional Court has reiterated in its jurisprudence
that there must be compatibility between the
exploitation of natural resources and the protection of
the social, cultural and economic integrity of
indigenous communities. Therefore, it is necessary to
guarantee their full, free and informed participation in
the decisions taken to authorize such exploitation in
their territories.
However, that Court has indicated that, while the
Government is obligated to provide effective and
reasonable mechanisms for participation, it is not
obligatory to reach an agreement. Indigenous peoples’
right to consultation is not absolute. Both the
Constitutional Court and the ILO Committee of
Experts have established that prior consultation does
not imply a right to veto State decisions, but that it is
an ideal mechanism for enabling indigenous and tribal
peoples to exercise the right to express themselves and
to influence the decision-making process.
The Declaration’s approach to prior consent is
different and could amount to a possible veto on the
exploitation of natural resources in indigenous
territories in the absence of an agreement. That could
interfere with processes benefiting the general interest.
Other articles of the Declaration state that
indigenous peoples have the right to own, develop and
control the territories that they possess by reason of
traditional ownership, as well as the underlying natural
resources. Other related rights, such as protection

18

Finally, Colombia has been and will continue to
be a country committed to facts and realities in
protecting the rights of indigenous peoples, from a
realistic and participatory perspective that harmonizes
national identity with the development of the State, to
which all Colombians belong. The decision to abstain
in the voting on this text because of the legal
incompatibilities that I have identified does not change
the State’s firm national commitment to implementing
the constitutional provisions,
internal norms and
assumed international obligations aimed at preserving
the Colombian nation’s multi-ethnic nature and
protecting its ethnic and cultural diversity.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/61/L.67, entitled “United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
I call on the representative of Guatemala on a
point of order.
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez: (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation would simply like to ask the
President which delegation requested a recorded vote
on draft resolution A/61/L.67.
The President: The representatives of Australia,
New Zealand and the United States of America
requested a recorded vote on draft resolution
A/61/L.67.
We shall now begin the voting process.
A recorded vote was taken.

07-50429

A/61/PV.107

In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina,
Botswana,
Brazil,
Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chile, China, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Gabon, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Niger, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, New Zealand, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Burundi,
Colombia, Georgia, Kenya, Nigeria, Russian
Federation, Samoa, Ukraine

07-50429

Draft resolution A/61/L.67 was adopted by 143
votes to 4, with 11 abstentions (resolution
61/295).
[Subsequently the delegation of Montenegro
advised the Secretariat that it had intended to vote
in favour.]
The President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote following the voting,
may I remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
representatives from their seats.
Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina was actively and constructively engaged
throughout the long process of dialogue, agreement and
negotiation that led to today’s adoption of the
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. When
the draft text of the Declaration was adopted by the
Human Rights Council, Argentina regretted that it had
to abstain in the voting rather than vote in favour —
despite our clear political will in favour of recognition
of the rights of indigenous peoples and given that the
majority of the Declaration’s provisions were in line
with our own proposals. On that same occasion, we
also regretted not having had more time to reconcile
references to the right to self-determination with
principles pertaining to the territorial integrity, national
unity and organizational structure of each State.
Fortunately, the efforts made since then to resolve
those issues without undermining the rights set out and
protected in the Declaration have achieved the
expected results. That success was due to the inclusion
in paragraph 1 of article 46 of conditions for the
application of the Declaration that made it fully
compatible with the principles to which I have referred.
It was thanks to those efforts and the results they
achieved that Argentina was today pleased to be able to
join with all the other countries that voted in favour of
the adoption of the Declaration. In doing so, we
reaffirmed our commitment in favour of due
recognition of the rights of indigenous peoples, which
is one of the most legitimate and important questions
that the international community must address.
Mr. Shinyo (Japan): It was from the viewpoint of
respect for the rights of indigenous peoples that the
Government of Japan voted in favour of the
Declaration. We would like to state our views on the
Declaration.

19

A/61/PV.107

The revised version of article 46 correctly
clarifies that the right of self-determination does not
give indigenous peoples the right to be separate and
independent from their country of residence and that
that right shall not be invoked for the purpose of
impairing a State’s sovereignty, national and political
unity or territorial integrity. The Government of Japan
shares that understanding of that right and we welcome
the revision.

underpins the public policies and initiatives we are
promoting for the economic, social and cultural
development of our indigenous peoples. The
Declaration will serve to strengthen those national
efforts, which are being carried out through dialogue,
respect for our specificities, observance of our
international commitments and, in particular, our
domestic institutions, rule of law and legal norms. It is
that spirit of consensus that is reflected in article 46.

While the Declaration stipulates that some rights
are collective rights, it seems that the concept of
collective human rights is not widely recognized as a
well-established concept in general international law,
and most States do not accept it. Nevertheless, we are
fully aware and would like to emphasize that everyone,
including indigenous peoples, has fundamental human
rights in international law. In that respect, taking note
of the thinking at which the Declaration aims, the
Government of Japan thinks that indigenous
individuals bear the rights contained in the Declaration,
and that with regard to certain rights they can exercise
them along with other individuals who have the same
rights.

Through her support for the Declaration,
President Michelle Bachelet has reaffirmed her firm
and resolute commitment to democratic governance
and the comprehensive development of indigenous
people, all the while respecting their dignity, rights and
roots.

The Government of Japan thinks that the rights
set out in the Declaration should not harm the human
rights of the others. We are also aware that, regarding
property rights, the content of the rights of ownership
and others relating to land and territory is firmly
stipulated in the civil law and other laws of each State.
Therefore, the Government of Japan thinks that the
rights relating to land and territory set out in the
Declaration, as well as the way those rights are
exercised, are limited by due reason in the light of
harmonizing and protecting third-party interests and
other public interests.
Mr. Andereya (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Chile voted in favour of the United
Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples, for we recognize the important and valuable
contribution of indigenous peoples in building and
developing our societies. The Declaration is a
significant step in our great national undertaking to
build a more inclusive, diverse and tolerant society.
In that context, we would like to reaffirm a
crucial principle of our domestic legal system, namely,
the need to “respect, protect and promote the
development of indigenous people, including their
culture, families and communities”. That principle

20

Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Allow me to say
at the outset that we normally would have expected to
speak after the representative of the Portuguese
presidency of the European Union, but as I understand
from the Secretariat, for technical reasons it is not
possible for the representative of Portugal to speak
before us today. Therefore, allow me to say that we
associate ourselves with the statement that will be
made by the representative of Portugal.
The United Kingdom welcomes the Declaration
on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples as an important
tool in helping to enhance the promotion and
protection of the rights of indigenous peoples. We
recognize that indigenous peoples continue to be
amongst the poorest and most marginalized peoples of
the world. For too long, their voices were not
sufficiently heard within the international system and
their concerns received insufficient attention.
The United Kingdom would like to record its
regret that it has not been possible to reach wider
consensus on this important text and that some States
with large indigenous populations have had no recourse
but to call for a vote on it. It is of course not desirable,
either from the perspective of States or for the interests
of indigenous peoples, that this should be the case.
Nevertheless, the United Kingdom recognizes and
welcomes the efforts that have been made to advance
the Declaration to its current final form, reflecting
many concerns that we and others had raised in
negotiations. We were therefore pleased to be able to
support its adoption.
The United Kingdom fully supports the
provisions in the Declaration that recognize that

07-50429

A/61/PV.107

indigenous individuals are entitled to the full
protection of their human rights and fundamental
freedoms in international law on an equal basis with all
other individuals. Human rights are universal and equal
for all.
I would like to recall here that, since equality and
universality
are
the
fundamental
principles
underpinning human rights, we do not accept that some
groups in society should benefit from human rights that
are not available to others. With the exception of the
right to self-determination, we therefore do not accept
the concept of collective human rights in international
law. Of course, certain individual human rights can
often be exercised collectively, in community with
others. Examples would include freedom of
association, freedom of religion or a collective title to
property.
That remains a long-standing and wellestablished position of my Government. It is one we
consider to be important in ensuring that individuals
within groups are not left vulnerable or unprotected by
allowing rights of the groups to supersede the human
rights of the individual. That is without prejudice to the
United Kingdom’s recognition of the fact that
Governments of many States with indigenous
populations have granted them various collective rights
in their constitutions, national laws and agreements, as
we have heard today. We warmly welcome this fact,
and it has served to strengthen the political and
economic position and protections for indigenous
peoples in those States.
In this regard, the United Kingdom strongly
endorses the twenty-second preambular paragraph of
the Declaration, which we understand to distinguish
between individual human rights in international law
and other, collective rights bestowed at the national
level by Governments to indigenous peoples. The
United Kingdom wishes to reaffirm that it reads all the
provisions in this Declaration in the light of that
preambular clause and according to that understanding
of human rights and collective rights.
Furthermore, the United Kingdom understands
article 46 of the Declaration to underpin the provisions
of the Declaration as a whole in emphasizing that the
exercise of the rights in the Declaration should respect
human rights.
We understand article 3 of the Declaration as
promoting the development of a new and distinct right

07-50429

of self-determination, specific to indigenous peoples.
We therefore understand the right set out in article 3 of
the Declaration to be separate and different from the
existing right of all peoples to self-determination in
international law, as recognized in common article 1 of
the two International Covenants on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights and on Civil and Political Rights.
Subsequent articles of the Declaration seek to set out
the content of that new right, which is to be exercised,
where it applies, within the territory of the State and is
not intended to have an impact in any way on the
political unity or territorial integrity of existing States.
The United Kingdom therefore understands that the
right put forward in the Declaration relates to the
specific circumstances of indigenous people and their
claims to self-determination within the territory of
existing States.
The United Kingdom welcomes the seventeenth
preambular paragraph of the Declaration, which
reaffirms the right of all peoples to self-determination
in international law. The United Kingdom notes that
that affirmation of the general right in international law
does not imply that the right of self-determination in
international law is automatically applicable to
indigenous peoples per se and does not indicate that
indigenous peoples automatically qualify as “peoples”
for the purposes of common article 1 of the
International Covenants. That existing common article
1 right of all peoples is not qualified, limited or
expanded by this Declaration.
The United Kingdom fully supports article 15 of
the Declaration. United Kingdom museums are keen to
promote understanding of the cultural achievements of
indigenous peoples in their collections and to
encourage tolerance and respect for different cultures.
The United Kingdom also understands the
commitments in article 11 to provide redress through
effective mechanisms and the commitment in article 12
to seek to enable access and/or repatriation through
effective mechanisms as applying only in respect of
such property or of such ceremonial objects and human
remains as are in the ownership or possession of the
State. The United Kingdom notes that its national
museums and galleries are separate legal bodies that
operate independently within the framework of their
founding legislation.
The United Kingdom notes that the commitment
to provide redress in article 12 and the commitment to

21

A/61/PV.107

seek to enable access and/or repatriation in article 13
are to be fulfilled through effective mechanisms
developed in conjunction with the indigenous peoples
concerned.
The United Kingdom emphasizes that this
Declaration is not legally binding and does not propose
to have any retroactive application on historical
episodes. Nonetheless, it will be an important policy
tool for those States that recognize indigenous peoples
within their national territories in implementing
policies that help to protect indigenous peoples’ rights.
The United Kingdom confirms that national minority
groups and other ethnic groups within the territory of
the United Kingdom and its overseas territories do not
fall within the scope of indigenous peoples to which
this Declaration applies.
The United Kingdom has long provided political
and financial support to the economic, social and
political development of indigenous peoples around the
world. We will continue to do so. Today we add our
voice in support of this important political document
that is the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples. We hope and trust it will provide an important
tool for indigenous peoples around the world to
advance their rights and ensure their continued
development and growing prosperity as peoples.
Mr. Løvald (Norway): The rights of indigenous
peoples are of key importance to Norway. We welcome
the adoption of the United Nations Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous People, which we believe will
help promote the protection of the rights of indigenous
peoples worldwide. The Declaration sets a standard of
achievement to be pursued in a spirit of partnership and
mutual respect. In Norway, we will do this in
partnership with Sami people in Norway, who are
recognized as indigenous people by the Government.
The recognition of the right to self-determination
referred to in this Declaration requires that indigenous
peoples have full and effective participation in a
democratic society and in decision-making processes
relevant to the indigenous peoples’ concern. Several
articles in the Declaration specify how the right to selfdetermination may be exercised. The Declaration
emphasizes that the right to self-determination shall be
exercised in conformity with international law.
Consultation with the peoples concerned is one of
the measures outlined in the Declaration. As a State
party
to
International
Labour
Organization’s

22

Convention No. 169, concerning Indigenous and Tribal
Peoples in Independent Countries, Norway has
implemented the consultation requirements specified in
that Convention. Self-determination is furthermore
exercised through the Sami Parliament, which is an
elected body with decision-making and consultative
functions within the framework of the applicable
legislation. The Government has also signed an
agreement with the Sami Parliament in which it sets
out procedures for consultations between the
Government and the Sami Parliament.
Norway considers that the Declaration is to be
understood within the framework of the United Nations
Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, adopted by resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24
October 1970.
Mrs. Asmady (Indonesia), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
For indigenous peoples, the question of land is an
issue that is crucial for indigenous culture and identity.
With reference to article 26 of the Declaration before
us, we state that, for States parties to International
Labour Organization Convention No. 169, the rights
concerned must be understood to refer to the rights
specified in that Convention. As concerns article 30,
Norway intends to continue military activities
necessary for upholding general contingency
preparedness, including national and allied training and
exercises, as we consider these to be justified by a
significant threat to public interests.
Ms. Ahmed (Bangladesh): Bangladesh fully
supports the rights of any group that is disadvantaged.
Our constitution explicitly forbids discrimination on
grounds of race, religion, caste, gender or place of
birth. Bangladesh adheres to all major international
instruments on human rights. In April this year we
ratified the Convention on the Protection and
Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions. In
all international forums, Bangladesh has always
supported the rights of indigenous peoples.
However, in our view, the Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples, in its present form,
retains some ambiguities. In particular, indigenous
peoples have not been defined or identified in clear
terms. We had also hoped that this political Declaration

07-50429

A/61/PV.107

would be able to enjoy consensus among Member
States, but unfortunately that has not been the case.
Under those circumstances, Bangladesh was
obliged to abstain in the vote on the draft resolution.
Ms. Al-Zibdeh (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan voted
in favour of draft resolution A/61/L.67, to which the
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples is
annexed. It wishes, however, to explain its vote. In
connection with articles 3 and 4, the right of selfdetermination must be exercised in accordance with the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and in
a manner consistent with the provisions of international
law relating to the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States.
Ms. Rovirosa (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): The
Mexican delegation hails this very important step
forward: the Assembly’s adoption of the first universal
instrument devoted to the rights of indigenous peoples.
The Government of Mexico solemnly reaffirms the
pride it takes in the multicultural and multi-ethnic
nature of the Mexican nation. As we approach the
bicentenary
of
Mexico’s
independence,
my
Government proclaims in this highest forum of
humankind its profound gratitude to its indigenous
peoples, which form the original foundation of our
national identity. As the root-stock of today’s Mexico,
indigenous peoples bring the extraordinary richness of
their social, economic, cultural and political
institutions to the inalterable destiny of the Mexican
nation as a single and indivisible country.
We welcome the spirit and thrust of the
provisions of the Declaration which accord with the
provisions of the constitution and laws of the United
Mexican States. Article 2 of our constitution
recognizes and guarantees the right of indigenous
peoples and communities to self-determination and
grants them autonomy to, inter alia, determine their
internal forms of coexistence and organization and
apply their own systems of rules to the settlement of
internal disputes. Similarly, indigenous peoples in
Mexico possess the right, in accordance with their
traditional rules, procedures and practices, to elect their
own authorities and representatives for the exercise of
their own systems of internal governance. Moreover,
our founding charter provides a framework within
which to promote equal opportunity for indigenous
people and eliminate all discriminatory practices.

07-50429

Mexico interprets provisions of the present
Declaration in the following way. The right of
indigenous peoples to self-determination, autonomy
and self-government, as set out in articles 3, 4 and 5 of
the Declaration, shall be exercised in accordance with
the constitution, so as to ensure the national unity and
territorial integrity of our State. The provisions of
articles 26, 27 and 28 relating to ownership, use,
development and control of territories and resources
shall not be understood in a way that would undermine
or diminish the forms and procedures relating to land
ownership and tenancy established in our constitution
and laws relating to third-party acquired rights. The
procedures set out in articles 27 and 28 are subordinate
to national legislation.
Mr. Ritter (Liechtenstein): Liechtenstein has
been a long-standing supporter of innovative
approaches to the right of peoples to self-determination
in order to fully explore the potential of this concept
for the promotion and protection of human rights. We
are therefore pleased that the Declaration on the Rights
of Indigenous Peoples, just adopted, contains a number
of provisions which mark an important new step in the
way the United Nations deals with the concept of selfdetermination. The introduction of the right to
autonomy or self-government in matters relating to
internal and local affairs, including their financial
aspect, offers a promising new approach which would
help to genuinely address the aspirations and needs of
many peoples to create an enabling environment for the
full protection and promotion of human rights, without
resorting to strife and violence.
It is our understanding that the reference to
“political unity” in article 46 of the Declaration does
not preclude any gradual granting of increasing levels
of self-government to such peoples, which is based on
a democratic process and the promotion and protection
of minority rights. It does not exclude any democratic
decision on the State structure either.
Liechtenstein voted in favour of the Declaration
because we are convinced that such innovative
concepts are particularly important for harmonious and
cooperative relations between the State and indigenous
peoples which are beneficial to the promotion and
protection of all human rights of indigenous
individuals, without any discrimination.
Mr. Park Hee-kwon (Republic of Korea): My
Government voted in favour of the Declaration on the

23

A/61/PV.107

Rights of Indigenous Peoples because of our belief that
the Declaration will become an important milestone for
the promotion, protection and further enhancement of
indigenous peoples’ rights. The Declaration is the
outcome of more than 20 years of work by indigenous
peoples and Member States, including the recent
negotiations by the General Assembly at the sixty-first
session to address the concerns of all parties, as was
well explained by the representative of Peru.
Adoption of the Declaration constitutes a solemn
pledge which sends a clear message to the international
community for the survival and well-being of
indigenous peoples, especially in support, inter alia, of
their dwindling cultures and languages and of their
right to pursue their vision of economic, social and
cultural development.
The Government of the Republic of Korea hopes
that adopting the Declaration will contribute to further
strengthening the international human rights system as
a whole by achieving equality and non-discrimination
for all, and especially for marginalized indigenous
peoples.
Ms. Ström (Sweden): Like my British colleague,
I would like to start by saying that Sweden, of course,
aligns itself with the statement to be delivered later by
the representative of Portugal on behalf of the
European Union presidency.
The Swedish Government is pleased that the
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples has finally been adopted by the
General Assembly. Sweden supported the elaboration
of the Declaration throughout the process and thus
voted in favour of the adoption of the resolution. It is
our hope that the implementation of the Declaration
will improve the situation of indigenous peoples.
The Swedish Government firmly believes that the
promotion of the human rights of indigenous
individuals contributes to the maintenance and
development of multicultural, pluralistic and tolerant
societies, as well as to the creation of stable and
peaceful democracies built upon effective participation
by all groups of society.
The Declaration includes several references to
collective rights. The Swedish Government has no
difficulty in recognizing collective rights outside the
framework of human rights law. However, it is the firm
opinion of the Swedish Government that individual

24

human rights prevail over the collective rights
mentioned in the Declaration.
The Sami people are recognized as an indigenous
people by the Swedish Parliament. The Swedish
Government bases its relations with the Sami people on
dialogue, partnership and self-determination, with
respect and responsibility for cultural identity. The
Government looks forward to pursuing a dialogue with
Sami representatives on the implementation of the
Declaration.
The Sami and other indigenous peoples must
have the right to influence the use of land and natural
resources that are important for their survival. The
political discussion on self-determination cannot be
separated from the question of land rights. The Sami’s
relationship to the land is at the heart of the matter. The
Government of Sweden must maintain a balance
between the competing interests of different groups
living in the same areas of northern Sweden.
During
the
negotiations
regarding
the
Declaration, Sweden expressed the view that the
Declaration must indeed be possible to implement. The
Swedish legal system has struck a delicate balance
between the rights of its citizens with a Sami
background and those with different backgrounds. The
areas where the Sami have reindeer herding rights are
often owned and used by non-Sami.
Some clarification of Sweden’s interpretation of
certain specific articles in the Declaration is necessary.
The right to self-determination in article 3 should not
be construed as authorizing or encouraging any action
which would dismember or impair, totally or in part,
the territorial integrity or political unity of sovereign
and independent States conducting themselves in
compliance with the principles of equal rights and selfdetermination of peoples and thus possessed of a
Government representing the whole people belonging
to the territory without distinction of any kind.
A large part of the realization of the right to selfdetermination is without doubt possible to ensure
through article 19, which deals with the duty of States
to consult and cooperate with indigenous peoples.
Article 19 can be implemented in different ways,
including through a consultative process between
institutions representing indigenous peoples and
Governments and through participation in democratic
systems, such as in the current Swedish system. It does
not entail a collective right to veto.

07-50429

A/61/PV.107

The issue of land rights has different connotations
in different States owing to historic and demographic
reasons. It is the interpretation of the Swedish
Government that the reference to indigenous peoples’
rights in articles 26.1, 27 and 28, plus references to
ownership and control in article 26.2, in the Swedish
context applies to the traditional rights of the Sami
people. In Sweden, those rights are called reindeer
herding rights and include the right to use land and
water for the maintenance by Sami members of
reindeer herding communities and their reindeer; the
right to reindeer herding; the right to build fences and
slaughterhouses for the reindeer; and the right to hunt
and fish in reindeer herding areas. In the Swedish
context, article 28 does not give the Sami the right to
redress for regular forestry by the forest owner.
Furthermore, the Swedish Government is of the
opinion that its present legal system meets the general
requirements in articles 27 and 28 and has presently no
intention to adjust Swedish legislation in that regard.
Sweden declares that the lands or territories of
indigenous peoples mentioned in article 29.2, article 30
and article 32.2 of the Declaration will be interpreted
as such lands or territories that are formally owned by
indigenous peoples. Sweden is furthermore of the
opinion that article 32.2 shall be interpreted as a
guarantee that indigenous peoples must be consulted,
not as giving them a right of veto.
It
is,
furthermore,
the
Government’s
understanding that nothing in article 31 conflicts with
existing international intellectual property obligations.
Measures to recognize and protect the exercise of the
rights enumerated in article 31 should be established at
the international level and negotiations are currently
taking place, inter alia, in the World Intellectual
Property Organization’s Intergovernmental Committee
on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources,
Traditional Knowledge and Folklore.
Mr. Punkrasin (Thailand): Thailand voted in
favour of the resolution because we are in agreement
with the spirit and intent of the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, as
annexed thereto, and in spite of the fact that there is
still a number of articles that are of concern to us.
Thailand welcomes the spirit of flexibility and
compromise shown by the parties concerned during the
process of negotiation. We acknowledge that the
Declaration that the General Assembly has just adopted

07-50429

is an improvement on the draft that was put forward to
the Third Committee in November last year. In that
connection, Thailand wishes to make the following
interpretive statement with regard to the adoption of
the Declaration in question.
First, Thailand understands that the articles
dealing with the right to self-determination and related
rights, as enunciated, inter alia, in articles 3, 4, 20, 26
and 32 of the Declaration, shall be interpreted in
accordance with the principles of territorial integrity or
political unity as stated in the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action. Article 46, paragraph 1 of the
Declaration stipulates in unequivocal terms that the
Declaration construed as authorizing or encouraging
any action which would dismember or impair, totally
or in part, the territorial integrity or political unity of
any sovereign and independent State.
Secondly, Thailand understands that the
Declaration does not create any new rights and that
benefits, as specified in the Declaration, shall be
interpreted in accordance with the Constitution of the
Kingdom of Thailand, the domestic laws of Thailand,
and international human rights instruments that
Thailand is party to.
Last but not least, under the Constitution of the
Kingdom of Thailand, every Thai citizen is entitled to
equal enjoyment of basic rights and fundamental
freedoms, without distinction and regardless of his or
her background.
Mr. Tarragô (Brazil): The Brazilian delegation
voted in favour of the present resolution, whereby the
General Assembly adopted the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. That
decision is a major achievement, long overdue, that
will provide new impetus to and acknowledgement of
the efforts of States and indigenous peoples to
strengthen the promotion and protection of indigenous
peoples’ rights.
More than a year has passed since the adoption of
this Declaration by the Human Rights Council. It had
been our view that the text adopted by the Council, as
the rightful and best-placed United Nations organ in
which to discuss and elaborate international standards
in the field of human rights, should not be reopened for
consideration. That notwithstanding, we praised States
and indigenous peoples who spared no effort and
demonstrated a great deal of flexibility to ensure this
memorable result.

25

A/61/PV.107

Brazil is home to 220 indigenous peoples, who
speak 180 languages and whose original rights over
their lands and to their cultural identity rely on an
extensive legal and institutional framework. Areas
dedicated to the exclusive and permanent use of
indigenous peoples encompass roughly 12.5 per cent of
the whole Brazilian territory.
Brazil takes pride in being a multi-ethnic,
multicultural country. The influence of our indigenous
peoples is pervasive in our food, language, lore,
dances, habits, values and religious manifestations.
Their traditional knowledge should also be
acknowledged and duly protected, as it holds
promising prospects for tackling some of the most
pressing issues of the development agenda, such as the
protection of biodiversity and the fight against new
diseases.
The history of indigenous peoples is marked by
centuries of violations of their fundamental rights.
Fighting discrimination while increasing the promotion
and protection of indigenous rights should be our
permanent endeavour, both for ethical reasons and
because of the invaluable contributions of indigenous
peoples to the material and spiritual life in all our
countries. Brazil is certain that the Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples will play an important
role in the promotion of a more harmonious
relationship between indigenous peoples and the other
segments of the societies in which they live.
Brazil wishes to underscore once again the
understanding that presided over the negotiations and
that is clearly spelled out in the Declaration: that the
exercise of the rights of indigenous peoples is
consistent with respect for the sovereignty, political
unity and territorial integrity of the States that they
inhabit. According to our understanding, the
procedures and measures referred to in the Declaration
to safeguard that territorial integrity and to determine
the relevant public interest are those provided for in the
national legislation of each country. While exercising
that responsibility, States should always bear in mind
their major responsibility to protect the lives and the
identity of their indigenous peoples.
The United Nations Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples is a reaffirmation of the
international community’s commitment to ensure the
enjoyment by indigenous peoples of all human rights
and fundamental freedoms.

26

Mr. Talbot (Guyana): Guyana voted in favour of
draft resolution A/61/L.67, by which the General
Assembly adopted the Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples.
Guyana is home to nine distinct Amerindian
peoples: the Akawaios, Arawaks, Arekunas, Caribs,
Makusis, Patamonas, WaiWais, Wapisianas and
Waraus. This month, September 2007, Guyana
celebrates Amerindian Heritage Month, an annual
tribute to our Amerindian brothers and sisters, the
original inhabitants of Guyana, who form an integral
part of Guyanese society and whose contributions to
the forging of our nation have been and continue to be
invaluable.
In supporting the adoption of the Declaration, our
delegation was motivated by the commitment, which
our Government and people firmly hold, to preserving
the dignity and well-being of all peoples and to
safeguarding the rights of all our citizens, including the
original inhabitants of Guyana, who constitute a
significant percentage — indeed, 9.3 per cent — of our
population. We were further motivated by the
consideration that the Declaration represents a goodfaith effort to address the genuine concerns and special
needs of indigenous peoples everywhere, many of
whom live under conditions of disadvantage and
deprivation.
Indeed, Guyana views the adoption of the
Declaration as marking an important and historic
milestone in recognizing the rights of indigenous
peoples and their equal status with all peoples
everywhere. We also take note of the fact that the
Declaration is political in character, as opposed to
being a legally binding document, though not without
potential legal implications. We are aware that some of
its provisions could give rise to interpretations and
expectations that may be out of consonance with its
fundamental spirit and intent. My delegation therefore
wishes to reserve its position on provisions of the
Declaration that we view as unclear or at variance, in
effect or interpretation, with our Constitution and laws.
We hope that the Declaration does not become an
instrument of division or fragmentation in States or
societies or an impediment to the promotion of national
unity and social cohesion.
My Government remains committed to advancing
the interests and enhancing the welfare of indigenous
peoples. At the national level, all citizens, without

07-50429

A/61/PV.107

distinction, enjoy equal status before the law. However,
in recognition of the specific circumstances and needs
of Amerindians in Guyana, the Government has taken
special measures, including the creation of a dedicated
Ministry of Amerindian Affairs, the extension of land
reforms, the enactment of an updated Amerindian Act
2006 to take account of current realities, and the
establishment of a constitutionally mandated
indigenous peoples’ provision to provide opportunity
for redress in matters pertaining to the rights of
Amerindians in Guyana. Those measures have been
undertaken through a process that allows for full and
active participation by Amerindian communities and
representatives.
In light of our commitment, Guyana was hopeful
that an opportunity would be provided to allow the
adoption of this Declaration by consensus. We find it a
great pity that the Declaration, which should have been
adopted unanimously, has become the source of
division. However, it is Guyana’s hope that in the
future, the international community will be able to
arrive at a position of consensus in ensuring respect for
and the promotion of the rights of indigenous peoples.
Mr. Mac-Donald (Suriname): The Republic of
Suriname places great importance on the promotion
and protection of all human rights and fundamental
freedoms, including those of indigenous peoples. With
the adoption today of this historic document, the
international community came to agreement on
principles to govern the rights of indigenous peoples.
Suriname voted in favour of the Declaration today. The
amendments that were made to the Declaration
addressed some of the concerns about several elements
included in the original text adopted by the Human
Rights Council.
Aware of the fact that indigenous peoples make
up a significant part of Suriname’s population and
contribute to our multi-ethnic, multicultural and
multireligious society, we deemed it appropriate to
respond positively to the Declaration. The Government
of Suriname has a responsibility to all its constituents
to prevent the discrimination and marginalization of
any group in our society, as well as the responsibility
to ensure a just balance between the different ethnic
groups. Granting special rights to one part of our
population may run contrary to the concept of equal
treatment.

07-50429

On the more substantive issues, I would like to
note that, with regard to references to the right to selfdetermination, the Constitution of the Republic of
Suriname recognizes and respects the rights of nations
to self-determination and national independence on the
basis of equality, sovereignty and mutual benefit. In
that regard, it shall not be understood that any group or
people has a right to initiate any activity that would
jeopardize the territorial integrity or political unity of
the State.
With regard to the provisions pertaining to free,
prior and informed consent, my delegation would like
to state that this concept should not be understood as
an encroachment upon the rights and duties of the State
to pursue society’s interests by developing its natural
resources and achieving sustainable development and
improving the lives of the population as a whole, and
the indigenous part of our people as well.
We accept that a State should seek prior
consultations in order to prevent unjustified disregard
for human rights. The level, nature and extent of such
consultations depend, in every instance, on the specific
circumstances. Consultation should not be viewed as
an end in itself, but should serve the purpose of
respecting the interests of those who have traditionally
inhabited and used the land. In that regard, we mean
both indigenous and other peoples.
The constitution of Suriname clearly states that
“Natural riches and resources are property
of the nation and shall be used to promote
economic, social and cultural development. The
nation shall have the inalienable right to take
complete possession of the natural resources in
order to apply them to the needs of the economic,
social and cultural development of Suriname”.
We express the hope that all groups in our society
will be inspired by this Declaration to follow the path
of constructive dialogue and peaceful coexistence. In
that regard, we hope that the Declaration will be placed
in its correct political context.
Finally, the Republic of Suriname recognizes this
document as a political document to express and
demonstrate the goodwill of the State regarding the
promotion and protection of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms, including those of indigenous
peoples. We also recognize the Declaration as an
instrument for raising awareness and as a reference

27

A/61/PV.107

document on international
indigenous peoples.

issues

pertaining

to

The Acting President: I should like to inform
members that, in view of the lateness of the hour, the
General Assembly will continue with the list of
speakers in explanation of vote following the voting on
draft resolution A/61/L.67 this afternoon at 3 p.m. I

28

would also like to inform members that immediately
following the adjournment of this afternoon’s plenary
meeting, there will be an informal segment to hear
statements by two representatives of the indigenous
community.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

07-50429
