asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6917

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6917th meeting
Tuesday, 12 February 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kim Sung-hwan/Mr. Kim Sook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Republic of Korea)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mammadyarov
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Churkin
Ms. Mushikiwabo
Mr. Menan
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Letter dated 4 February 2013 from the Permanent Representative of the Republic
of Korea to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2013/75)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

13-22967 (E)

*1322967*

S/PV.6917

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Letter dated 4 February 2013 from the
Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Korea to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2013/75)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome
the Secretary-General, the ministers and other
representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their participation is an affirmation of the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.
Under rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite the representatives of Armenia,
Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia,
Georgia, Germany, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Ireland,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Jordan, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malaysia, Mexico,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Norway, Portugal, Qatar, Senegal, Spain, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, the Syrian
Arab Republic, the United Republic of Tanzania, Turkey,
Uruguay and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ms. Navanethem Pillay, United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Philip Spoerri, Director for
International Law and Cooperation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, to participate in this
meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Ekmeleddin
İhsanoğlu, Secretary-General of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Ioannis Vrailas,
Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations, to participate in this meeting.
2

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/75, which contains a letter dated
4 February 2013 from the Permanent Representative of
the Republic of Korea to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General transmitting a concept paper
on the item under consideration.
I sincerely hope that today’s open debate will
contribute to sharing the urgent sense among the United
Nations membership that the situations endured by
civilians in many of today’s conflicts require renewed
attention. At the same time, we hope that such attention
can translate the progress that has been made in the
normative framework of international humanitarian
law into concrete action. It is my firm belief that today’s
debate will be a valuable and timely opportunity to
renew our joint resolve on the issue.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: Before I turn to the
subject of this meeting, let me say a few words about
the appalling underground nuclear test conducted by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
I strongly condemn Pyongyang’s reckless act,
which shows outright disregard for the repeated call of
the international community that it refrain from further
provocative measures. The test is a clear and grave
violation of the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council.
Together with the rest of the international
community, I have repeatedly called on the new
leadership in Pyongyang to give up its pursuit of
nuclear weapons, to address international concerns
through dialogue, and to start building confidence with
neighbouring countries, particularly the Republic of
Korea, and the international community. I have also
appealed to Pyongyang to focus its energies on ensuring
a better future for the country’s people by addressing
the dire humanitarian and human rights situation.
Regrettably, my appeals have fallen on deaf ears.
I am profoundly concerned about the negative
impact of this act on regional stability. It is deplorable
that Pyongyang has chosen the path of defiance. This
third nuclear test by Pyongyang is a serious challenge
to global efforts to curb nuclear proliferation. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is the only

13-22967

S/PV.6917

country that has carried out nuclear tests in the twentyfirst century. The authorities in Pyongyang should not
be under any illusion that nuclear weapons will enhance
their security. To the contrary, as Pyongyang pursues
nuclear weapons, it will suffer only greater insecurity
and isolation.
I am encouraged by the swift and overwhelming
international condemnation of this wanton act. This is a
direct challenge to the Security Council. It is absolutely
essential that the Council act and speak with one voice
and engage with the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea in a unified manner. I welcome the press
statement just issued by the members of the Council
in that regard. I will remain in close contact with all
concerned parties, and I stand ready to support their
efforts.
I thank the Republic of Korea for convening
today’s debate and His Excellency Mr. Kim Sunghwan, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Korea, for coming to participate in this very important
meeting.
Since the Security Council last addressed this issue
(see S/PV.6790), civilians have remained subject to
unacceptable threats to life and dignity in conflict zones
worldwide. Warring parties have continued to violate
human rights and international humanitarian law with
impunity. And the efforts of United Nations and other
humanitarian actors to provide assistance and protection
have been hampered by violence. Every day, civilians
are killed or maimed in targeted or indiscriminate
attacks. Women, girls, men and boys are raped in front
of their families. Children and youths are abducted,
held in sexual slavery or compelled to take up arms and
inflict abuses on their own communities — scarring
them for life. Families are forced from their homes into
a state of desperation and dependency from which they
may never escape.
In Syria, every day provides a searing reminder
of the human cost of war. Four million people are in
urgent need of humanitarian assistance. More than
2 million people have fled their homes. Many lack even
the most basic services. Sexual violence is a constant
threat. The volatility of the security situation, logistical
challenges and bureaucratic constraints are hampering
the response effort. The international community needs
access to all areas so we can reach more people in need.
The situation in Syria is particularly acute and
intractable, but in Afghanistan, the Central African

13-22967

Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mali, Myanmar, Somalia, South Sudan, the Sudan and
elsewhere, civilians continue to suffer and die as parties
to conflict ignore their obligations to protect.
But, let us remember that the obligation does not rest
solely with warring parties. We all have a responsibility
to protect. Failure to protect civilians in armed
conflict can contribute directly to the commission
of atrocity crimes. Violence against civilians is also
unquestionably abetted by the free flow of weapons.
This underlines the importance of next month’s arms
trade treaty negotiations. We urgently need a robust
and comprehensive agreement that addresses the
humanitarian impact of the poorly regulated trade in
arms.
My internal review panel on United Nations action
in Sri Lanka raised important issues concerning how
the United Nations and Member States could strengthen
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. The
recommendations are undergoing internal review, and I
will report on them later this year.
In previous reports to the Council, I have welcomed
the informal experts group on the protection of civilians
as an important forum for keeping the Council informed
of protection developments on the ground. I encourage
this practice to continue and the Council to explore
ways to make greater use of the Group. My reports have
also recommended steps for enhancing the protection
of civilians that I would like to emphasize again.
First, all parties to conflict should avoid using
explosive weapons with wide-area effect in populated
areas. This includes roadside bombs, heavy weapons and
artillery, and air strikes. I urge the Council to recognize
and act on this fundamental humanitarian issue. My
next report will provide concrete recommendations for
consideration.
Secondly, the Council must emphasize that States
bear the primary responsibility for the protection of
civilians. Where there are peacekeeping missions, the
United Nations will do its utmost to support States to
fulfil their obligations, in line with our Human Rights
Due Diligence Policy. I urge the Council to take a strong
and visible lead in protecting civilians and pursuing
accountability for violations of international human
rights and humanitarian law. In this regard, I welcome
the debate triggered by the call of some Member States
for the Council to refer the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court.

3

S/PV.6917

Thirdly, States should recognize the need for
consistent engagement by humanitarian actors with all
relevant State and non-State actors. This is essential
to ensuring improved compliance with international
humanitarian and human rights law, as well as safe
access to populations in need.
Fourthly, all relevant authorities should expedite
administrative, visa, travel and customs procedures
to facilitate the rapid and unimpeded passage of
relief consignments, equipment and personnel to
people in need of protection and assistance. We need
accountability for grave denials of access and for
attacks against humanitarian workers.
Fifthly, I urge the Council to make greater use
of commissions of inquiry and fact-finding missions
mandated by the United Nations to investigate and verify
alleged violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. It is important for accountability,
justice and protection to support timely follow-up on
their findings.
Finally, the Council must ensure that peacekeeping
operations mandated with protecting civilians have
adequate resources. It is particularly important that
they be equipped to respond to conflict-related sexual
violence. States that contribute military and police
personnel to missions should be supported to ensure
that they are trained to be proactive in addressing the
unique vulnerability of women and children. That
includes partnering with human rights and other
civilian components to prevent and respond to human
rights and humanitarian law violations.
Next month, the Commission on the Status of
Women will address conflict-related sexual violence as
part of its theme of “Ending violence against women”.
I count on Member States to use the meeting to make
practical commitments to ending sexual and genderbased violence in all its forms.
Today’s debate is an important opportunity for the
Council and Member States to reflect on the impact of
armed conflict on civilians and on the actions that need
to be taken to increase compliance with international
law and fulfil the Council’s commitment to protection.
The Council’s continued and consistent discussion of
this issue is essential. I urge Council members to bring
all their considerable powers to bear on reducing the
unacceptable toll that conflict is taking on civilians
every day.

4

The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to Ms. Pillay.
Ms. Pillay: Let me follow the words of the
Secretary-General by beginning with with Syria. At
my latest briefing to the Security Council, 60,000
people had already been killed. That figure is probably
now approaching 70,000. The Security Council is at
its best when it acts with a unified voice. The lack of
consensus on Syria, and the resulting inaction, has been
disastrous. Civilians on all sides have paid the price.
We will be judged against the tragedy that has unfolded
before our eyes. The Council, as well as those of us in
key positions within the United Nations, will be rightly
asked what we did.
One immediate action that the Council could
take is clear, namely, refer Syria to the International
Criminal Court. That would send a clear message to
both the Government and the opposition that there will
be consequences for their actions. It could also have a
very significant preventive effect.
In contrast, the Council has achieved political
consensus regarding the situation in Mali. I welcome
the Council’s provision for United Nations human rights
monitoring there. The protection of human rights is
key to stabilizing the situation. My Office is deploying
human rights officers in the country, with the first
having arrived in Bamako at the end of last week.
As the situation evolves, attacks and reprisals risk
driving Mali into a catastrophic spiral of violence. I call
on all parties to the conflict to abide by international
human rights and humanitarian law and to prevent
retaliation.
The Council is increasingly making use of human
rights components in peacekeeping and special
political missions, often in response to concerns for
the protection of civilians from human rights abuses.
Human rights components provide fundamental support
to the overall mandate of peace missions through strong,
impartial and independent human rights monitoring and
reporting. Through that, they bring critical information
to the Council and support local authorities in directly
addressing human rights concerns.
In Afghanistan, the Council’s decision to provide
a strong human rights mandate to the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) allows
the international community to have an authoritative

13-22967

S/PV.6917

account of the protection-of-civilians challenges
and the responsibility of all parties for protecting
them. Currently, according to UNAMA, insurgents’
indiscriminate use of improvised explosive devices
(IEDs) account for 53 per cent of all civilians killed or
wounded. I call again on all anti-Government groups
in Afghanistan to cease targeting civilians and stop the
use of IEDs and other illegal tactics.
In the eastern part of the Democratic Repulic of
the Congo, the human rights component of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has reported to the
Council on recent large-scale and serious violations.
To end that cycle of violence, I encourage the Council
to include an accountability element in its interaction
with all parties in that country and in neighbouring
countries.
Given the ongoing conflict in Somalia and recent
events in the Central African Republic, independent
and stronger human rights monitoring is essential also
in those countries. Human rights information will allow
the Council to measure progress against its mandated
objectives in those countries.
I also urge the Council to provide for a stronger
human rights monitoring capacity in the peacekeeping
mission in Abyei. That would help the mission and the
international community to respond proactively to the
fragile situation in the border area.
The recent expulsion of a human rights officer by
the South Sudanese Government, without any valid
justification, sets a dangerous precedent that does
not facilitate the mission’s efforts to protect civilians.
I join Special Representative Johnson in asking the
Government to reconsider its decision.
I wish to thank the Secretary-General and
Deputy Secretary-General for their leadership in
launching a follow-up process to the Petrie report,
which reviewed United Nations action in Sri Lanka.
The report highlights systemic failings that extend
across responses to many situations and indicates
that important recommendations of the 1999 United
Nations independent inquiry on Rwanda have not been
implemented. It is time for us to find a way to do better.
In that context, my Office looks forward to working
towards addressing this issue. Let me highlight four
areas where there is need for improvement.
First, early and credible information on human
rights and international humanitarian law violations
13-22967

can make it easier for the Council and the wider United
Nations system to reach consensus and make informed
decisions. While information technology facilitates
early warning, it cannot replace impartial, reliable
and timely expert monitoring and reporting on respect
for international law. Far too often, before monitoring
and reporting on human rights violations, the United
Nations waits many months until we deploy staff on
the ground. Sometimes access is denied expressly to
prevent reporting. United Nations protection of civilians
cannot be held hostage to delayed deployments or a lack
of access. We must have the capacity and structures
to monitor from Headquarters, when needed, and to
provide Member States and policy makers with the best
available information.
Secondly, the United Nations can strengthen its
sense of common purpose and management. The Petrie
report points to the problematic tendency of United
Nations entities to compartmentalize our approach to
a situation rather than providing Member States with a
holistic analysis. Compartmentalization not only leads
to duplication, but can also side-line human rights
concerns.
Thirdly, the United Nations should offer a wider
range of tools for intervention on the ground. Small and
discrete models of field operations with short lifespans
can be deployed quickly at limited cost and in close
consultation with the regional States and national
authorities. Such deployments provide a non-intrusive
means of United Nations action that may be attractive
where States wish to support an early United Nations
response to serious concerns with regard to the
protection of civilians, so long as it is light and limited.
The use of large peacekeeping operations can be
deployed later where needed.
Fourthly, both the Rwanda and the Petrie reports
are clear in stating that the single most important
element for United Nations protection of civilians is
early political consensus among Member States acting
through the United Nations. I hope that we in the
Secretariat can better support Member States in their
efforts to reach early consensus.
Effectiveness, integrity, courage and accountability
are what the people we are trying to protect expect from
us. That is what should guide our interactions when
dealing with the killing of many people. There will
always be some disagreement within the international
community as to how to respond to a given situation, but
when tens of thousands of civilian lives are threatened,
5

S/PV.6917

as is currently the case in the Syrian Arab Republic,
the world expects the Security Council to unite and act.
The President: I thank Ms. Pillay for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Spoerri.
Mr. Spoerri: On behalf of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), I am pleased and
honoured to once again brief the Security Council, and
I thank the Republic of Korea for the invitation.
Since I last addressed members of this Council
eight months ago (see S/PV.6790), a number of armed
conflicts have seen a resurgence or have intensified,
and others have continued to rumble on, as they have
for many years. All of them, regardless of their causes
or where they are in the world — be it in the Syrian
Arab Republic or Mali, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo or Afghanistan — have at least one thing
in common. In all of them, the grim reality is that
civilian men, women and children continue to suffer
the overwhelming burden of the fallout, while efforts
to protect those civilians are fraught with difficulties.
During the debate held in June 2012, I focused
on three issues of fundamental concern to the ICRC.
The continuing urgency of those issues justifies
my returning to them today. They are, first, threats
affecting access to health care for the wounded and sick
in armed conflicts and other emergencies; secondly, the
availability and use of arms; and thirdly, the overarching
lack of compliance with international humanitarian
law on the part of States and non-State armed groups,
which lies at the heart of the massive suffering to which
we are witness.
On the issue of violence against health care
personnel and facilities, I will start with some modest
but encouraging good news. Following the adoption of
a far-reaching resolution on health care in dangerous
situations at the thirty-first International Conference
of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, held in Geneva in
December 2011, the ICRC began a series of consultations
with States and other major stakeholders on making the
delivery of health care safer in dangerous situations
worldwide. Some concrete steps have already been
taken. A series of experts’ workshops, which began in
2012 and will continue into 2014, has mobilized health
authorities, medical associations, national Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies and non-governmental
organizations from around the world. They have
helped to raise awareness and understanding of the

6

issue and have put forward practical recommendations
for safe practices. States have in some cases, of their
own volition, undertaken diplomatic initiatives aimed
at facilitating the delivery of health care in conflictaffected countries. In others — Colombia and Yemen,
for example — they have taken specific steps towards
ensuring respect for health care structures and personnel
in their own countries.
Sadly, the good news cannot detract from the bad.
ICRC health care data for 2012 shows that the vast
majority of violent incidents, or over 80 per cent of the
almost 900 incidents recorded in 22 countries, affect
local health care workers. Of those health workers caught
up in such incidents, around 25 per cent were killed or
wounded. In some cases, secondary explosions targeted
those trying to assist the victims of an initial explosion,
a particularly repugnant practice causing further injury
and death and preventing care from reaching those
who urgently need it. A further trend with sometimes
catastrophic consequences is the large-scale flight of
health workers in the face of attacks, threats or general
insecurity.
Thus, while there may be some steps in the right
direction, much more needs to be done. As States
bear the primary responsibility for improving the
situation, the ICRC once again urges members of the
Council to initiate or actively support efforts to tackle
this pressing humanitarian concern and to influence
others to do the same. Indeed, that is required under the
obligation to respect and ensure respect for international
humanitarian law in accordance with common article 1
of the 1949 Geneva Conventions.
That brings me to the second major concern,
which is closely linked with the first, and that is the
massive circulation and widespread availability of
arms and ammunition. In many contexts, that may put
civilians at a risk of being wounded or killed after an
armed conflict has ended equal to the risk during the
conflict. The poorly regulated international trade in
conventional arms, including the inadequate standards
for their transfer, is at least partly to blame.
A strong and effective arms trade treaty is urgently
needed to enhance the protection of civilians as well
as health-care and humanitarian workers working to
assist those who are most vulnerable and to help ensure
that international humanitarian law is respected by
all parties to armed conflicts, be they international or
non-international in nature.

13-22967

S/PV.6917

The next diplomatic conference, to be held in just
a few weeks’ time, will be a golden opportunity, which
we urge States to seize decisively in order to redouble
their efforts to ensure the adoption of a robust arms
trade treaty, one that sets strict criteria for all transfers
of all conventional arms. The ICRC remains committed
to helping to achieve that goal, working with States,
national Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, the
United Nations and other organizations.
The third major concern — namely, the prevailing
lack of respect for international humanitarian law
by both States and non-State armed groups, coupled
with a dominant culture of impunity — is the main
common denominator of all other protection concerns.
Some progress has undoubtedly been made at both
the national and the international levels to improve
compliance and accountability. That ranges from the
implementation of domestic legislation to the training
of security forces and the judicial processes of the
international criminal tribunals. In addition, in 2011,
the International Conference of the Red Cross and
Red Crescent endorsed the ICRC proposal to further
work aimed at strengthening legal protection for people
affected by armed conflict. The joint Swiss-ICRC
initiative to strengthen compliance with international
humanitarian law has gained momentum, with an
increasing number of States engaging in substantive
discussions on that issue.
The ICRC works at all levels — diplomatic, policy
and operational — towards ensuring better respect
for international humanitarian law. To be credible and
effective, that requires a rigorously impartial, neutral
and independent approach, one that remains consistently
distinct from any kind of political or judicial process.
That in turn helps to facilitate dialogue with parties
on all sides to a conflict and humanitarian access to
people in need. Protection lies at the heart of the ICRC
mandate and mission and provides a framework for our
assistance activities.
Of course, there are numerous challenges and
constraints that make that task all the more difficult.
The humanitarian environment is an increasingly
complex one. Just one aspect of that is the sometimes
baffling array of new actors, both those involved in
armed conflict and those responding to its humanitarian
consequences, with at times a blurred line between the
two. Increasing numbers of civilian and military actors
are working for the protection of civilians with very
different mandates, objectives and approaches. At the

13-22967

same time, the limitations on access to people in need
of protection that have been imposed by States and
non-State actors are a severe constraint in numerous
situations of armed conflict.
The challenge here is to clearly distinguish and
separate principled humanitarian action from pure
relief assistance. Whereas the latter may have military,
political or economic objectives underpinning it,
the former must always be based purely on actual
needs. Blurring the lines between the two ultimately
complicates or hinders impartial humanitarian access
to people on both sides of a conflict for all actors. To
that end, the principles of humanity and impartiality
must be the essential guide for all humanitarian actors,
regardless of their particular mandate or approach.
As the ICRC marks its 150th anniversary this week,
it is a fitting moment to reflect on not only the profound
changes in the humanitarian environment over the years
and the necessity to adapt to those changes, but also on
what has remained constant. Henri Dunant’s vision of
humane treatment for wounded and captured soldiers
on all sides — which has extended to one of providing
protection and assistance to all people affected by
armed conflict, on the basis of humanitarian need
alone — must surely remain the bedrock of humanitarian
action, as much today, as was the case 150 years ago.
The desire and ambition to uphold human dignity, even
in the midst of armed conflict, must surely continue to
be our common goal. Respect for the laws of war also
provides the foundation on which people can rebuild
and recover after conflict has ended.
Tackling the problems ranging from combatting
violence to health care workers, ensuring the adoption
of a strong arms trade treaty to taking concrete measures
to improve compliance with international humanitarian
law would already represent great strides towards
achieving our common goal. I end, therefore, with the
ICRC’s urgent plea to the members of the Council to do
all they can to address those issues.
The President: I thank Mr. Spoerri for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade of the Republic
of Korea.
Before I proceed to the main topic of today’s
open debate, let me briefly touch upon the nuclear
test conducted by North Korea last night. That
country’s nuclear test constitutes a flagrant violation of
resolutions 1718 (2006), 1874 (2009) and 2087 (2013).
7

S/PV.6917

It poses a direct challenge to the whole international
community, as well as an unacceptable threat to the
peace and security of the Korean peninsula and NorthEast Asia.
Just an hour ago, the members of the Security
Council strongly condemned North Korea’s nuclear
test with one voice and decided to begin working
immediately on adopting a Security Council resolution
to take necessary measures. The Government of the
Republic of Korea, as President of the Security Council
for the month of February, will cooperate closely with
the international community.
I would now like to deliver my statement on the
main topic of the open debate today.
It is a great honour for me to be here today and
preside over this open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. I would like to express my
sincere appreciation to the Secretary-General, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Director for
International Law and Cooperation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross for joining us today. I also
welcome the presence of Ms. Louise Mushikiwabo,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
the Republic of Rwanda; Mr. Elmar Maharram oglu
Mammadyarov, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Azerbaijan; and Mr. Antonio de Aguiar
Patriota, Minister for External Relations of Brazil.
Despite significant normative progress in the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, civilians are
still suffering the direct effects of armed conflicts on
the ground. They have been killed, injured, kidnapped
and forced to leave their homes. It is deeply regrettable
that civilians continue to represent the majority of the
victims of conflict in many parts of the world today. The
widespread violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights law trouble us all. The Security
Council needs to remain ever vigilant to address that
situation.
The deteriorating situation in Syria is of particular
concern to us. It is alarming that, according to the
recent briefing by the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, more than 60,000 Syrian citizens have been
killed. While it is hard to know the exact number of
non-combatant casualties, it is clear that civilians are
bearing the brunt of the continuing violence. They are
also subject to humanitarian tragedy.
Against that backdrop, I would like to emphasize
the following three points. First, I would like to
8

underline the need to bolster accountability for
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law, which I believe is crucial for the protection of
civilians. Countering impunity is not only a significant
tool in preventing further violations against civilians,
but also an essential factor in ensuring an effective
reconciliation process.
While national authorities have the primary
responsibility to provide accountability, the Security
Council should be able to play a more active role where
national authorities fail to do so. The Council needs
to contribute towards ensuring accountability at the
international level, including through the referral of
relevant situations to the International Criminal Court.
In order to ensure accountability, it is also
important to investigate and document violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law in
armed conflicts. That is a significant prerequisite
for bringing perpetrators of crimes to justice. In that
regard, we support the continued efforts of the entire
United Nations system, including the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the Human Rights Council, which has established
several commissions of inquiry and special procedures.
Secondly, there is an urgent need to ensure
timely and unhindered humanitarian access, as well
as the safety and security of humanitarian workers.
Impediments to humanitarian access in violation of
applicable humanitarian law should be condemned
and removed immediately. It is of particular concern
that violence against humanitarian workers, including
their abduction and killing, continues to threaten
humanitarian activities in many armed conflict
situations.
Resolution 1894 (2009) invited the SecretaryGeneral to continue the systematic monitoring and
analysis of constraints on humanitarian access. I am
pleased that a detailed analysis of the problem was
provided in the Secretary-General’s report of last year
on the issue (S/2012/376). As the report rightly pointed
out, constraints on humanitarian access are varied in
nature. States and other parties to conflict need to work
closely with humanitarian organizations to identify
appropriate, context-specific solutions and strategies to
allow humanitarian assistance and reduce the security
risks of humanitarian workers.
Thirdly, particular attention needs to be paid to
the various forms of violence against women and

13-22967

S/PV.6917

children in armed conflict. It is deeply regrettable that
sexual violence, including rape, remains a prominent
feature of armed conflict, affecting women and girls
in many parts of the world. While all civilians need to
be protected, we need to remain concerned about the
particular vulnerabilities of women and girls. I believe
that ending violence against women should be pursued
during the entire process of conflict resolution and
peacebuilding. I would like to underline once again
the significance of ensuring accountability for those
responsible for violence against women. In addition,
as Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) recognized,
we need to enhance women’s empowerment, including
their participation in peacekeeping operations and
post-conflict reconstruction processes.
Before concluding, I would like to pay tribute to
the United Nations peacekeepers and humanitarian
workers, who are working hard to protect civilians
around the world and to ease their hardship.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
Ms. Mushikiwabo (Rwanda): I would like to
commend the President of the Council for convening
this important debate on the protection of civilians
and for the draft presidential statement which will be
adopted today. I also thank the Secretary-General for
his informative briefing, as well as High Commissioner
for Human Rights Pillay and Mr. Spoerri for their
valued contributions and briefings this morning.
The protection of civilians is a very personal issue
for my country, Rwanda. In 1994, a genocide claimed
the lives of nearly 1 million Rwandans. Rwandans
wince in sympathy when they see images of civilians
under threat elsewhere in the world today.

in activities, such as United Nations peacekeeping
operations, that increase protection for civilians
in armed conflict. We also take very seriously all
efforts, such as that in which we are engaged today, to
strengthen international norms to reduce tolerance for
such crimes.
In that regard, I would like to begin my remarks
on a note of optimism. Significant progress has indeed
been made in the evolution of international norms since
the genocide in my country 19 years ago. Normative
progress is slow, built year by year and resolution by
resolution, almost imperceptibly. It can sometimes
seem like we are just repeating ourselves, but the
cumulative effect is dramatic. Each year, the consensus
grows stronger that the protection of civilians and the
prevention of crimes, ethnic cleansing, and crimes
against humanity are a fundamental duty of each State,
as well as a legitimate and necessary focus of collective
action in the international system.
The impetus to rethink international norms
comes in large part from the effort to comprehend
what happened in conflicts such as the tragedy of
Rwanda in 1994. The world’s response to crimes has
been to withdraw international forces, particularly
in my country 19 years ago, and in some cases to
refuse outright to provide protection. Yet I believe
that the course of action adopted by the international
community in 1994 and the concepts used to justify it
would not be acceptable today — hence, my optimism.
Rwanda would be pleased if the end result of the process
of introspection were to be a world that is much more
resistant to crimes and mass atrocities. And if we keep
working together, I believe that we can get there.

My country’s core message today is that enhancing
the protection of civilians in armed conflict requires
action before the conflict starts. The proliferation of
non-State armed groups makes civilian protection both
more urgent and harder to achieve. In particular, I wish
to emphasize the importance of increasing investments
in the professionalization of military and police forces,
especially adequate training in the protection of
civilians. Only when the leadership of armed forces
shares the international community’s preoccupation
with civilian protection will we see decisive progress
made.

Evidence that progress is possible should encourage
us to redouble our efforts, yet we must not neglect the
urgent challenges that confront us at this very moment.
Civilians are at serious risk today in Syria, the Sudan,
South Sudan, Mali and the Democratic Republic
of Congo — right in our neighbourhood — and the
Council is likely to face new situations of armed
conflict in the months and years ahead. My country’s
experience explains why we are proud to co-chair,
together with the Netherlands, the Group of Friends on
the Protection of Civilians. Indeed, I would like to take
this opportunity to connect our debate on the protection
of civilians more concretely to the evolving norm of the
responsibility to protect.

As a result of the experience of Rwanda, we feel a
moral obligation to participate as vigorously as possible

Two features of that norm — prevention and the
danger of incitement, as set out in paragraph 138 of

13-22967

9

S/PV.6917

the 2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly
resolution 60/1) — have not been emphasized often
enough. I believe that the best way to enhance the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts is to move
from a mindset of conflict management to one of
prevention. Moreover, individual States and United
Nations peacekeeping missions must become more
sensitive to often subtle forms of incitement that lay the
groundwork for crimes against humanity, and work to
curtail it before it is too late.
I would like to address two further aspects of the
core challenges identified by the Secretary-General
in his 2009 report (S/2009/277) — first, enhancing
the implementation of protection mandates by United
Nations peacekeeping missions, and secondly,
enhancing accountability for violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law.
On peacekeeping, my country Rwanda welcomes
the continued development of strategies to protect
civilians and operational baselines through the guidance
of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
Rwanda currently contributes to seven United Nations
peacekeeping missions. In line with the lessons we
learned about rebuilding after the genocide, we do not
approach peacekeeping as an exclusively military task.
We believe that early peacebuilding is critical to the
success of missions, and that adequate resources should
be directed to complement uniformed personnel as they
fulfil their mandate to protect civilians.
Effective measures need be neither costly
nor controversial. For example, within their areas
of patrol with the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, Rwandan peacekeepers
have introduced an energy-efficient stove that was
developed in Rwanda back in the year 2000 to protect
the environment. Because the stoves use less firewood,
women and children do not have to venture as far to
collect wood, thereby reducing the risk of brutal attacks
and rape that often accompany their search.
Another example is increasing the number of
trained female peacekeepers. Female peacekeepers
are often better able to intervene in specific situations
concerning women and children, particularly in
specific cultural contexts. Rwanda is a leading
contributor of female police officers to United Nations
peacekeeping missions, and we have seen these officers
combat gender-based violence and raise awareness in
the communities they serve in ways that have made
peacekeepers better able to do so.
10

Ensuring that all necessary capabilities are
deployed in support of peacekeepers is critical to their
ability to protect civilian populations. In late 2012,
Rwanda contributed military utility helicopters to
the United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan , extending the Mission’s area of influence and
contributing to a safer environment for civilians.
We also support calls for peacekeeping missions
to work with the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to preserve the civilian and humanitarian
character of refugee camps.
On accountability for crimes against civilians, I
wish to emphasize four important points. First, justice
must be timely. Nearly two decades after the genocide
in my country, the international judicial process
has yet to conclude. Secondly, rendering justice to
victims should be the only objective of accountability
mechanisms, keeping political considerations out
of the process. Justice should not be and cannot be
selective or used for political expediency. Thirdly,
more careful attention should be paid to the principle
of subsidiarity when choosing the most appropriate
venue for judicial proceedings. Justice is best rendered
at home. Fourthly, and related to subsidiarity, is that the
international community should increase investment in
strengthening national judicial capacities, which is the
best way to make justice relevant to local communities
and sustainable.
I conclude by once again restating Rwanda’s firm
commitment to enhancing the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, and we express gratitude to the women
and men protecting those in need, especially on our
continent, as well as those who have laid down their
lives in the name of international peace and security.
Mr. Mammadyarov (Azerbaijan): First of all,
I would like to thank the Republic of Korea and you
personally, Mr. Minister, for convening this important
open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and for submitting a concept note on the topic
(S/2013/75, annex). We are also grateful to the SecretaryGeneral, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the Director for International Law
and Cooperation of the International Committee of the
Red Cross for their statements.
A response to the large-scale atrocities perpetrated
during the Second World War served as the basis for
the founding of the United Nations, the proclaiming
of fundamental values, such as peace and respect for

13-22967

S/PV.6917

human rights, and the establishment of multinational
judicial institutions. The significant development of
international norms and standards for the protection
of civilians and the engagement of the Security
Council, including the adoption of a number of
important documents and practical steps towards their
implementation, have given rise to increased attention
to the issue.
However, efforts to ensure a peaceful, just and
prosperous world have not always been consistent and
successful. As a consequence, civilians continue to
suffer from inadequate protection and discriminatory
treatment in situations of armed conflict. As the
latest report of the Secretary-General on the topic
acknowledges:
“Despite some progress, the reality on the ground
continues to be characterized by the frequent
failure of parties to conflict to comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law to
respect and protect civilians as well as with relevant
human rights obligations.” (S/2012/376, para. 4)
Azerbaijan’s consistent position with regard
to the issue under consideration is well known and
stems from its keen interest in contributing to the
achievement of sustainable peace and development and
from our practical experience in addressing the impact
of armed conflict on civilians. The war unleashed
by neigbouring Armenia against my country and
the military occupation of our territories have had a
considerable impact on civilians. As a result of that
aggression, Azerbaijan continues to suffer from having
one of the highest numbers of refugees and displaced
persons in the world. At present, approximately one
of every nine persons in the country belongs to that
category. Twenty-one years ago, an unprecedented
massacre was committed against the Azerbaijani
population in the town of Khojaly. In one night, more
than 600 civilians were killed in that town only because
they were Azerbaijanis. Not even women, children and
elderly were spared by the invading Armenian troops
and irregular local armed groups.
In all its four resolutions adopted in 1993 in response
to the occupation of the territories of Azerbaijan
(resolutions 822 (1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993) and 884
(1993)), the Security Council referred specifically to
violations of international humanitarian law, including
the displacement of a large number of civilians in
Azerbaijan, attacks on civilians and the bombardment
of inhabited areas. We are confident that the consistent
13-22967

measures being taken at the national level, as well as
the existing international legal framework, will serve to
bring to justice those responsible for the grave offences
committed against the civilian population of Azerbaijan
during the conflict. It is incontrovertible today that no
official or political status cloaks the person concerned
with immunity for the most serious international
crimes, such as war crimes, crimes against humanity,
genocide and ethnic cleansing.
In recent years, important steps have been taken
for the protection and vindication of rights and the
prevention and punishment of crimes that have an
international dimension and scope. Indeed, ending
impunity is essential not only for the purposes of
identifying responsibility for both parties to the conflict
and individual perpetrators but also for ensuring
sustainable peace, truth, reconciliation, the rights and
interests of victims and the well-being of society at
large.
Unfortunately, not all grave violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law
have received due attention and a response at the
international and regional levels. As a result, past
wrongs left unpunished and unrecognized continue to
impede progress in achieving the long-awaited peace
and reconciliation and could even play a key role in the
eruption of new conflicts and the commission of new
crimes.
More resolute and targeted measures are required
to end impunity in such situations. We concur with the
Secretary-General that where national authorities fail
to take the steps necessary to ensure accountability,
the international community and the Council should
play a more proactive role in ensuring an appropriate
response, including through the establishment of
international commissions of inquiry and fact-finding
missions and in supporting the implementation of their
recommendations. It is also essential to emphasize the
role of the relevant humanitarian mandates in ensuring
that all situations of armed conflict, including those
of a protracted nature, receive due attention by the
international community.
It is important to repeatedly recall that the
establishment of truth in respect to gross violations
of international humanitarian and human rights law,
the provision of adequate and effective reparations to
victims and the need for institutional actions to prevent
the repetition of such violations are all necessary
adjuncts to true conflict resolution and imperative with
11

S/PV.6917

regard to the effective and politically uncompromising
system of international criminal justice. In any event,
the conflict resolution initiatives considered by the
Security Council and regional arrangements must
ensure that peace and justice work together effectively.
Such an approach provides that no peace settlement
can be reached if it is inconsistent with international
law, particularly where peremptory norms and the rules
and standards of international humanitarian and human
rights law are concerned.
It is essential that peace efforts and peace agreements
never encourage the acceptance of situations achieved by
the unlawful use of force and other egregious violations
of international law, such as war crimes, crimes against
humanity, genocide and ethnic cleansing. On the other
hand, in situations of protracted armed conflict, the
lack of agreement on political issues cannot be used
as a pretext for not addressing problems caused by
continued and deliberate disrespect for international
humanitarian human rights law.
Particular consideration must be given to
implications for the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts aggravated by population displacements and
foreign military occupation. The impact of conflict on
housing, land and property, as well as discrimination
on ethnic grounds and forced demographic changes
in such situations, require a more consistent approach
in order to put an end to illegal practices and policies
and to ensure the safe and dignified return of displaced
populations to their homes.
It is important that the recognition of the right to
return, along with increased attention to its practical
implementation and concrete measures aimed at
overcoming obstacles that prevent return, be applied
by the international community with more systematic
regularity. As the Secretary-General made clear in an
earlier report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict,
“[e]nsuring the right to return constitutes a
categorical rejection of the gains of ethnic
cleansing ... and offers some measure of justice to
those displaced from their homes and land, thereby
removing a source of possible future tension and
conflict” (S/2007/643, para. 55).
Among the pressing issues requiring urgent action
and attention is that of civilians, including women
and children, taken hostage and reported missing in
connection with armed conflict. Azerbaijan continues

12

its efforts to address that disturbing phenomenon,
including through the relevant biannual resolution of the
General Assembly and the Commission on the Status of
Women, of which my country is a main sponsor.
It is important that the Security Council
consistently maintain its focus on the protection of
civilians. Azerbaijan would support more systematic
and frequent discussions on the topic during briefings
and consultations, as well as at informal meetings, such
as Arria Formula meetings.
In conclusion, I would like once again to commend
the initiative of the Republic of Korea to convene
this open debate on the protection of civilians and
to advance that significant theme in the work of the
Security Council. We welcome the draft presidential
statement to be adopted later as the outcome of today’s
meeting. It contains a number of the aforementioned
key components of our position and approach on the
topic.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank
Foreign Minister Kim Sung-hwan for chairing this
important debate. I also thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, High Commissioner Pillay and International
Committee of the Red Cross Director Spoerri for their
statements. Protecting civilians in armed conflict
is a fundamental responsibility of the international
community and a core function of the Security Council
in carrying out its mandate to safeguard international
peace and security.
The United States knows that its security is
diminished when masses of civilians are slaughtered,
refugees flee across borders to escape brutal attacks,
and murderers wreak havoc on regional stability and
livelihoods.
Regrettably, history has taught us that our pursuit
of a world in which States do not systematically
slaughter civilians will not arrive without concerted
and coordinated action. Nearly a year ago, President
Obama announced at the United States Holocaust
Memorial Museum new actions that the United States
is taking to implement his landmark policy directive on
atrocity prevention.
Under the President’s leadership, my Government
has implemented unprecedented steps to enhance our
capabilities and structures for preventing heinous
crimes against civilians, from strengthening our
early warning and preventive diplomacy to punishing
perpetrators and pressing for accountability. Our new
13-22967

S/PV.6917

Atrocities Prevention Board, a committee of senior
officials from across the United States Government, is
overseeing this critical work and ensuring that we are
focused on emerging situations of concern.
But while national action is necessary, it is not
sufficient. International collective action is required,
and we look forward to strengthening our cooperation
with the United Nations and Member States to that end.
Few are more likely to be the victims of mass
atrocities than civilians caught in armed conflict. Time
and again, and all too often, the world bears witness to
the horror of mass killings, sexual violence and gross
human rights abuses of innocents in conflict. Therefore
protecting civilians in armed conflict must remain a
top priority of the Council and the United Nations as
a whole.
Though we must never relent in this effort, we
are encouraged that the United Nations has made
strides in enhancing United Nations tools to protect
civilians. We commend the Secretariat’s efforts to
help United Nations field missions develop operational
guidance and mission-wide strategies to implement
their civilian-protection mandates. The recently
released United Nations study entitled “Protection of
civilians: coordination mechanisms in United Nations
peacekeeping missions” highlights several mechanisms
for
executing
protection-of-civilian
mandates
successfully.
Simple but practical tools, many focused on internal
procedures and mission structure, enable mission
focal points to integrate mission activities in support
of protection mandates. The United Nations Mission
in South Sudan, for example, produced an integrated
strategy that led to an innovative early-warning system
and country support basis that enabled better protection
of rural populations.
Mission-wide strategies depend on missions really
understanding the threats and violence that civilians
face in their area of operation. When peacekeepers
know their local environments well, they are better able
to protect civilians. Such detailed knowledge requires
active and sustained engagement with local populations.
We encourage United Nations missions with protection
mandates to assess, in their reports and briefings to the
Council, the threats and vulnerabilities facing civilians
in their area of operation. We also urge mission-wide
strategies to anticipate and outline steps to counter
any escalation in violence against civilians that could

13-22967

culminate in mass atrocities. United Nations missions
should proactively explain their role in protecting
civilians to local communities.
Beyond a sophisticated understanding of their
areas of operation, peacekeepers need strong training
in civilian protection. The United States invests
significantly in peacekeeper training, and we urge
all peacekeeping training centres to adopt the United
Nations innovative training guidance on the protection
of civilians. Such training should be standardized and
required for every peacekeeper.
For all that United Nations peacekeepers and
field missions can do, let us not forget that national
Governments always bear primary responsibility
for protecting their own populations. In some
countries, Governments are manifestly failing in that
responsibility, often because of insufficient capacity
or will to address the problem. In some countries,
moreover, Governments condone and even perpetrate
atrocities against their own people. Through its
statements, resolutions and diplomacy, the Council
must continue to press Governments to fulfil their
obligations.
In that regard, I want to highlight the horrific
attacks by the Syrian regime on the Syrian people,
including the widely reported targeting of hospitals
and health-care centres and the use of ballistic missiles
against civilian populations. The carnage unleashed
by Al-Assad merits universal indignation and strong
action from the Council. When the people of Libya
were on the verge of being slaughtered by a brutal
dictator, the Council acted, prevented a massacre and
saved countless lives. That should remind us that, for
civilians in conflict, Security Council action can mean
the difference between life and death.
In the 2005 World Summit Outcome document
(General Assembly resolution 60/1) and in resolution
1894 (2009), all States Members of the United
Nations accepted a shared responsibility to protect
populations from genocide, ethnic cleansing, crimes
against humanity and war crimes. While we continue
to elaborate the application of that principle, when
Governments manifestly fail to protect their civilians,
the international community must not dither, but, rather,
act decisively to assume its responsibility collectively
to protect.
Another fundamental but often overlooked
principle of protecting civilians is the ensuring of

13

S/PV.6917

humanitarian access. No State Member of the United
Nations or non-State actor should ever prevent timely,
full and unimpeded humanitarian access to populations
in need of assistance. Yet the Government of the Sudan
has refused, for a year and half now, to permit the safe
and unhindered provision of international humanitarian
assistance to address the acute humanitarian
emergency in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states,
particularly the Sudan People’s Liberation MovementNorth-controlled areas, which is largely of Khartoum’s
making. Since 2011, more than 214,000 refugees have
crossed into Ethiopia and South Sudan, and 695,000
have been displaced within the two areas. That is
appalling and unacceptable.
In this and other such situations, we commend the
service and dedication of the humanitarian workers,
who help the world’s most vulnerable, at great risk to
themselves. Attacks against humanitarian workers
are deplorable and should be condemned wherever
committed.
We fully support the Secretary-General’s call for
the Council to be more active in addressing violations
of international law and to strengthen accountability.
The United States strongly rejects impunity and
supports efforts to hold accountable violators of
international humanitarian and human rights law. Our
long-standing support for international tribunals and
efforts to document ongoing atrocities in places such as
Syria reflect that commitment.
Recent events, including the conviction of Charles
Taylor by the Special Court for Sierra Leone and the
International Criminal Court’s judgement against
Thomas Lubango Dyilo, of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, show us that accountability for those
who commit atrocities and justice for their victims is
possible.
Yet too many perpetrators remain free. The Council
needs the facts and strong reporting to help bring to
justice the perpetrators of crimes against civilians.
President Obama has declared that preventing mass
atrocities is a core national security interest and a core
moral responsibility of the United States. The protection
of civilians is a fundamental element of the Security
Council’s obligation to ensure international peace and
security. It is clear that we must keep our attention
focused squarely on the practical steps we can take to
enhance the protection of civilians in armed conflict
and redouble our efforts to ensure that the Council is

14

not sitting on the sidelines when civilian populations
are in grave danger.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for holding this important debate
today and for having come to New York to lend
your personal weight to this important issue. Let
me also warmly thank the Secretary-General, High
Commissioner Pillay and the Director for International
Law and Cooperation of the International Committee of
the Red Cross, Mr. Spoerri, for their valuable briefings.
Civilians continue to account for the vast majority
of casualties in armed conflict. That suffering must stop.
The protection of civilians is a pressing responsibility
that must be discharged and that requires action during
armed conflict and in peacetime, and at all stages in
between. States bear the primary responsibility to
protect civilians, and must act strictly in accordance
with their legal obligations and their moral duties. In
addition, we, the United Nations, must provide the
appropriate political, humanitarian and development
support necessary to protect civilians.
Civilians in situations of armed conflict suffer
in a multitude of ways, including through deliberate
targeting, sexual and gender-based violence and
displacement. We must address them all at all stages of
the conflict cycle. The international community cannot
be a passive bystander and idle witness in the face of
gross violations against civilians. It is deeply regrettable
that, since our last debate on this subject, in June of last
year (see S/PV.6790), there has been limited progress in
addressing certain situations of grave concern.
In particular, we remain appalled by the
deteriorating situation in Syria. Since June, the crisis
has intensified. The depth of suffering of the Syrian
people is truly dreadful and worsening daily. More
than 60,000 Syrians are now believed to have died, and
more than 700,000 have taken refuge in neighbouring
countries. Our objective is clear, that is, we want an
end to the violence and a process of genuine political
transition, and we want to see the Security Council
apply its collective weight towards those objectives.
That is not just our view; it is the view of the Arab
League and the vast majority of States Members of the
United Nations. We deeply regret that there is still no
end in sight and that the international community has
been unable to address the situation.
The impact of conflict on civilians around the
world remains unacceptably high. The sad truth is that

13-22967

S/PV.6917

the perpetrators of appalling, life-shattering crimes
still tend to go unpunished. Without accountability
there is a culture of impunity for which ordinary people
pay the price. Ensuring accountability for the most
serious crimes of international concern lies at the heart
of protecting civilians and is key to delivering global
justice. The International Criminal Court is an essential
tool in promoting and ensuring such accountability.
The United Kingdom also stresses the importance
of international commissions of inquiry and factfinding missions to verify and investigate allegations
of serious violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law. The Security Council must support
such mechanisms. Justice must be delivered.
In tackling the culture of impunity, the Council
must address the range of crimes committed against
civilians in conflict, including rape. We must overturn
the old assumption that rape is somehow an inevitable
byproduct of conflict, and we must confront it. An
effective response to sexual violence should be built
into every aspect of conflict prevention, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development. The United Kingdom
is already taking action to tackle rape as a weapon
of war and to improve support for survivors through
its initiative on preventing sexual violence. That will
involve deploying teams of experts to assist survivors
and support local capacity in, for example, areas
bordering Syria, Libya, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Mali. We are
also working in close collaboration with the Office of
the United Nations Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict to identify additional countries
where our team of experts can helpfully be deployed.
The disproportionate impact of conflict on
children, who are among the most vulnerable, is
shocking. Children should not grow up in a climate
of fear, violence and suffering. The United Kingdom
condemns all those who target and recruit children in
armed conflict despite international pressure. Civilians
both inside and outside conflict zones are affected by
conflict; refugees and internally displaced persons
fleeing the violence are confronted with a struggle for
their most basic needs. Humanitarian access is essential
for the protection of civilians. We regret that we continue
to see humanitarian access to areas in need blocked
or constrained. The continued denial of humanitarian
access to the states of Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan
in the Sudan has created a crisis resulting in nearly
1 million displaced people. The Council has watched
that situation worsen for far too long. Humanitarian
13-22967

access must be protected and expanded, particularly in
fragile and conflict-affected States.
The protection of civilians is among the Council’s
foremost responsibilities. The lives of many depend
on the vigilance with which we discharge that
responsibility. We must continue to take the steps
necessary to protect civilians, and we must use the
Council’s authority to ensure that States shoulder
their primary responsibilities to prevent conflict,
minimize suffering and ensure that cycles of conflict
and pain are not repeated. I welcome the fact that the
Council has united around a strong draft presidential
statement — which will be read out shortly — that
upholds our commitment to the protection of civilians.
We must be guided by the principles and contents of
that statement in the months and years ahead.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank the
Republic of Korea for organizing this open debate on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, a theme
that is important for the Security Council and for the
international community. Foreign Minister Kim’s
decision to preside over the debate is a reflection of
the Republic of Korea’s commitment to addressing the
issue. We congratulate you, Ambassador Kim, and your
able team on presiding over the Council in a skilful and
capable manner, and for circulating the concept note on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2013/75,
annex).
Pakistan welcomes the presence of the SecretaryGeneral, whose latest report (S/2012/376) and incisive
briefings have guided our work on this team. We
have also benefited from the insightful presentations
of Ms. Navanethem Pillay, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, and the Director for
International Law and Cooperation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Philip Spoerri, as
indeed from the statements of the Foreign Ministers of
the Republic of Korea, Rwanda and Azerbaijan. We also
commend the representative of the United Kingdom and
his able team for steering the negotiations over the draft
presidential statement in a most professional manner.
It is a grim reality today that civilians account
for the vast majority of casualties in armed conflicts
around the globe. They bear the brunt of wars, conflicts
and strife. Progress has been made on elaborating a
normative framework for the protection of civilians,
but it has yet to be fully translated into tangible
results. Thanks to the initiative of the Republic of
Korea, we will be able to make some progress today
15

S/PV.6917

on accountability, humanitarian issues and the
implementation of peacekeeping mandates. We endorse
the draft presidential statement that the Council will
issue today. The message going out from the Council
is loud and clear: all parties to a conflict bear the
responsibility to protect civilians. They must take sure
to ensure the protection of women, children, journalists,
refugees and internally displaced persons, who are the
most vulnerable in conflict situations. Protection must
be given to humanitarian actors, including medical
personnel and premises. It is also the responsibility of
occupation forces to ensure full respect for international
humanitarian law.
We strongly condemn attacks on medical personnel
and facilities, as well as on schools and teachers. There
should be no impunity for those involved in serious
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law. The Security Council and international
tribunals have addressed these concerns in a number of
situations, through measures targeted against violators.
Because of the proven value of this approach, the
Council should persevere with it.
More than a decade ago, when the Security
Council first began to address protection issues, there
were apprehensions among the wider United Nations
membership concerning the Security Council’s role and
mandate, as well as its ability to deliver. However, the
compelling need to protect civilians in armed conflict
has led to a broad consensus that such an approach,
when pursued objectively and without politicization,
produces salutary results on the ground.
It is an established norm that international
humanitarian law covers only situations of armed
conflict and should not be extended to other situations.
For other situations, other forms of law, such as
international human rights law, are applicable. That
fine distinction must be maintained in order to avoid
the occasional drift into reporting about the situations
that do not fall within the category of armed conflict.
The protection of civilians is part of many United
Nations peacekeeping mandates. Pakistan, as one of the
top troop contributors, has worked in many missions
in various parts of the world to ensure the protection
of civilians. Our peacekeepers are doing so right now
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Darfur, Côte
d’Ivoire and Liberia.
The protection of civilians remains the primary
responsibility of host countries. Peacekeeping missions

16

should assist host authorities as and where appropriate,
in accordance with their mandates. The peacekeepers’
ability to perform such mandates is directly linked to the
resources available, including intelligence capabilities
and the configuration of the missions. Besides, we need
to pursue the continuous training of peacekeepers so
that operational plans to protect civilians can be refined.
In developing mission strategies and plans,
consultations with the host Government or authorities,
troop-contributing countries and humanitarian actors
must continue. That is simply good practice.
Missions provide physical protection and assist
host countries in creating protective environments. The
metrics developed by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations provide a good tool for monitoring progress
in that context. Yet there should be no misplaced
expectations as to what missions can ensure. They
cannot provide protection to all civilians all the time.
That is why it is essential to bolster national capacities
with regard to defence and security forces.
New technologies for gathering information and
for surveillance are being used increasingly in armed
conflicts for offensive and non-offensive purposes. In
that regard, we support the Secretary-General’s view
that it is extremely important that the use of such
technologies should comply with the principles of
distinction and applicable international humanitarian
law. A clear distinction must also be made, as the
Secretary-General has advised us, between the
protection of civilians and the responsibility to protect.
The conflation of those two concepts has created some
legal confusion.
It is important to ensure the safe and unhindered
provision of humanitarian assistance, in accordance
with the well-established principles of humanity,
neutrality, impartiality, independence and the guiding
principles set out in the annex to General Assembly
resolution 46/182, which reaffirm full respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and national unity of
States.
There is, of course, a need for consistent
engagement on the part of humanitarian agencies with
all parties to armed conflict in order to ensure respect
for international humanitarian law. Humanitarian
actors must conform to and work strictly within the
framework of the host country agreements.
Irrespective of the normative progress, success
will ultimately depend on how effectively the Council
13-22967

S/PV.6917

continues to take action to protect civilians on the
ground in situations of armed conflict. The key element
in that regard is the impartial handling of all situations
by the Council.

we will be judged by our actions and by our failures to
act in response to protection challenges. We are already
judged by our failure in Syria, and we are failing in
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile.

I conclude by paying tribute to the peacekeepers
and humanitarian actors in the field, who are trying,
under very difficult circumstances, to protect civilians.

So what should we do? I will mention five areas.
First, we should bring humanitarian access to the
fore and do all we can to ensure compliance with
international humanitarian law. Around the world,
tens of millions of civilians continue to suffer every
day. Although international humanitarian law requires
parties to conflict to respect and protect humanitarian
personnel whose work is vital to help those victims, we
know that those obligations are not being implemented.
We have to do better.

Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for the Republic of Korea’s leadership in convening this
debate today and for Foreign Minister Kim Sung-hwan’s
presence with us today as well. I also welcome the
participation of the Foreign Ministers of Azerbaijan and
Rwanda, as well as the Foreign Minister of Brazil and
the Secretary-General of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation. I also thank the Secretary-General, of
course, for his consistent leadership on protection
in all its dimensions and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Navanethem
Pillay, and the Director for International Law and
Cooperation of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Mr. Philip Spoerri, for their indefatigable and
irreplaceable efforts.
As a member of the Group of Friends of the
Protection of Civilians, Australia associates itself
with the statement to be delivered later today by the
representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group.
As the Secretary-General has said, the situation
with regard to the protection of civilians is, and I
use his word, “abysmal”. The situation of the most
vulnerable — women and children — violates our
humanity. There is what should be seen as an irresistible
case for the Council and the United Nations system
to focus sharply on strengthening efforts to meet the
five core challenges that the Secretary-General has
identified in his latest report (S/2012/376). My country
supports the report’s analysis and recommendations,
and we will work assiduously with others on the
Council, Member States generally, troop- and
police-contributing countries and humanitarian actors
to take forward those recommendations as a priority.
In shouldering the responsibilities for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Council must do all it can to prevent and respond to
threats of violence against civilians, particularly
the most vulnerable, namely, women and children.
Protection is not just at the core of the Council’s
responsibility, it should also be, it must be, the
Council’s moral compass. More than any other issue,

13-22967

Australia is particularly concerned about ongoing
attacks against medical workers and facilities, notably
today in Syria. More than half of all hospitals there
have been damaged or destroyed, and a third of the
medical services are not operating. We strongly support
the call by the Secretary-General and today’s draft
presidential statement for the immediate cessation of
attacks against medical personnel and facilities. Their
deliberate targeting is not only morally abhorrent, it is
an unquestioned violation of international humanitarian
law, and my country will continue to work with others
to improve the protection of medical personnel and
facilities and access to them in Syria. Equally, our
draft presidential statement necessarily highlights the
imperatives to protect schools, teachers and journalists.
Secondly, we should confront the challenge of
unregulated small arms and the indiscriminate use of
weapons. All too often, as we know, we see explosive
weapons being used in densely populated areas. Again,
Syria is a particularly egregious example. Parties
to conflict must abide by international law, and we
support the Secretary-General’s recommendation and
further action on those issues.
Similarly, some 2,000 people, mostly civilians,
many women and children, are killed every day as a
result of the illicit and irresponsible trade in weapons.
We can fix that. We have a historical opportunity with
the negotiations in March to achieve a legally binding
arms trade treaty. We must not fail in that opportunity.
Thirdly, we should enforce the protection of
civilians mandates within peacekeeping missions. The
Council must lead the way in ensuring that peacekeepers
are able to protect civilians. We should be pressing for
mission-wide protection strategies, including strategies

17

S/PV.6917

on early warning and prevention. We have seen such
mechanisms in place in the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, for example, through the work of provincial
senior management groups on protection, which plan
the deployment of joint protection teams and provide an
essential link with local communities, who, we know,
are often best placed to anticipate and communicate
protection risks. We must continue to encourage
improvements in and sharing of best practices.
Peacekeepers in vastly different peacekeeping
operations confront very different obstacles. The
threat of conflict-related sexual violence in the Kivus
requires a very different response from the response to
gang activities in Port-au-Prince or to cattle raiding in
Jonglei. The development of mission-specific training
is therefore a further crucial step, and we must maintain
our focus on operationalizing effective guidance and
training materials.
Fourthly, we should foster accountability.
Accountability is first and foremost a national
responsibility, but the Council has a critical role to play
in ensuring accountability. It must exercise its authority,
for instance, through referrals to the International
Criminal Court and necessary follow-up, and through
other mechanisms, including commissions of inquiry
and fact-fording missions. And it should, where it needs
to, mandate peacekeeping missions to help implement
its decisions on accountability.
While the responsibility to protect is a different
principle from broader efforts to protect civilians,
Australia firmly supports the Council’s efforts to
uphold it. All our leaders have pledged to support the
responsibility to protect, and we welcome the Council’s
acknowledgement of this commitment in the draft
presidential statement to be adopted today.
Fifthly and finally, we believe that we should
reform the Council’s working methods on the protection
of civilians. The time has come to work together on a
more regular and formalized mechanism of input to the
Council that brings together analysis and trends across
the whole protection of civilians agenda. We also
believe that an annual report of the Secretary-General
is needed.
In conclusion, I should like to commend the
personnel involved in peacekeeping and political
missions, as well as other humanitarian actors and civil
society groups, for their enormous service. They are

18

the front line of protection, and they are all too often
inadequately resourced for the challenges they face.
The Council must not fail them. We should do all we
can to better enable them to perform their essential
roles.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I shall begin
by thanking your country, Sir, for including the issue
of the protection of civilians in armed conflict on
the Council’s programme of work for this month. We
welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Korea to guide our deliberations.
I also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing
on the topic under considersation, as well as Ms. Pillay,
High Commissioner for Human Rights, and Mr. Spoerri
of the International Committee of the Red Cross for
their statements.
One of the international community’s principal
concerns is ensuring the protection of civilians when a
crisis or armed conflict arises to threaten them. Despite
the existence of a body law on this subject, including
the case law of the international criminal tribunals on
the effective protection of civilians in armed conflict,
civilians continue to suffer the most serious violations
of their rights. Even the early warning systems set
up within peacekeeping operations sometimes reveal
their shortcomings in effectively protecting civilians.
Indeed, civilians suffer violence of all types, including
sexual and gender-based violence; cruel, inhuman and
degrading treatment; enforced disappearances and
obstacles to access to humanitarian assistance.
The conflicts raging in various regions of the
world today have caused extensive loss of human life,
injury and mass movements of refugees and internally
displaced persons. It has also been established that
the ratio of civilian to military victims has risen, as
evidenced in the conflict in Syria, where over 60,000
people have died, as Ms. Pillay noted early. Moreover,
armed conflicts in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Sudan, South Sudan and Mali, as well as the
recent crisis between Gaza and Israel, have also claimed
their share of civilian victims. Furthermore, armed
conflicts are also rife with trafficking in humans and
their organs. In all cases, unfortunately, it is children,
women, the disabled, the elderly and humanitarian,
health and media personnel who pay the heaviest toll
of such violence. It is all the more shocking that the
perpetrators of such acts may paradoxically be the
peacekeeping personnel who are supposed to protect
civilians.
13-22967

S/PV.6917

There are a number of explanations not only
for such ongoing serious violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights in armed conflict,
but also for the exponential rise in the number of
civilian victims. First among these is the flouting by
the parties to conflict of their obligations under relevant
international legal instruments in human rights and
international humanitarian law in armed conflict, in
particular the 1949 Geneva Conventions and their 1977
Additional Protocols, together with the customs and
laws of war.
Moreover, certain non-State actors do not feel
bound by international legal instruments and customary
law, or are totally ignorant of their existence. We also
note the difficulties of media coverage, which — given
the fact that the media are kept far from the theatres of
conflict — prevent them from informing international
public opinion of realities on the ground. As a result, the
media is hard-put to raise awareness among civilians
of the precautions they should take and to ensure that
they do not engage in activities that might cause them
to lose their status as civilians and thereby forego the
protection to which they are entitled. Furthermore, the
institution of the Protecting Powers under the Fourth
Geneva Convention, one of whose roles is to ensure
respect for humanitarian law and the protection of
civilians, may prove ineffective.
We welcome the efforts of certain international
organizations, such as the International Committee of
the Red Cross, to fill that gap so to protect civilians
despite their very limited resources. The Security
Council itself, given the differences among its members,
particularly the permanent members, may have trouble
reaching agreement when a crisis, such as that in Syria,
erupts.
The deterrence of impunity through international
criminal law is also being hindered from becoming
operational for several reasons. On the one hand,
international commissions of inquiry do not always have
the means to establish the facts objectively. Moreover,
cooperation between States and international tribunals
in the execution of arrest warrants and other decisions
tends to be ineffectual.
In the light of the gap between the measures taken
and their effective protection of civilians in armed
conflict, Togo should like to suggest certain changes.
First, the States concerned should be parties to the
relevant international legal instruments, incorporate

13-22967

them into their national legislation, and ensure their
observance. It is also necessary to maximize the
role of transitional justice, which hinges on a broad
range of judicial and parajudicial measures, including
reparations for victims, in accordance with the principle
of full satisfaction, in order to ensure the restoration of
peace, security and reconciliation.
Secondly, we must design training modules that can
be made available to missions and training centres in
troop-contributing countries so as to ensure that troops
are better informed with respect to the protection of
civilians and to prevent potential violence against them.
Resolution 2085 (2012) of 20 December 2012, regarding
the deployment of the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali, is a model in that it establishes the
precedent of verification of prior training before any
intervention and calls for the presence of observers
on the ground to ensure the effective respect of
international humanitarian and international human
rights law with respect to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.
Furthermore, we must urgently provide all
peacekeeping operations with early warning
mechanisms and the resources and means to monitor
and prevent incidents and intervene in real time when
incidents occur.
Similarly, it is urgent that we establish sound
vertical and horizontal cooperation among the various
national, international and regional stakeholders. In that
regard, we could consider including in the training for
peacekeeping operations some of the African Union’s
guidelines on the protection of civilians.
Lastly, with regard to the Security Council in
particular, the stakes continue to be two-sided. On
the one hand, there is a need for this organ to adopt
clear and precise mandates that include the protection
of civilians. On the other hand, when it comes to
combating impunity, the Council should implement the
conclusions of the debate that took place on 17 October
2012 (see S/PV.6849), with regard to coherence as to
the referrals sent to the International Criminal Court,
the financing for those cases, and follow-up to the
decisions handed down.
I would like to conclude my statement by
underscoring the fact that Togo continues to believe
that the surest way to ensure the protection of civilians
is to prevent the outbreak of conflicts and crises. That
requires promoting preventive diplomacy as much as

19

S/PV.6917

possible, which has the advantage of sparing civilians
from the effects of armed conflict.

information and analysis concerning this phenomenon
in order to better protect civilians.

Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank the Republic of Korea
for organizing this important open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, presided over
this morning by Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade
Kim Sung-hwan. I also welcome the participation of
the Ministers from Azerbaijan, Rwanda and Brazil.
Likewise, I would like to express our appreciation to
the Secretary-General, the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the director from the International
Committee of the Red Cross for their informative
statements. Lastly, I wish to thank the delegation of
the United Kingdom for leading the consultations on
the important draft presidential statement that we will
adopt later on.

Peacekeeping operations with a mandate to protect
civilians continue to be an important tool at the
Council’s disposal. Their effectiveness depends upon
sustained support from the international community in
ensuring the implementation of mandates by providing
the necessary resources to prevent attacks on civilians
and to strengthen the capacity of the country concerned
to meet its responsibility to protect civilians.

Since the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999), the
protection of civilians in armed conflict has occupied
a central position on the agenda of the Security
Council, as evidenced by the numerous resolutions,
presidential statements and other measures adopted by
the Council intended to overcome the major challenges
to protecting civilians. The track record of the past
14 years is encouraging, given the significant normative
framework that has been developed. However, that is
still insufficient both in terms of implementation and
impact on the ground.
The report of the Secretary-General published on
22 May 2012 (S/2012/376) describes a difficult situation
that often includes a failure by parties to a conflict to
abide by their obligations flowing from international
humanitarian law and instruments on human and
refugee rights.
As the Minister from Rwanda pointed out, the
situation of civilians takes on more serious dimensions
in the context of recent conflicts, which are spreading in
an extremely dangerous manner, as well as in situations
involving terrorism, separatism and transnational
organized crime. Such situations have become genuine
threats to the security and lives of civilians, as well as
to national and, at times, international patrimony. The
capacity to acquire weapons and secure financing, as
well as the dangerous alliances among various groups,
mean that civilians are often held hostage by virtue
of threats, intimidation and acts of reprisals by such
groups. We hope that the next report of the SecretaryGeneral will take up those new challenges, in order
that the Security Council can have at its disposal
20

In our quest to better protect civilians in armed
conflict, we should continue to pay particular attention
to women and children, who are often targeted for
extreme violence and every manner of atrocity in
time of conflict. Sexual violence, in particular rape,
continues to be among the violence to which women
and girls continue to be subjected. Children continue to
be killed in conflict, often coerced into taking up arms
and used as human shields by armed groups and forces.
Given their vulnerability, it is incumbent upon all of us
to pay ongoing attention to the specific needs of women
and children.
Journalists and humanitarian and health workers
also pay a high price for their commitment to protecting
civilian victims and easing their suffering. This group
also has the right to protection.
Conflicts produce thousands of refugees and
displaced persons, who are sometimes exposed to
inhumane practices on the part of the armed groups
that control refugee camps. Those groups also commit
grave violations of international law, human rights law
and refugee law. Control over civilians by non-State
actors in refugee camps, including sometimes the
lack of distinction between armed elements and
civilians, remains a continuing threat and inhumane
practice whereby civilians are forced to live under
threat, blackmail and want. In such conditions,
complicity — direct or ill-advised — on the part of
States hosting camps, as well as the total avoidance of
any responsibility on the part of armed non-State groups
amount to a denial of rights that is both unacceptable
and immoral.
The report of the Secretary-General is clear on this
in stating that
“Humanitarian activities continue to suffer
from interference by State and non-State actors
pursuing a non-humanitarian agenda that results

13-22967

S/PV.6917

in the disruption of humanitarian projects and the
diversion of assistance” (S/2012/376, para. 14).
It is time that we correct this anachronistic situation
by finding lasting solutions. That means registering
refugees and carrying out a census in every single
situation — steps that are both essential preconditions
and permanent obligations in protecting civilians and
providing assistance.
Given the challenges on the ground, reducing
the number of civilian victims of violence entails
long-term efforts based on promoting all aspects of
the protection of civilians — legal, humanitarian
and security — in all United Nations activities.
The Security Council therefore cannot evade the
imperative need to establish a protective environment
built through development, strengthening capacity,
promoting democratic values and peacefully settling
political, social and territorial differences before they
lead to armed conflict with unforeseen repercussions
for civilians. On those two complementary aspects, the
work of the Council in promoting and consolidating
peace remains crucial and beneficial.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the presence of the Minister of Foreign
Affairs and Trade of the Republic of Korea, His
Excellency Mr. Kim Sung-hwan. We thank him for
having convened this open debate at such an opportune
time and for presiding over it . We regret that our own
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Fernando Carrera
Castro, who wanted to join us here, was unable to do so
due to a last-minute conflict in his schedule.
We would like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his very informative statement and for
his ninth report on the matter (S/2012/376). As that
report was published in May 2012, it is essential that
it be updated. We also appreciate the statements by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Ms. Navanethem Pillay, and express our thanks to
Mr. Philip Spoerri for his contribution to this debate.
The protection of human life and the protection
of civilian populations are at the core of the United
Nations mandate and the agenda of the Security
Council. However, civilians continue to suffer and are
the victims in every conflict, despite the resolutions of
the Council on the matter, a solid base of international
jurisprudence and the tireless and increasing efforts
of the international community with respect to those
noble intentions.

13-22967

It is regrettable that, over and over again and in
recent examples such as in the Syrian Arab Republic,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Sudan
and Mali, we are compelled to energetically condemn
premeditated attacks against civilians and the
consequent loss of human life resulting from the use of
indiscriminate or disproportionate force. All parties to
an armed conflict, whether domestic or transnational,
must promote the peaceful resolution of conflicts
and undertake their obligations in accordance with
international humanitarian law.
Many decisions have been adopted after resolution
1265 (1999), which marked the beginning of a new
approach to the protection of civilians in the Council’s
discussions. However, in most of the reports on the
subject, as well as in those on the protection of specific
groups such as women and children, we are merely
informed of the immense suffering endured by civilian
populations and the casualties among them, which
invariably surpass military casualties.
In his 2009 report (S/2009/277), the SecretaryGeneral presented the five basic challenges that the
United Nations in general and the Security Council
more specifically, together with the international
community, must address. Those challenges continue
to be entirely pertinent, because in most cases we have
not yet been able to resolve the problem.
Moreover, as members know, we are now faced with
the fact that conflicts are increasingly of an intra-State
nature, rather than between two States, which makes
intervention by the Council more difficult as these
are, strictly speaking, the internal affairs of sovereign
States, even if those States are not upholding their
primary obligation of protecting their own citizens.
Precisely when such situations arise, especially when
they are of a flagrant nature, the established principle
of non-intervention must be superceded by our common
commitment, and even responsibility, to protect
civilian populations from mass violations and atrocities
inflicted on them by their own Governments.
Guatemala participates actively, through our
troops and under the flag of the United Nations, in
peacekeeping operations that have strong mandates
concerning the protection of civilians, as in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. However, a simple
examination of the ratio of peacekeepers to civilians
reveals that Blue Helmets cannot guarantee protection
for everyone. The protection of civilians also requires
significant equipment and logistical support, which
21

S/PV.6917

are often insufficient or not available to missions.
That gives rise to the broader question of the balance
between mandates and resources.
We will continue to work in close cooperation in
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
on the strategies for the protection of civilians in
peacekeeping missions. We will do so in compliance
with their mandates, international law and full respect
for the primary responsibility of host States to protect
their own civilian populations. However, we remain
concerned about many issues, which I will not mention
in my oral statement but which are listed in the text of
the statement that we have circulated.
Furthermore, we trust that a legally binding treaty
that would establish common international norms
that are as strict as possible on the import, export and
transfer of arms will be adopted at the final United
Nations conference on the arms trade treaty, to be held
in New York in March. The lack of such a universal
instrument has a high toll in terms of human lives.
We recognize that important steps have been
taken in the area of international justice to bring those
responsible for violations to justice. The Security
Council itself has provided important such examples
by creating the International Tribunals for the Former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda, respectively, and in referring
the situations in Darfur and Libya to the International
Criminal Court. In that regard, it should be stressed
that the International Criminal Court is an ally of the
Security Council in the fight against impunity for the
worst crimes. We should not fail to take advantage of
its preventive, dissuasive and punitive capacity. We call
on all Member States to ratify the Rome Statute and to
cooperate fully with the International Criminal Court.
I would like to conclude with a brief reference to the
ample arsenal of preventive diplomacy at our disposal.
We would recall that, in 2012, the Secretary-General
presented his five-year plan of action, which included
promoting the agenda of the responsibility to protect.
As I suggested earlier, my delegation fully supports that
priority, which in turn contributes to further shaping
the subject of today’s debate in spite of the differing
concepts of the topic, which the Secretary-General
himself has rightly brought to our attention.
The important message regarding the responsibility
to protect is that it is expected of all members of the
international community to observe a pattern of
behaviour relevant to their respective populations.

22

Notwithstanding, committing genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing or crimes against humanity or
provocative actions that lead to those crimes should be
considered totally prohibited.
States that do not meet that basic commitment must
understand that they will face consequences. Our own
heads of State jointly accepted the concept in 2005; the
least that we can do now, seven years later, is to offer
assurances that this important achievement continues
evolving in its practical and operational application.
We are pleased that the concept has been included in
the draft presidential statement to be adopted today.
In defending the protection of civilians, we send
a message of hope and a signal of our firm collective
commitment. We are prepared to protect the vulnerable
from the scourges caused by conflicts and other
violations of peace and security. If we continue to act
collectively, in time we will be able to fully fulfil our
responsibility to protect our civilian populations.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg thanks the Republic of Korea for having
organized during its presidency this open debate on a
topic that is very dear to all of us, the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
the High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
Director for International Law and Cooperation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) for
their very informative presentations. One conclusion is
clear: despite all efforts by the international community,
notably the Security Council, the situation remains
alarming. We must and can do better.
I welcome therefore the draft presidential statement
prepared for this debate under the leadership of the
delegation of the United Kingdom. It confirms the
Council’s commitment to protect civilians in armed
conflict and strengthens the normative framework.
Luxembourg fully endorses the statement that will
be made on behalf of the European Union.
At the most recent open debate of the Council on the
protection of civilians, in June 2012 (see S/PV.6790), I
focused on the tragic situation in Syria. Since then, the
conflict in that country has become even more serious,
with the Syrian civilian population as its first victim. The
High Commissioner has recalled the staggering number
of victims. When civilian populations are slaughtered
on such a scale, when international humanitarian law

13-22967

S/PV.6917

and international human rights law are violated on such
a scale, the principle of accountability must be upheld.
It is for that reason that Luxembourg has supported
the Human Rights Council’s establishment of the
independent international commission of inquiry on the
human rights situation in Syria. It is also for that reason
that we support, together with many other States, the
initiative of Switzerland requesting the referral of the
situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court
(ICC).
In general terms, setting up international
commissions of inquiry or fact-finding missions or
referrals to the ICC have a preventative and dissuasive
effect. The appropriate use of those measures by the
Council can strengthen the protection of civilians.
When a situation is referred to the ICC, the Council
must, however, ensure effective follow-up, as well as
give the Court the necessary resources for it to be able
to do its work.
Today, 12 February, we observe the international
day against the use of child soldiers. In 1996, in her
landmark report (see A/51/306), Graça Machel made a
powerful call to action, which I would like to echo here:
“It is unconscionable that we so clearly and
consistently see children’s rights attacked and
that we fail to defend them. It is unforgivable that
children are assaulted, violated, murdered and yet
our conscience is not revolted nor our sense of
dignity challenged. This represents a fundamental
crisis of our civilization. The impact of armed
conflict on children must be everyone’s concern
and is everyone’s responsibility; Governments,
international organizations and every element
of civil society. Each one of us, each individual,
each institution, each country, must initiate and
support global action to protect children. Local
and national strategies must strengthen and be
strengthened through international mobilization”
(A/51/306, para. 317).
Today our conscience is revolted, but children
continue to be recruited to go to war and they are the
first victims of war, in Syria, but also in northern
Mali, in Darfur, in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in the Central African Republic
and in other crisis situations. As Chair of the Council’s
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
Luxembourg commits, with the other members of the
Council, to do everything it takes to fight this scourge.

13-22967

Effectively protecting civilians in armed
conflict is not possible without improving access to
humanitarian assistance. It is necessary to ensure full,
free and unimpeded humanitarian access to affected
populations. We appreciate the efforts made to that end
by the United Nations, first and foremost by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and by
other humanitarian actors, such as the ICRC.
However, all too often, unfortunately, parties
to conflict restrict humanitarian access. We see it in
Syria today, but also in the Sudanese states of Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile, where aerial bombardments
coupled with the prohibition of cross-border
humanitarian operations are trapping the civilian
population.
The recommendations made by the SecretaryGeneral in his 2012 report (S/2012/376) to improve the
protection of civilians in armed conflict remain entirely
relevant. Apart from the principle of accountability
and from humanitarian access, which I have already
referred to, it is necessary to address three core
challenges, namely, enhancing compliance by parties to
conflict with international law, enhancing compliance
by non-State armed groups and strengthening the
mandate for the protection of civilians of United
Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions.
As far as respect for laws and norms is concerned,
we must respond to the challenge posed by the rising
number of attacks and other acts of interference targeting
specifically health-care personnel and infrastructure, a
trend which has been well documented, notably by the
ICRC. We are also deeply concerned by attacks against
teachers and education infrastructure and the use of
schools for military purposes and the recruitment of
child soldiers.
Finally, we would like to take this opportunity to
condemn the use of explosive weapons, including cluster
munitions, in densely populated areas. According to
data collected by non-governmental organizations in
2012, at least 25,000 civilians died or were injured by
the use of explosive weapons in such areas, with 42 per
cent of civilian victims of explosive weapons being
children.
To conclude, I would like to pay tribute to the
personnel serving in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, who are working every day to protect
civilians against all forms of violence, including sexual
and gender-based violence. In order for United Nations

23

S/PV.6917

operations to fulfil their mandates effectively, we have
the responsibility to provide them with the resources
that they need. For its part, Luxembourg emphasizes on
the necessity to deploy in the field, in every situation
where it is necessary and in sufficient numbers, women
protection advisers and child protection advisers. Their
contribution is indispensable for the work of the United
Nations. Luxembourg fully supports them in their
difficult task.

and the recruitment of child soldiers continues.
With the Congolese army barely able to shoulder its
responsibilities and the M-23 still threatening the
town of Goma and the region, the actions of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) must
be stepped up. That requires bolstering its mandate,
as the President of France called for during his visit to
Kinshasa.

Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General, Ms. Pillay and
Mr. Spoerri for their briefings.

But the protection of civilians also requires the
strengthening the capacities of the Mission. The recent
decision of the Security Council to authorize and use
drones for observation of the Kivu and border zones
will enhance the observation capacities of MONUSCO,
and thus its capacity to respond. It will act as a deterrent
to illicit arms trafficking and the movement of armed
groups.

France endorses the statements to be made
by the observer of the European Union and by the
representative of Switzerland, on behalf of the Group
of Friends on the Protection of Civilians.
For France, the protection of civilians and human
rights are a priority. We have proven that in Libya and
we have proven that in Mali. At the request of the Malian
authorities, France made a timely intervention to halt
an offense by terrorist groups that were threatening
Bamako. The very existence of Mali was at stake.
What we refused to tolerate was the establishment of
a terrorist State within Africa. What we prevented was
the spread of huge human rights violations like those
already committed by terrorist groups in northern
Mali — executions, rapes, amputations and destruction
of cultural heritage. With Malian troops we liberated
Gao and Timbuktu.
In that context, we were mindful that resolution
2085 (2012) stipulated the deployment of human rights
and humanitarian law observers, and we call for their
swift deployment. Once the situation is stabilized, a
United Nations peacekeeping operation will have to
take over from our efforts. The protection of civilians
will be an integral part of its mandate.
Providing robust mandates on the protection of
civilians is a first step, and France is working on that.
But it is also crucial to provide peacekeeping operations
with the means to implement their mandates. That is
what we are attempting to achieve in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
The plight of civilians in that country is tragic.
The number of internally displaced persons (IDPs) now
stands at over 2.5 million people. There are 500,000
new IDPs in North Kivu alone since the beginning of the
crisis, triggered by the Mouvement du 23 Mars (M-23).
Reports indicate that looting, rape, summary executions
24

Finally, the Security Council has also supported
the provision of additional helicopters to MONUSCO
to ensure greater mobility, and therefore greater
effectiveness of the force.
In conclusion, let me mention the battle against
impunity. The protection of civilians requires
prosecuting perpetrators of serious human rights
violations. It is true in Mali — a situation of which
the International Criminal Court is seized. Atrocities
committed should not go unanswered.
That is also true in the Syrian Arab Republic,
where Bashar Al-Assad, ignoring the calls of the
international community, continues to kill his own
people. The figures that Ms. Pillay gave us today speak
for themselves: over 60,000 dead, mainly civilians;
hundreds of thousands of people injured; tens of
thousands of people missing. In violation of the most
fundamental rules of international law, the regime is
using all the means at its disposal — heavy artillery,
incendiary cluster bombs, ballistic missiles — and all
in civilian areas. It spares neither women nor children.
While 4 million people need emergency food aid, the
Syrian authorities still refuse access for humanitarian
aid to all populations in all areas. And they are
increasing the number of obstacles to providing that
aid. The perpetrators of war crimes and crimes against
humanity perpetrated in Syria, starting with Bashar
Al-Assad, will be held accountable to justice.
That is why we reiterate our appeal that the Council
refer the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court.

13-22967

S/PV.6917

It gives no country any pleasure whatsoever to
engage in military operations. France did so in Libya,
which is now free from the yoke of dictatorship and is on
the way to rebuilding after 40 years of dictatorship. It is
doing that in Mali in a serious and determined manner
while respecting international law as the situation
requires. To those who continue to call for inaction, to
those who prefer the comfort of words over the risks of
action, to those who turn a deaf ear to the calls for help,
we put before them the joy of liberated peoples.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates the initiative of the Republic of Korea in
holding this open debate on the question of protecting
civilians in armed conflict. We welcome Mr. Kim
Sung-hwan, President of the Security Council for the
month of February, as he presides over today’s meeting.
We would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing. We listened attentively to the statements
by Ms. Pillay, United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, and Mr. Spoerri, Director for
International Law and Cooperation of the International
Committee for the Red Cross.
Civilians represent the most vulnerable groups in
wars and armed conflicts. In order to protect innocent
civilians from harm resulting from armed conflicts,
the Council has in the recent past adopted numerous
resolutions and presidential statements, thereby playing
an active role in promoting the protection of civilians,
including women and children. However, civilians
in many countries and regions are still subjected to
devastation and harm as a result of armed conflict. The
international community still faces an arduous task
in terms of protecting civilians. China supports the
Council in conducting in-depth discussions on the major
challenges it confronts in considering the protection
of civilians in armed conflicts, effectively promoting
related work so as to achieve more constructive results.
I wish to highlight four points.
First, protecting civilians represents an unshirkable
responsibility facing all parties to a conflict. All parties
to an armed conflict should implement in earnest the
Geneva Conventions, international humanitarian
law and the relevant resolutions of the Council by
making unremitting efforts to protect civilians. The
Governments concerned have the primary responsibility
for protecting innocent civilians in armed conflict.
The concern and help of the international community
should not replace the responsibility and obligation
of the country concerned, related countries and their
13-22967

Governments, as well as the parties in response
to conduct that violates human rights. As well as
contributing to international humanitarian law, to
pursue accountability and judicial justice, the first line
of action is to fully utilize the domestic judicial system
as the main channel.
Secondly, in carrying out actions to protect civilians
in armed conflict, it is essential to comply with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular such principles as respecting
national sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity. It is
essential to avoid politicizing the protection of civilians.
It is inadmissible to make arbitrary interpretations of
Security Council mandates in the name of protecting
civilians. It is even less so to carry out regime change
under the same pretext. When it comes to protecting
civilians, the Council should adopt a consistent position
in all situations on its agenda. Double standards or select
practices can only damage the authority and the role
of the Council. When conducting humanitarian relief
operations for the purpose of protecting civilians, it is
imperative to observe such principles as humanitarian
neutrality and objectivity. Only by winning the trust and
support of host countries can we ensure the effective
implementation of humanitarian relief operations.
Thirdly, in order to strengthen the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts, it is essential to make
greater effort in preventing and solving conflicts. The
Council should place the protection of civilians in the
larger framework of peacefully resolving conflicts.
It should actively conduct preventive diplomacy to
prevent and contain conflicts. The Council should go
out of its way to urge all parties to conflict to resolve
their differences through such peaceful means as
dialogue and negotiation to achieve political settlement
and minimize civilian casualties. Resorting to military
means can more often than not result in bigger crises,
resulting in more bloodshed and civilian casualties.
Fourthly, when considering a protection-ofcivilians mandate for a peacekeeping operation, it is
crucial to respect fundamental principles, such as the
consent of host countries. Peacekeeping operations
should always strictly observe the mandate of the
Council by minimizing civilian casualties. However,
they should also respect the sovereignty of the host
country, ensure objectivity and impartiality and avoid
becoming a party to the conflict.
Past experience and lessons learned have shown
that the appropriate relationship between the two
25

S/PV.6917

aforementioned parties will have a significant impact
on the effective implementation of peacekeeping
operations. We should also acknowledge that relying
solely on the deployment of peacekeeping operations
cannot resolve the fundamental issue of the protection
of civilians. The Council and the international
community should consider the long term by paying
close attention to and fully taking into account the
conditions prevailing in the host country. As a priority,
they should take steps to strengthen the host country’s
security and judicial sectors and to improve its ability
to effectively protect civilians on its own.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We will only touch upon certain aspects of the
issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
which has been discussed at length. The topic has
been on the Council’s agenda for almost 15 years. The
Council regularly includes the protection of civilians
in the mandates of peacekeeping operations. Moreover,
the relevant provisions are contained in existing
international legal documents.
However, despite the assurance of parties to an
armed conflict that they are taking all precautionary
measures, reports of cases of the disproportionate or
indiscriminate use of force causing civilian deaths
continue to reach us from war zones with alarming
regularity. Such incidents include medical personnel,
teachers, journalists and humanitarian staff, that is,
those whom international humanitarian law categorizes
as civilians and who should enjoy the unconditional
protection of all parties to armed conflict. In that
connection, we reiterate that guaranteeing the effective
protection of civilians is possibly only by the parties
to a conflict fully complying with their international
commitments under international humanitarian law.
Far from being theoretical, such problems are
of a practical nature, in particular given the fact that
resolving such situations directly involves the Security
Council. Civilian deaths as a result of the actions of
those who should protect them clearly reflect a flaw
in the system. Either precautionary measures are
insufficient or they occur through the authorities
mandated by the Security Council not fulfilling their
obligation to protect civilians.
In that regard, unfortunately, we must once again
note that, despite the calls of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, the circumstances of the civilian
26

deaths in Libya as a result of NATO air strikes, as
reported by journalists and investigated by the Human
Rights Council, have still to be duly established. It is
a matter of such fundamental issues as the need for
scrupulous compliance with Security Council mandates
for the protection of civilians and basic ethical norms,
such as due apologies and material compensation. The
issue of the protection of civilians is all the more in
the spotlight in view of the practice of the targeted use
of unmanned aircraft or drones, including in a crossborder context.
In that connection, we are concerned both about
civilian deaths and the psychological stress inflicted on
civilians living under the constant threat of a devastating
missile strike. That issue is already a foremost priority
of human rights bodies, including the Human Rights
Council Special Rapporteur on the promotion and
protection of human rights while countering terrorism.
We call on the Security Council to remain focused on
the issue. We believe that it is worth mentioning the
positive experience of certain United Nations missions.
For example, it seems important to examine in depth the
experience of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, which, we understand, has developed a
special mechanism for tracking civilian deaths.
In conclusion, we reiterate our position that the
international community should take proactive steps to
protect civilians, in particular if it involves the use of
force, only if endorsed by the Security Council and with
fullest compliance with the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. I
also commend you for having convened this important
open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. As in every open debate on the subject,
Argentina reiterates that the Security Council must
remain committed to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict through the promotion of full respect
for international law, in particular international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law,
as well as by combating impunity.
Argentina appreciates the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2012/376) and its recommendations.
Unfortunately, the report is lucid in stating that the
state of the protection of civilians remains abysmal.
It is therefore imperative to recall that the parties to
an armed conflict are bound by the basic norm of
13-22967

S/PV.6917

international humanitarian law, which provides that
civilians must be protected from the effects of conflict.
That obligation, contained in common article 3 of the
four Geneva Conventions of 1949, is also applicable
in the context of armed conflicts that are not of an
international character, that is, to non-State combatants.

peacekeeping operations to comply with international
humanitarian law, as well as the need to continue to
include protection activities in the mandates of United
Nations missions in the field. Those mandates have to
be clear, and such missions must be provided with the
necessary resources in a timely and effective manner.

Argentina not only agrees with the report of the
Secretary-General but also particularly thanks the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Pillay, and
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
Director, Mr. Philip Spoerri, because, as well as being
present, they both made statements this morning. We
appreciate the presence of the highest authorities,
which clearly demonstrates that full compliance
with international humanitarian law is still a basic
challenge for all States. The principles of distinction
and proportionality are crucial. We must also recall
the basic norm that non-compliance by one party to a
conflict does not justify non-compliance by the other.

As regards the integration of components, it is
important to provide the necessary structure and staff
in order to be able to protect women and children from
all kinds of violence, in particular sexual and genderbased violence.

With regard to the promotion of compliance, it
is important that Member States remain committed
to ensuring awareness of the obligations imposed
by international humanitarian law. In Argentina,
international humanitarian law has been included as
one of the most important aspects of international law
in the curricula of law schools and in the training of
the armed and security forces. In addition, Argentina
participates in the joint initiative “Reclaiming the
protection of civilians under international humanitarian
law”, one of whose undertakings is a series of seminars
to promote compliance with international humanitarian
law through practical recommendations. The delegation
of Norway will certainly mention that initiative, which
Argentina supports.
United Nations work is crucial to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, to preventing the emergence
of situations of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity, and to putting an end to
such situations when they arise. My country shares the
Secretary-General’s observations with regard to the
distinction between the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and the responsibility to protect. However,
to prevent violations of humanitarian law in armed
conflict and the four crimes under the responsibility to
protect from being committed, prevention is key. In that
regard, we highlight the importance of full respect for
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
Regarding action by the Security Council,
my delegation wishes to underline the need for
13-22967

In that respect, I should like to note that Argentina,
in cooperation with the ICRC, has developed courses
on humanitarian law for the armed forces, with an
emphasis on those that form part of the Argentine
contingents in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
I note also that the Commission on the Application
of International Humanitarian Law has drawn up a
manual on international law in armed conflicts, which
contains a compilation of the norms of international
humanitarian law for the conduct of armed forces in
the context of operations. That will be effective only
if it leads to the outcome that countries are seeking
to achieve when they contribute to peacekeeping
operations. We would like here, in drawing attention
to the work of all peacekeepers, to commend Argentine
peacekeepers — men and women — about whom there
has never been a single complaint of violation of human
rights or international humanitarian law.
As regards humanitarian assistance, the parties to a
conflict must make every effort to ensure effective and
timely access of such assistance, including shipments
and materials, which enjoys special protection under
international humanitarian law. Medical personnel and
vehicles, as well as hospitals, must also benefit from
such protection.
Fact-finding is another aspect that Argentina deems
crucial. Impartial mechanisms are key to determining the
facts regarding violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law. In addition to ad hoc factfinding commissions, including those established by
the Human Rights Council, we would like to highlight
the role of the International Humanitarian Fact-Finding
Commission, established under Protocol I to the 1949
Geneva Conventions. Argentina welcomes the fact
that, in conformity with the provisions of resolution
1894 (2009), the Security Council has recognized once
again, in the draft presidential statement to be adopted
later, the possibility of resorting to that Commission.
27

S/PV.6917

Lastly, the suffering of victims of armed conflict
often continues beyond the end of hostilities, as
they continue to be victims when they return to
their communities. In that context, in addition to
the challenges presented by post-conflict situations,
we wish to refer to the role of justice. The Council
established two international tribunals — the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda — and,
at present, the international community is witnessing
the consolidation of an international justice system for
the most heinous crimes, including war crimes, that is
no longer based on ad hoc tribunals but is permanent:
the International Criminal Court (ICC), established
by the Rome Statute in 1998. We would like to stress
the need for cooperation by all States with the ICC, in
particular regarding arrest warrants.

issued as a document of the Security Council under the
symbol S/PRST/2013/2.

The Council should establish, as soon as possible,
a mechanism to follow up closely on its referrals to
the ICC. Argentina welcomes the fact that the draft
presidential statement to be adopted later makes
reference to both to the need for cooperation with the
international tribunals and to the commitment of the
Security Council to follow up on its decisions in that
regard; this is something that has long been hoped for
in the context of referrals to the ICC.

I am equally grateful to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his very informative briefing, as well as to
High Commissioner Navi Pillay and Mr. Philip Spoerri,
of the International Committee of the Red Cross, for
their remarks.

Argentina reiterates that, in accordance with
international humanitarian law and the resolutions of
the Council, attacks of any kind against civilians or
other protected persons in situations of armed conflict,
as well as the recruitment of child soldiers, all forms
of violence against woman and interference with the
delivery of humanitarian aid, constitute clear violations
of international law.
I would therefore end by urging the fullest
compliance with the obligations emanating from the
Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907; the four 1949
Geneva Conventions, which are universally accepted,
and their Protocols of 1977; international human rights
law; refugee law and the decisions of the Council.
Standards must become reality.
The President: The Council has before it the text of
a statement by the President on behalf of the Council on
the subject of today’s meeting. I thank Council members
for their valuable contributions to that statement. In
accordance with the understanding reached among the
members of the Council, I shall take it that the members
of the Council agree to the statement, which will be

28

It is so decided.
I now give the floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): Let me congratulate the
Republic of Korea for assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of February. I also thank
you, Sir, for having convened this timely and important
high-level debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.
I would like to greet Her Excellency Mrs. Louise
Mushikiwabo, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Rwanda,
and His Excellency Mr. Elmar Mammadyarov, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Azerbaijan, and thank them for
their contribution to this debate.

As we gather to discuss this crucial item on the
Council’s agenda, our point of departure must be the
acknowledgement that, as indicated by the SecretaryGeneral in paragraph 2 of his latest report (S/2012/376),
the state of affairs regarding the protection of civilians
is “abysmal”.
Civilians continue to be injured, displaced and
killed in great numbers and subjected to all kinds of
hardships in many parts of the world. It is our collective
moral and political responsibility to confront this
situation and offer improved prospects to civilians
facing actual or potential risks.
The difficulties that have prevented us from
adequately discharging our responsibilities in the
area of the protection of civilians do not stem from
differences on the fundamental ethics underlying the
concept. They stem from differences that prevent us
from translating our common ethics into agreed policies
leading to coherent and effective results.
The use of force in the protection of civilians stands
out as an issue that divides opinions, compromises
efforts towards the peaceful settlement of disputes, and
distances us from dealing with the multifaceted issues
surrounding protection.
As regards the use of force, a Brazilian concept
paper on “responsibility while protecting” (S/2011/701,
13-22967

S/PV.6917

annex) was shared with the Security Council in 2011.
In our view, resort to military action should always
be an exceptional measure, after all peaceful means
have been exhausted and only upon the authorization
of the Council. If force is authorized, it must be
judicious, proportionate and limited to the objectives
established by the Council. We must be careful not
to worsen situations that put civilians at risk and
thus involuntarily contribute to further violence and
instability. Furthermore, the Council should assure the
wider membership that military action is monitored
and resolutions are interpreted and implemented in a
way that guarantees that the responsibility to protect
is observed. Events in the recent past make us ponder
whether direct military intervention and support for
armed groups have led to improved circumstances for
civilians or to further instability and violence.
However, even as we ponder past experience, we can
easily agree on the notion that the most effective way to
protect civilians is to prevent armed conflict and, should
such conflict arise, to display a real commitment to its
resolution by peaceful means. The Charter provides
a basis for associating the maintenance of peace and
security with the promotion of socioeconomic and
institutional development, as well as respect for human
rights. I had the opportunity to highlight this aspect
in the debate under Brazil’s presidency of the Council
in February 2011 on the interdependence of peace,
security and development (see S/PV.6479).
It is arguable that promoting sustainable
development, poverty eradication and food security
contributes to the promotion of peace and security
by creating a more stable environment for civilians.
Conversely, it is regrettable that the world spends
enormous resources on the development of weapons
and military budgets while we are still short of meeting
official development assistance targets, as agreed on
in the 2002 Monterrey Consensus. This disturbing
situation was described by Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon in a powerful article published last August.
As he said, the world is overarmed and peace is
underfunded.
If we are to seriously commit to the protection of
civilians, and if we all agree that the primary way to
achieve that is by avoiding the emergence of conflict,
we must seek to reverse that trend. As the SecretaryGeneral said today, the upcoming conference on an
arms trade treaty offers us an opportunity to take a
meaningful step and to agree on rules that will help

13-22967

spare civilians the consequences of poorly monitored
flows of arms.
On the nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation
front, consistent and balanced progress needs to be
made. We cannot afford to leave this agenda unfinished.
In that context, let me state that the Brazilian
Government condemns the new nuclear test carried out
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We urge
that Government to fully comply with all the relevant
Security Council resolutions on the matter. Brazil also
associates itself with the statement to the press read out
earlier this morning by the President of the Council.
In the same vein — approaching the protection of
civilians as a means to avoid conflict — the Council
should fully assume its responsibility regarding the
plight of those who are victimized on a daily basis
in protracted conflicts, such as that between Israel
and Palestine. The protection of civilians must be
implemented in a universal and non-selective manner.
Civilians should be equally protected against threats
of violence, be they in Homs or in Gaza, in Kandahar
or Timbuktu. Multilateral efforts should be in line
with international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, including in the context of the fight
against terrorism. In that context, Brazil welcomes
the announcement by the United Nations Special
Rapporteur on Counter-Terrorism and Human Rights
concerning the launch of an inquiry into the civilian
impact and human rights implications of the use of
drones and other forms of targeted killing for counterterrorism and counter-insurgency purposes.
We welcome the increased participation of
regional organizations, such as the African Union, in
efforts towards mediation and conflict resolution in
coordination with multilateral efforts, in accordance
with relevant provisions of the Charter. At the same
time, we must recognize that coordination between
the regional and the multilateral has not always been
satisfactory, and that improved governance will be
required to deal effectively with situations of instability
in which civilians are placed at risk.
The complexity of the challenges involved requires
inclusiveness in decision-making and in implementing
decisions. In that respect, a word on the long-overdue
reform of the Security Council is also justified. A more
representative and legitimate Council can, and in my
opinion will, help lead to decisions and strategies that
contribute to avoid conflict and protect a greater number
of civilians worldwide. Negotiating and building
29

S/PV.6917

common ground is the Council’s fundamental task. In
that regard, diplomacy is of the essence and should not
be equated, as it sometimes is, with a lack of resolve.
The phrase “there is no military solution” is being
increasingly used and may reflect the recognition that
we are entering a phase of greater openness to dialogue,
negotiation and diplomacy — a tendency that Brazil
would definitely support. Syria certainly comes to
mind, and Brazil agrees with those who are of the view
that there is no military solution to the Syrian crisis
and that the Council should firmly and unequivocally
rally behind the efforts of Joint Special Representative
Lakhdar Brahimi, on the basis of the Geneva plan of
action, which clearly opposes militarization.

emphasize the importance of strategies that protect
civilians in situations of conflict through non-military
efforts. First, we see the need for a broader awareness
of the importance of dealing with the prevention of
conflict by peaceful means, including through the
promotion of social and economic development,
intensified efforts towards the full implementation of
disarmament and non-proliferation commitments and
by seriously confronting crucial challenges such as that
presented by Israel and Palestine, among others. At the
same time, in situations where conflicts do break out,
we see the urgent necessity of placing more emphasis
on diplomacy and dialogue as the primary tools for
addressing them.

I believe that, after recent experiences in the use of
force for the protection of civilians, the international
community can now better appreciate the value of
conflict prevention and the peaceful settlement of
disputes, including as tools to ensure the safety of
those whom it wishes to protect. In conclusion, let me

The President: There is still a large number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. Given
the lateness of the hour, I intend, with the concurrence
of the members of the Council, to suspend the meeting
until 3 p.m.

30

The meeting was suspended at 1.55 p.m.

13-22967
