UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FiRST

YEAR

1936’”

MEETING:

28 JUNE 1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS

... .. ... . ... .. ... .. ... .. .. .. ... .. ... .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . .

1

The question of the exercise by the Palestinian people of its inalienable rights:
Report of the Committee established under General Assembly resolution
3376 (XXX) (S/12090) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/1936)

S/PV. 1936

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters cornbined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Cowtcil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which infor-,
mation about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fuliy operative
on that date.

1936th MEETING
Held in New York, on Monday,
President:

Mr. Frederick

R. WILLS

(Guyana).

Present:
The representatives
of the following
States: Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan,
Libyan Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/l936)

of the agenda

The question of the exercise by the Palestinian
people of its inalienable rights:
Report of the Committee established under General Assembly resolution 3376 (XXX) (S/12090)
The meeting

was called To order al 3.45 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda
.._
The agenda was adopted.
--The question of the exerdise by the Palestinian people
of its inalienable rights:
Report of the Committee established under General
Assembly resolution 3376 (XXX) (S/12090)’
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken at the 1924th, 192&h, 1933rd to 1935th
meetings, I shall now invite the Chairman and other
members of the Committee
on the Exercise of the
Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian
People, the
representative
of the Palestine Liberation
Organization and the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria,
Bahrain, Bulgaria, Cuba, Democratic Yemen, Egypt,
the German Democratic Republic, Guinea, Hungary,
India, Indonesia, Jordan, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Mauritania,
Morocco, Oman, Saudi
Arabia, Somalia, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia,
Turkey, the United Arab Emirates and Yugoslavia
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote.
Al the invitation of’the President. the deiegtrtiott of’
the Committee
otl the Exercise of’ the Itutiic~ttahie
Rights of rhe Paies~it~iatt People anti Mr. Terzi (Palestitle Libcratiotr Orgatiiza~ioti) took pitrc~es tit the Corrttcii table trtui Mr. Siddiq (A.~~~i~ttii.srtrtt), Mr. Rahtri
(Algeria), Mr. Al Sqj$tr (Btrhrvrin). Ms. Grozev (Buigttria), M. Alaruin (Cuba), Mr. Ashtai (Dettutcra~ic

28 June 1976, at 3 p.m.

Yemen), Mr. Abdei Megrrid (Egypt), Mr. Fioritl (German Detnocratic
Republic), Mr. Camara (Gttinea).
Mr. Bn’nyn’sz (Hrrngary). Mr. ,Jaipal (India). Mr. Marpaung (Indonesia), Mr. Shnraf (Jordat~), Mr. Borrlotn
(Lao People’s Democratic Republic). Mr. El Hasseil
(Maurirania),
Mr. Zaimi (Morocco),
Mr. Hagras
(Oman), Mr. Baroody (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Httssett
(Somalia), Mr. A//af(Syrian Arab Reptrblic). Mr. Driss
(Tunisia),
Mr. Tiirkttren (Turkey), Mr. Humaidan
(United Arab Emirates) anti Mr. Perrik ( Yugoslavia)
took rhe places roser\*ed for lhetn at’&
side of the
Corttlcii chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives
of Iraq and Poland containing
requests to be invited to participate without the right
to vote in the discussion, in accordance with the pro=
visions of Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure. With the consent of
the Council and in accordance with the usual practice,
I shall therefore invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote.
3. In view of the limited number of places available
at the Council table, I invite those representatives
to take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber, on the understanding that they will
be invited to take a place at the Council table when
it is their turn to speak.
Ai the ittlittrriotr
of’ the Plesiti~~tt~. Mr. AI-Shoikhl~
Iraq) and Mr. Jaroszek (Poiattd) took the piace.s reserlwi fctr chetn a1 die side of rlie Cortttcil chamber.
4. Mr. RiOS (Panama) (itltcJ~p~c~toCioti.fiu,nl
Spanish):
Mr. President, first of all please allow me, on behalf
of my delegation to bid you a most cordial welcome
to the work of the Security Council.
5. Since my delegation is speaking on the nixt-tolast day on which the Council will be working under
the direction of Ambassador Jackson, it wishes to
state for the record its appreciation of his efficiency
and impartiality
in the conduct of our deliberations.
June 1976 has been a difficult month, one of intense
concern for all members of the Council, and for Ambassador Jackson it has been a month which has
proved his skill, his tirelessness and his superior intelligence.
6. My delegation wishes to join those delegations
which have expressed their sorrow at the death of two

high-ranking
diplomatic
officials of the Government
of the United States Foreign Service in Lebanon. We
express the sincere hope that wisdom will prevail and
that such dastardly assassinations will cease.

to worship, and even a time to die. I sincerely believe
that this report on which I am commenting and which
is dramatically
brief tells us that the time has come
to make peace in the Middle East.

7. To turn to the question on our agenda, we wish
to praise warmly the work accomplished by the members of the Committee
established under Genera!
Assembly resolution 3376 (XXX). The report it has
presented to the Council is an urgent call for a realistic
solution to the Middle East conflict to be reached
without delay, since time is at a premium. In contrast
to other reports, the report of the Committee
does
not allow its argument to get lost in too many pages
of lengthy presentations. It wastes neither paper nor
time on futile dialectical
exercises. In a relatively
small space it goes to the heart of the matter and presents to us solutions aimed at breaking the status quo.
One can either agree or disagree with these measures,
but no one can deny that they represent points of
departure on the road to a solution of the Palestine
problem. And the picture becomes clearer in this
regard-every day. There will be no peace in the Middle
East as long as the Palestinians, continue to live as
refugees on foreign soil, harbouring hatred and feelings
of revenge from the days of their childhood.

10. The painful events which are destroying the
beautiful country of Lebanon are the strongest possible call for moderation and good sense so that, under
the auspices of the United Nations, Israel, the Palestinians and their Arab neighbours may sign peace
agreements. I said a moment ago that the concepts
had to be defined and that we had to call a spade a
spade; I wish to insist on this since I believe it to be
fundamental. Panama supports the rights of the Palestine people to self-determination
and the exercise of
its sovereignty; but let us be frank and let us say that
self-determination
and sovereignty are essential .requisites which identify the independent
State and
that they are valid and have meaning only when they
are exercised on a given territory. Every sovereign
State must, in order to deserve being so called, be
based on a Government, a population and a territory.
To my knowledge, mention has been made of an
independent Palestine State, but its territory has not
been specifically defined.
11. The report on which I am commenting
and
whose contents I am once again emphasizing because
of its very positive approach, states in paragraph 34:

8. The report of the Committee, whidh incorporates
the aspirations of the Palestinian people as expressed
by its most authoritative
spokesmen and also the
points of view of the community
of Arab countries,
proposes some formulas for action on .which Latin
America, and in particular Panama, have agreed. I am
referring first of al! to the solution of the Palestine
problem and, secondly, to peace negotiations leading
to a recognition of the right of the States of the region
to live within secure and recognized boundaries. In
paragraph 34 of the report the Committee mentions

“Upon the Israeli vacation of the occupied areas
and the establishment of an independent Palestinian
administration,
the Palestinian people would be able
to exercise its right to self-determination
and to
decide its form of government through democratic
means.”
The text I have just quoted makes two suggestions
with which Panama fully agress: first, the recognition
of the independent State of Israel and, secondly, the
location of the independent State of Palestine on territories occupied by Israel by war.

“negotiations
for a peace settlement in the Middle
’ East, which would cover the question of secure
and recognized boundaries for a!! States in the
region.*’

12. If that interpretation
is correct, we have said
everything that needs to be said on the first point.
We voted for the establishment of the sovereign State
of Israel, and from the very outset we have supported
that State’s right to live in peace within secure and
recognized boundaries. We have maintained the most
cordial relations with that State, and we shall continue
to do so. With regard to the second point, in order
to make the Panamanian position clear I shall quote
the following from a statement on this question made
in this chamber on 24 March by the representative of
Panama, Mr. Aquiline Boyd:

In our view, these are the essential elements of the
question. Herein lies the basis for the just and lasting
peace we have been ca!!ing for years, at times sincerely and at others-why
not say so?-as a smokescreen to conceal evil intentions.
9. Now, if we take the two basic principles I have
mentioned as a point of departure, we shall have to
define our concepts. We are too apt to beat about the
bush and spend a lot of time on a question without
being able to make a definitive statement on it or,
rather, without being able to say what we want to say.
We note that time in absolute terms may be limitless,
inexhaustibles,
when time is related to ephemeral
things, such as the life of man and of peoples, it is
exhaustible and does come to an end. In the timespace continuum,
human activities have their time.
Thus we speak of a time to love, a time to fight, a time

“After considering the problem as a whole, it is
our conclusion that an understanding can be negotiated, one that will be practicable only on the basis
of a Palestinian
State, including the Gaza Strip
and the West Bank of the Jordan, and that for their
part, the Arabs must respect the right of Israel to !,ive
2

within secure and recognized
nteetittg,

boundaries.”

If one or more of the parties are thinking of deriving
advantages from the final sacrifice of another party,
we can only expect the worst, and we here in the
Security Council will have been the fools. It is an
essential prerequisite that the United Nations and the
Secretary-General
define and put into effect the means
to instil confidence into the Jews, who still fear, when
an independent Palestinian
State is mentioned,
that
that presages the elimination
of the State of Israel,
a political entity created by the United Nations.

[18Y7th

pcrrir. 39.1

That statement is even more authoritative today in the
context of the position of the delegation of Panama,
especially when we take into account the fact that
that distinguished Panamanian diplomat is today the
Foreign Minister of Panama.
13. In defining the territorial
space on which the
Palestinian State should be situated, we shall be laying
the basis for future decisions. That will be so whether
the elements in question like it or not. I repeat: whether
it is accepted or not, this definition will be the point
of departure for negotiations
in which the United
Nations, and especially the Secretary-General,
will
be called upon to play a very important part.

18. In that connexion, do not let us forget the decisive role played in this entire matter by the two superPowers. For reasons that it is not for me to judge,
they bear in one way or another the blame for .the
tragedy in the Middle East. The time has come for
them to abandon their imperialistic
and hegemonistic
ambitions and once and for all to place their immense
capabilities,
their great resources and their influence
sincerely at the service of that just and lasting peace
about which so much has been said but nothing positive has yet been achieved.

14. In reviewing the history of this bitter dispute,
and taking into account the increasing danger it entails,
we cannot but make a strong appeal to the parties
directly concerned to forgo warlike attitudes, explore
the avenues of conciliation
and decide to use them
without delay.

19. In our view, one of the most burning questions
that have given rise to conflict has been and still is the
Holy City of Jerusalem.
The Committee’s
report
presents points of view on that controversial
question in paragraphs 36 to 39, without being able to make
any specific recommendation,
as we have all seen.

15. The destructive potential of the weapons being
accumulated today in the Middle East is more than
sufficient reason for setting in motion without delay
a peace plan based on the establishment of the Palestinian State and the recognition of the State of Israel
in accordance with Security Council resolution 242
(1967). These are facts which neither the Jews nor the
Arabs can ignore any longer.

20. For Panama, the status of the City of Jerusalem
is a cause for serious concern. We cannot conceive
of celestial Jerusalem, as it has also been called, as
territory subject to the exclusive jurisdiction
of a
temporal State. The Wailing Wall, the Mosque of
Omar and the Holy Sepulchre are only three of the
major religious monuments
which proclaim to the
world the imperative need for the City which inspired
Tasso to write the 20 cantos of his famous epic to be
an open city under an international
regime. In this
regard, the Panamanian
delegation considers very
pertinent what is stated in paragraph 37 of the Committee’s report, the contents of which we believe
worthy of note; for that reason I should like to quote it.

16. We would not wish what we have just said to be
taken to mean that we are naive or that we harbour
any illusions. We know that this cannot all come
about spontaneously. An essential prerequisite would
be for the United Nations, with all the authority it
has under the Charter, to exert pressure on the parties.
This is not the age of feudalism, when the lords could
decide to wage private wars; it was a matter only for
them and their rassals. Today no one can afford the
luxury of armed attack without endangering international peace and security. That is why we regard
more direct action by the United Nations as indispensable and urgent. In saying that, we are only trying
to strengthen or revitalize formulas adopted by the
world Organization in the very first years of its existence, as can be seen from General Assembly resolutions 181 (II), 194 (III) and 273 (III). On 29 November
1947, the United Nations Palestine Commission
was
created. We note with special interest that Panama,
along with Bolivia, Czechoslovakia,
Denmark and the
Philippines, was a member of that Commission.

“A suggestion was made that the administration
of the City of Jerusalem should consist of two main
organs: (a) a 45member
legislative body in which
the three main religious communities
of the city
would be equally represented;
(b) an executive
organ led by a United Nations commissioner
appointed by the Secretary-General
‘with the consent
of the Security Council.”
21. In support of what I have said, I shall repeat
what was stated by Ambassador Boyd at the 1897th
meeting of the Council:

17. We would not wish to end these remarks without
saying that when we speak of urgent understandings
to bring about peace in the Middle East, we are taking
for granted the honesty and sincerity of those who are
to negotiate that peace. The cards must be placed on
the table, and the rules of the game must be known.

“The Holy City must continue to be the heritage
of the three major monotheistic
religions, a sacred
heritage of almost a billion and a half of their adherents throughout
the world. Jerusalem is the
3

site of temples and of sacred relics for believers, and
conditions there must remain equal for all. As the
home of the three religious communities
that live
there, Jerusalem is the goal of thousands of pilgrims
who visit it constantly and it must therefore be protected by ail possible guarantees and have the
greatest possible security.

the Arab State of Palestine. We would be well advised
to review and update what has been said about a
special rigime for Jerusalem in resolution 181 (II).
24. My delegation wishes to conclude by stating that
it is ready to support any intelligent and timely decision which may be taken for the purpose of bringing
peace to that tormented region of the Middle East.

“In view of the presence and tenure in Jerusalem
of different groups, the logical and intelligent thing
to do would be to find a peaceful, equitable solution
to the problem. We must adopt an elevated approach
for that purpose and must accept a religious pluralism confirmed by history with sufficient guarantees for the full enjoyment
of the respective
rights of the three religions.

25. We are convinced that the rights of the Palestinians and of the Jews must be recognized and, above
all, respected. This we feel is only right. A .people
such as the Panamanian people that has had recourse
to the international
community ‘to demand justice and
to obtain effective sovereignty over its whole territory, without jurisdictional
limitations,
can do no
less than enthusiastically
support what it believes to
.
be just in every part of the world.

“This approach is not unrealistic; it is a goal that
we can all achieve if we demonstrate good faith.
Our conclusion is that Jerusalem requires a special
status, internationally
guaranteed. The basic elements of that status would include the following
guarantees, in our opinion: first, freedom of residence, freedom of whorship and respect for the
preservation of and free access to the Holy Places,
as well as facilities to maintain institutions, temples,
homes.and places for those who are in charge of the
administration
of those institutions. The authorities
in charge should give due protection to historical
rights and to the rights of the various communities
involved to the property they have acquired. The
authorities of the city must help preserve and safeguard the historical sites of the Holy City. Secondly,
the authorities should ensure equal rights for the
three religious communities
and should guarantee
to foster their spiritual, cultural and social lives.
Suitable opportunities
must be provided for economic progress so that there may be more employment and better education for those participating
in these development plans.” [Ihid., parus. 31-33.1

26. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Mauritania,
whom I invite to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
27.

Mr.

EL HASSEN
(Mauritania)
(inferpreration
In extending my congratulations
to you,
Mr. Minister, on your accession to the presidency of
the Council, I wish to tell you what an honour it is for
the Mauritanian
delegation to speak under your presidency. I also wish to pay a tribute to the representative of your country, Ambassador Jackson, who has
already displayed a noteworthy degree of tact and skill
in the United Nations, and particularly
as President
of the Security Council. I am personally proud to have
him as a friend.

from French):

28. Before speaking on the substance of the matter
being considered today by the Council, I should also
like, on behalf of my delegation and of my country,
to extend our sincere condolences to the delegation
of the United States upon the senseless murder of the
American Ambassador to Lebanon and his two colleagues.

22. As I mentioned before, we are aware of the fact
that the case of Jerusalem is crucial. So far, Arabs and
Jews have made it known that, with regard to the Holy
City, they will not cede what they consider to be their
legitimate rights which each one’ of them claims for
historical, religious and political reasons, and even for
reasons of international prestige.

29. This is by no means the first time that the Security Council has taken up the question of Palestine;
nor is it the first time that it has had to concern itself
with the tragic fate of the Palestinian people. But the
debate on this matter in which the Council is engaged
today differs in many respects from previous ones
and, for that reason, is of particular significance.
Indeed, this debate represents the culmination
of a
relentless quest on the part of the international
community, undertaken as a matter of duty in order, at
last, to find a solution of the Palestine problem which
,,:
is both just and equitable.
::1
30. Before outlining the various stages and vicissitudes through which this quest has passed, allow me,
first, Mr. President, to define the problem itself.

23. At the risk of being judged wrongly, we venture
to say that if the parties directly concerned can, without interference from those who are fishing in troubled
waters, understand that neither side is unilaterally
trying to benefit at the other’s expense, we see no
insurmontable
obstacles to the attainment
of the
specified goal; and, if that goal is attained, a major
step forward will have been made in the search for
peace. We are not indulging in esoteric arguments; on
the contrary, we are resorting to the original sources
of this question and seeking answers in what was recommended and ordered by the founders of the United
Nations, by those who created the State of Israel and

31. A little more than half a century ago, the people
of Palestine-an
Arab people-was
living in peace bn
4

creating new prospects for a just and durable solution
to the Arab-Israeli
conflict, simply exacerbated tension and made the situation progressively more explosive and infinitely more dangerous. Resolution
242
(1967), which is the one most frequently mentioned
here, is quite typical of the state of affairs which has
prevailed here at the United Nations. That decision
of the Security Council resolved no problem-it
was
even followed by the deadliest tiar ever unleashed in
the Middle East-because
it suffered from this fundamental failing, that of disregarding
the political
nature of the Palestine question. In other words,
during that first long stage in its search for a solution
the United Nations made no progress, but rather the
contrary, precisely because the main issue, the recognition of the inalienable national rights of the people of Palestine, was constantly evaded.

its lands. It was a people that was tolerant of all those
who for religious reasons came to settle in Palestine.
Jewish immigrants,
in particular, found in the land of
Palestine refuge, friendship
and brotherhood.
The
Palestinians never stopped to question the motives
of those immigrants;
they regarded them rather as
victims of injustice and persecution, and consequently
felt it was their duty to rescue them from their isolation. That was the attitude of the Arab people of Palestine until that immigration
took on the political and
military hue with which we are familiar today. Progressively but implacably,
the Arab people of Palestine were driven from their homes, dispossessed of
their property and reduced to living like vagabonds
on international charity.
32. It would be a long and perhaps tedious task to
review even a portion of the series of criminal acts
committed by international Zionism against the Palestinian people. Suffice it to recall the names of the.
Haganah, the Stem Gang and the Irgun to be reminded
of the tragic fate meted out to a considerable number
of Palestinians.
In Deir Yassin and the villages of
Nasser El-Dine and Kafou, to name but three, the
entire population was executed or herded.into mosques
which were then dynamited.

37. It is precisely in view of this failure on the part
of the international
community
that the Arab people
of Palestine, united in the Palestine Liberation Organization, rose up as all must rise up who wish to die in
freedom or to live in dignity. They made their existence and presence felt as well as their need for their
rights to be taken into consideration
with regard to
their lands, their homes and their property. Essentially, therefore, it was thanks to the determination
of the Palestinian people and to the support of fraternal
and friendly countries and of those that prize freedom
and justice that the United Nations gradually adopted
a new approach to the problem which was more effective and more constructive because it was juster and
politically sounder. It is thus that the General Assembly, breaking in 1969 with a quarter of a century of
indifference, reaffirmed in its resolution 2535 B (XXIV)
the inalienable national rights of the Arab people of
Palestine. Since then several resolutions have been
adopted by the General Assembly recognizing and
defining in ever stricter and more precise terms the
rights of the people of Palestine.

33. The first consequence of that terrorist activity
occurred in the years 1947-1948 with the expulsion of
700,000 Palestinian Arabs and the total destruction of
their dwellings. That figure was subsequently
to
increase as the Zionist authorities gained strength and
as they perfected their terrorist methods and their
settlement policy. The Arab people of Palestine, who
were now reduced to the state of vagabonds, were
not only driven from their homes but were even
pursued into the territories
of neighbouring
Arab
States. Meanwhile, as time passed, those countries
saw their territories
shrink like Balzac’s pem tk
chop-in and their sovereignty reduced as they were
forced to undergo four successive wars, with their
concomitant suffering, poverty and mass destruction.

38. In that period in which the General Assembly
adopted a new approach to the problem some events
of major importance deserve to be stressed, we believe, because they proclaim the international
recognition of the national rights of the people of Palestine
and at the same time reveal the importance which the
United Nations was henceforth to attach to the enjoyment of those rights.
.

34. That, then, is the problem as it appears in all its
brutal simplicity. As can easily be seen, the Palestine
question is not merely an element of the problem of
the Middle East, an element which incidentally
for
some time now has been regarded as a purely humanitarian one. The Palestine question is the root-cause of
this problem and consequently the key to any solution,
35. The United Nations has had this problem before
it practically
since its foundation.
During the first
stage of its efforts-from
1947 to the beginning of this
decade-the
United Nations unfortunately singled out
only the humanitarian
aspects of the issue and maintained a studied silence, for various reasons, about its
essentially political character and its threat to peace
and stability in. that region, and indeed to international security.

39. The first event undoubtedly
was the welcome
given by the General Assembly on 13 ‘November
19742 to the representative of the Arab people of Palestine, our brother Yasser Arafat, Chairman of the
Executive
Committee
of the Palestine Liberation
Organization.
Although he represented a people that
had been wounded in its dignity and whose very existence had long been ignored; our brother Yasser
Arafat displayed a remarkable degree of moderation
and a great deal of political maturity in the statement
he made before the General Assembly.

36.. That erroneous evaluation of the facts, far from
alleviating the sufferings of the Palestinian people or
5

40. The fact that the General Assembly granted
observer status to the Palestine Liberation
Organization [rrsolution 3237 (XX1X)] and the fact that the
representative of that organization is present here at
the Council table also demonstrate that the United
Nations is more than ever aware of the fact that
nothing serious and lasting can be undertaken in the
Middle East without the active participation
of the
Arab people of Palestine.

opment. They all would like to devote their resources
and all their energies to those problems. It is really
being politically short-sighted to believe that they do
not ardently desire peace. But how can they accept
peace when their territories are occupied, when day
after day their very existence is threatened by the
forces of international
Zionism?
45. Peace in the Middle East necessarily involves
finding a solution to two fundamental questions-the
restitution of the inalienable national rights of the Arab
people of Palestine and the unconditional
withdrawal
of Israel from all occupied Arab territories. It is not
by harping on what we conventionally
term “secure
and recognized boundaries’* that we can continue to
evade a solution to these fundamental
questions.
Besides, there can be no secure boundaries unless
they are recognized, and they can be recognized only
when they are based on law and justice, two important
concepts which do not appear to have any place in the
Israeli philosophy.

41. By way of completing the process started in 1969
in connexion with the recognition of the Palestinian
situation, the General Assembly decided, in resolution 3376 (XXX) to set up a Committee “on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian Peo‘pie”. This also is an event of great import because, as
I said at the beginning of my statement, it represents
the culmination
of the efforts which have been made
by the .intemational
community
since 1947 for the
purpose of finding a solution of the unhappy problem
of the Middle East. The Committee
carried out its
mandate excellently
and submitted
a very clear,
practical and well-balanced report to the Council. I
should like to take this opportunity
to pay a warm
tribute to the members of the Committee, to its Chairman. and to its Rapporteur. As I have said, they have
submitted a clear report to the Council. The Council
therefore finds itself at the end of a long period of
evolution which was marked initially by indifference
and finally by realism and wisdom, and it now has
before it concrete proposals which, if taken into consideration, may lead to a just and lasting solution of
the Palestinian
problem, thus eliminating
the main
cause of the conflict.

46. The eyes of the entire world are now on the
Security Council, whose *main responsibility
is to
make might bow to right. We hope that it will not miss
this opportunity once again to prove itself equal to its
responsibilities
by recognizing the inalienable national
rights of the Palestinian people.
47. Mr. LA1 Ya-Ii (China) (trunslurion from Chinese): Mr. President, we are most pleased and honoured to see the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Guyana, presiding personally over these
important meetings of the Security Council, First of
all, allow me, in the name of the Chinese delegation,
to extend our most cordial greetings to you and,
through to the friendly Government
and people of
Guyana.

42. This is what gives the Council’s deliberations
today a special meaning. The Council cannot shirk its
responsibility
by underestimating
the importance of
the Committee’s
report or by simply remaining a
bystander to the political developments occurring in
the United Nations itself. It is only the Council which,
up to now, has been unable to adopt a resolution recognizing the inalienable national rights of the Arab
people of Palestine, although those rights are no longer
questioned except by the Zionist usurpers in Tel Aviv.
The proved inadequacy of resolution 242 (1967), the
ear of 1973 which it was unable to prevent and the
tragic events which recently took place in the occupied
West Bank must, however, convince the Security
Council of the need to redress this injustice.

48. The Palestine question is an important political
question that has been before the United Nations for
a’ long time. However, owing to super-Power manipulation, the United Nations has adopted a most unjust
stand on the Palestine question over the years. Many
resolutions on the question of Palestine and the Middle East, including Security Council resolution 242
(1967). have all described the question of the restoration of the Palestinian people’s national rights as a socalled refugee problem. It is only natural that the broad
masses of the Palestinian
and other Arab peoples
categorically
reject and resolutely oppose such a
practice of shielding the Israeli aggressors, a practice
which is most unjust to the victims of aggression.
*

43. Of course it can be no pleasure for the Arab
people of Palestine to live permanently
in refugee
.other
camps, to endure all sorts of suffering-in
words, to live in precarious circumstances. The Arab
people of Palestine desire peace, but they want it to
be a peace founded on law, on their rights-the
right
to return, the right to compensation,
the right to
recognized national sovereignty and independence.

49. At its twenty-ninth session the General Assembly
for the first time listed the Palestine question as an
important item for separate consideration and invited
the Palestine Liberation Organization to participate in
the discussion of the related questions as the representative of the Palestinian people. The General Assembly also adopted by overwhelming
majorities
resolutions 3236 (XXIX) and 3376 (XXX), reaffirming

44. For their part, the other Arab countries have
tremendous problems of economic and social devel6

toriously exploding the myth of Israel’s ihvincib.ility.
The historic feats of’the. Arab countries using oil as
a weapon have dealt heavy blows to Israeli Zionism
and hegemonism and continue to exert far-reaching
influence. Not long ago, the Egyptian Government
and people, driven beyond the limits of forebearance
and determined to rid themselves of the super-Powers’
chains, declared the abrogation the so-called treaty of
friendship and co-operation they had concluded with
a super-Power, thus setting a shining example for the
people of the third world in resisting hegemonism and
safeguarding national independence and State sovereignty. All this marks the new awakening of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples and the intensification
of their struggle against aggression and hegemonism.
At present, the Israeli Zionists are in unprecedented
isolation and beset with troubles both at home and
abroad. The super-Powers’ pattern of aggression and
contention for hegemony has been further exposed;
they are discredited and find the going tougher and
tougher. The whole situation continues to develop in
a direction favourable to the Palestinian
and other =
Arab peoples. This is the outstanding feature of the
current situation in the Middle East.

the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination without external interference, and national independence and sovereignty recognizing that they are
entitled to regain by any means their inalienable
national rights, and appealing to all States to extend
their support to the Palestinian people in their .just
struggle. This is the result of the protracted struggle
persistently carried on by the Palestinian and other
Arab peoples with the support of the third world and
the people of various countries.
Fundamentally
speaking this is .also a manifestation
of the current
situation in the Middle East.
50. The Palestine question is an important integral
part of the whole Middle East question. The essence
of the Palestine question and the whole Middle East
question lies in Israeli Zionist aggression and the
rivalry between the two super-Powers for hegemony
in that region versus the struggle of the Palestinian
and other Arab peoples against aggression and hegemonism. With imperialist aid and abetment, Israel has
repeatedly carried out acts of aggression against Palestine and the Arab countries,
seized and illegally
occupied large tracts of Arab territories and driven
over a million
Palestinians
from their homeland,
exposing them to prolonged suffering and robbing
them of their property. Had it not been for external
interference, it would not have been difficult for the
Palestinian and other Arab peoples, united as one, to
defeat the Israeli aggressors, recover their lost territories; regain their national rights and achieve their
national
liberation.
However,
as the two superPowers, in their rivalry for spheres of influence in the
Middle East, have done their utmost to obstruct and
sabotage the liberation struggle of the Palestinian and
other Arab peoples, to support and abet the Israeli
Zionists and deliberately create and maintain a situation of no war, no peace in the region, the difficulty
and complexity
of the liberation struggle of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples have been greatly
increased. This also shows that the frenzied superPower rivalry in this region is the fundamental reason
for the prolonged failure to achieve a settlement of the
Palestine problem and the whole Middle East question.

52. Of course, the enemies will never be reconciled
to their defeat. The Israeli Zionists are gathering their
forces and awaiting an opportunity to counter-attack.
One super-Power is still adamantly refusing to recognize the national rights of the Palestinian people and
is continuing to bolster up Israel. And the super-Power
cloaked as the “natural ally” of the Palestinian and
other Arab peoples is engaging in the most revealing’
antics and is resorting to more sinister and venomous
means to get out of its deteriorating
situation. While
saying a few hypocritical words against Israeli aggression, it is actually working hand-in-glove with Israel.
Its collusion with Israel has grown from secret to open
contacts, and the level has been elevated from nongovernmental to official. In the Arab world, it is doing
its utmost to sow dissension, setting one State against
another, inciting the different factions to kill each
other and using Arabs to fight Arabs, so that it may
exploit the chaos for infiltration,
expansion and control. At the same time, it is using the gunboat policy
for political blackmail and military threats. This shows
full .well that this super-Power is the ferocious enemy
of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples and the main
source of a new world war. The Palestinian and other
Arab peoples have realized ever more clearly that in
order to regain their national rights ,and recover the
lost territories it is essential for them to link the struggle against Israeli Zionism closely with the struggle
against super-Power hegemonism
and to strengthen
their own unity so as to resist and strongly oppose
the enemies’ intrigues aimed at sowing dissension.

51. Over the past three decades, the heroic Palestinian and other Arab peoples have never ceased to
fight, holding high the banner of defiance to Israeli
Zionism and hegemonism, and advancing wave upon
wave, they have carried on dauntless struggles under
most difficult conditions.
The armed forces of the
Palestinian people have grown stronger through their
battles. In recent years, with the victorious development of the struggles of the people of the numerous
third-world
countries
against colonialism,
imperialism and hegemonism,
the liberation struggle of the
Palestinian and.other Arab peoples has known new
upsurges and opened up new prospects. During the
October War, the heroic fighters of the Palestinian
people resolutely took up arms to fight shoulder to
shoulder with the fraternal Arab countries and peoples, breaking through the situation of no war, no
peace imposed on them by the super-Powers and vic-

53. We believe that in order to extend active support
and to the just struggle of the Palestinian and other
Arab peoples and to co-ordinate it, the Security Council must rectify the most unjust stand towards the
Palestinian people it formerly adopted under super7

Power manipulation,
unequivocally
recognize the
complete
restoration
of the Palestinian
people’s
national rights without outside interference and recognize that the Palestinian people are entitled to
resort to every means to regain these rights. The
restoration of the national rights of the Palestinian
people is inseparable from the recovery of the lost
Arab territories. Therefore, the Council must also call
upon Israel to withdraw immediately
and unconditionally, completely
and not partially, from all the
territories it has occupied illegally.

58. Having said that, I should now like to make some
observations on the report before us. The Council has
considered the problem of Palestine several times
since the beginning of this year-first
in January, then
in March and again in May-and
on these occasions
my delegation stated clearly and fully the basic position of the Government
of Japan on this problem,
which constitutes a very essentiai part of .the whole
problem of the Middle East.
59. It is the considered view of the Japanese Government that a just and lasting settlement of the Middle
East problem should be based on the following three
requirements:
first, withdrawal of Israeli forces from
all the territories occupied since June 1967; secondly,
respect for and acknowledgement
of the sovereignty,
territorial
integrity and political independence of all
States in the area, including Israel, and their right
to live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries; thirdly, recognition
of and respect for the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people in accordance with the Charter. All three of these requirements are equally indispensable and all three must be
met in any solution.

54. In our view, the report of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People deserves detailed study. We support the content of the report, which is in conformity
with the
spirit of the fqregoing. As to the inadequacies and
ambiguities of the report, they could be remedied by
amendmeqts
and additions in accordance with the
spirit of resolutions 3236 (XXIX) and 3376 (XXX).
.55.
In the final analysis, the settlement of the question of Palestine and the whole Middle East question
must be based on the unremitting struggle of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples with the support and
assistance of the people of the world and not on a
United Nations resolution. The struggle of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples against aggression and
hegemonism is an important component of the struggle
of all the peoples of the third world and it therefore
commands the greatest sympathy and support from
the peoples of the third world and of other countries.
We have every reason to believe that the Palestinian
and other Arab peoples will be able to foil the disruptive schemes of the super-Powers and Israeli
Zionism and that, he.ightening their vigilance, bearing
in mind their over-all interests and persevering in unity
and struggle, they will steadily improve the situation
and gradually lead their just cause to complete victory.

60. It is true that the problem of Palestine is. a crucial
element in the Middle East problem. It is very true
that the settlement of the Palestinian problem is an
integral part of an over-all settlement of the problem
of’the Middle East. Without a solution of the Palestinian problem, there can be no just and lasting solution of the problem of the Middle East. However, this
has not been sufficiently underscored in the past by
the intemattonal community;
It was only recently that
world opinion really focused on the vital importance
of the Palestinian problem. It is therefore in the light
of such background facts that my delegation
has
studied with maximum care the report of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People.

56. Mr. ABE (Japan): Mr. President, may I say at
the outset how happy and privileged my delegation
feels in serving on the Council these days under your
presidency, as you are a most distinguished
statesman and diplomat of Guyana. Your personally assuming the presidency not only enhances the prestige
of the Council but also gives full satisfaction to its
members-all
the more so since, before you came to
the Council, it was Ambassador Jackson, Guyana’s
Permanent
Representative,
who during nearly the
whole month of June conducted the Council’s albeit
complicated
and difficult business so wisely and so
patiently-in
brief, so brilliantly.
My delegation
would like to express thanks and pay a tribute to you
and to Ambassador Jackson for your achievements.

61. However, although we highly value the work
done by the Committee,
we are bound to state that
a number of the recommendations
contained in the
report in the form of a programme designed to implement the rights of the Palestinian people are of a nature
that would make them very difficult to implement,
wither legally or politically.
As has been pointed out
by some representatives
during our earlier debates,
this conclusion was inevitable, because the mandate
of the Committee was so limited that it was unable to
take into account all the other elements and circumstances deriving from the three fundamental requirements for an over-all settlement which I mentioned
earlier. The recommendations
that would be so difficult to implement are included in the most important
part of the report. We are not able to support them.

57. Mv delegation takes this opportunity to express
its profound Condolences to the ‘United -States helegation on the tragic deaths of Ambassador Meloy and
his companions in Beirut. This is once again a reminder of the urgent need for a return to order and
peace in that country.

62. My delegation feels, however, that important
aspects of the problem of Palestine, such as the rights
of the Palestinian. people to return, to selfdetermina~
tion, independence and sovereignty, on which some
8

mittee, which, under the dynamic leadership of its
Chairman, Ambassador Fall of Senegal, carried out
a very complex and delicate task within the timelimit that had been established. The report which the
Committee
has submitted to the Council reflects the
serious efforts made by its members, as well as their
obvious determination
to define the first elements of
a practical and feasible solution that could lead towards
a final settlement of the Palestinian problem.

substantive studies were made by the Committee,
would come to serve in future negotiations as a valuable contribution
to the search for an over-all settlement.
63. The current situation in the Middle East should
not be allowed to stagnate. My delegation agrees with
the suggestions made by the Committee
in paragraph 56 of the report to the effect that, since the Security Council remains the only forum in which all
parties to the conflict have been able to meet, this
unique circumstance might be more actively utilized
for a constructive move towards a settlement. We also
share the hope expressed in the same paragraph that
all .the parties concerned would show statesmanship
and a genuine willingness to negotiate-necessary
prerequisites for achieving .a comprehensive
political
settlement.

69. This problem, as we are only too well aware, has
affected the entire life of the United Nations, and
nothing could be more impressive than the number
of discussions that have been devoted to it at all levels
and the mass of decisions and resolutions which, year
after year, have proposed partial or over-all solutions
and have expressed, more or less felicitously,
the
subjects of concern to the international
community
and its difficult search for a balance between the
brutality offnits accomplis which are a shock to its
conscience and respect for the immutable
principles
that should guide its actions.

64. My delegation again urges that some positive
steps be taken as soon as possible to facilitate every
effort, including the resumption of the Geneva Conference with the participation
of the Palestine Liberation Organization
in an attempt to achieve an early
agreement among all the parties concerned on a just
and lasting settlement.

70. Hence, this is not a new question or one that is
unfamiliar to the members of the Council, and we are
not going to recall once again the genesis and the _
development -of the problem. History will record who
was responsible for the fact that the Palestinian people
lost their homeland, fled their country and were despoiled of their property. It is in history, too, that we
must seek the bases of a realistic analysis that can lead
to a future settlement. For we cannot associate ourselves with those whose realism is selective, confined
to 2,000 or 3,000 years ago or to the recent period of
the past 30 years.

65. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Algeria. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
66. Mr. RAHAL
(Algeria)
(interpretation
from
French): This debate in the Security Council is in
principle devoted to the consideration of the report of
the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People. However, the background of the debate is the situation in the Middle East,
which places the Palestinian problem in its true context and gives the present series of Council meetings
its true significance. The interest that has been shown
throughout the world in the Middle East crisis, the
concern it arouses in international
opinion and the
passions it generates among all the protagonists make
it totally unnecessary for the Non-Aligned
Group to
state again that it has.always attached importance to
the problem and is observing its developments
with
attention.
:
67. Mr. President, we know the great attachment
which your country, Guyana, has to the principles of
non-alignment,
and we appreciate the very praiseworthy part it is playing in our Group in strengthening
our cohesion and inspiring us towards dynamism. In
saying that, I wish to tell you, Sir, what a pleasure it
is for me to welcome you here on behalf of my delegation, and what an honour it is for me personally to
address the Council at a time when, by a coincidence
that I regard as particularly fortunate, you, the Foreign
Minister of Guyana, are its President.

71. Incredible as it may seem, the Members of this
Organization took a very long time to recognize such
an obvious fact. Some of those Members-which
for quite a time determined the positions and decisions of our institutions-stubbornly
persisted in
regarding as the only basic elements of the crisis the
right to the existence in Palestine of a Zionist entity
and the settlement of the conflict between Israel and
the neighbouring
Arab States. The Palestinians, who
in their eyes had lost even their personality and their
identity as a people, became refugees who at best
were the recipients of international charity.
72. It was only through a long and slow process that
it finally became clear to everyone that the real tragedy in the Middle East was the tragedy of the Palestinian people and that no true settlement of the Middle
East crisis could be envisaged if it did not deal, above
all, with the Palestinian problem itself. That idea may
not please everyone, but it is because some have
wished deliberately to ignore it that the’situation in the
Middle East has remained usolved up to the present
time, that it has become more and more complex and
its dangers have spread to the entire region and even
beyond, introducing an element of permanent tension
into international
relations.

68. Of course,.1 shall not go on with this statement
before paying’s well-deserved tribute to the Com9

73. Having said that, it would be difficult not to
mention what is happening in Lebanon or to deplore
the unleashing of fratricidal violence which threatens
the unity and the future of that country. This is also
an opportunity for me to associate my delegation with
those who have expressed their condolences to the
representative of the United States on the senseless
killing of the United States Ambassador and two of
his companions. The persistence and growth of instability andinsecurity
in the region should lead the whole
international community to take a new look at the facts
of the problem itself, free from the passions, the cliches and the slogans which, under skilful and undeniably effective propaganda, have come to replace
reality.

be easy to implement the programme proposed by the
Committee so long as the Israeli authorities continue
to nourish their expansionist dreams and so long as
their aggressive attitude and warlike policy find moral,
material or military
support in Western countries,
particularly in the United States. Israel is too accustomed to defying with impunity the decisions of the
United Nations and the resolutions of the Security
Council and has always adopted an attitude of disdain
towards all attempts at settling the crisis in the Middle
East. It is true that, in the final analysis, it is the
country which has benefited from that situation, and
history will record it as perhaps the only example-at
any rate the most curious one-of an aggressor quietly
enjoying the fruit of its aggression and even transforming it into a bargaining element for use against the
victims of its aggression.

74. It is for that reason that we are pleased with the
clear development which for several years has characterized the way in which the question of the Middle
East has been considered in the General Assembly
and the Security Council. The General Assembly
recognized, in its resolution 3236 (XXIX),
that the
Palestinian people was a principal party in the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East
and reaffirmed the national rights of the Palestinian
people to seif-determination,
national independence
and sovereignty, as well as the right of individual
Palestinians to return to their homes and property.
At its thirtieth session the Assembly complemented
those decisions by establishing the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, which, within the framework of the responsibilities entrusted to it, prepared the report which is
before the Council today for its consideration.

77. We are certain that the Council will attach full
importance to the Committee’s
report. The least it
could do would be to single out among the Committee’s
recommendations
those decisions which it has already
had the opportunity
to adopt without‘ being able to
ensure their implementation.
The Council will note
the practical orientation
of those recommendations
which, while referring to principles already adopted
by the United Nations and confirmed by the Council
itself, reveal above all a concern for their translation
into reality and practical action. This concern should
be underscored, since it is aimed at remedying one of
the major weaknesses of our organization,
which is
frequently reproached for being incapable of implementing its decisions. It seems to us that it will be the
duty of the Council to see to it that this attempt, which
has several merits, does not prove vain and that this
will not be another lost opportunity for the Council
and our organization to act in keeping with their responsibilities
and with the hopes that our peoples
continue to place in them.

75. One can easily see that that report has been very
faithful to the resolutions of the Assembly and the
Council relating to the various aspects of the Palestinian problem. It is clear indeed that it is not for lack
of decisions or more or less ingenious suggestions
that it has not been possible so far to initiate a settlement of that problem. The Committee has therefore
done well to delve into that pile of often very pertinent
documents for its proposals. The Committee furthermore invited all Member States and regional inter-.
governmental
organizations to participate in its work
or to submit proposals and suggestions to it. It is
therefore difficult to understand how the Committee
could be accused of partiality on grounds of its composition or the results of its work when it was possible
for any interested party to make known its views and
to defend them in ,the course of the Committee’s
meetings.

78. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Oman, whom I invite to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
79.

Mr.

HAGRAS
(Oman) (intsrpretcrtion
from
May I be allowed first, on behalf of my delegation and on iny own behalf, to express our profound
regret and our sincere condolences to the delegation
and Government of the United States upon the tragic
death in Beirut of the Ambassador of the United States
and his colleagues.

Frmch):

SO. Sir, may I also take this occasion to congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. We are very pleased to see you occupying that seat, since Guyana has always played a
very important role in the United Nations as a member
of the Non-Aligned
Group. Your presence here today,
Mr. Minister,
shows the importance
which your
country attaches to the Palestine question as well as to
justice and international
peace. There could be no
better occasion than a time when J,<>LIare presiding

76. For our part, we believe that the recommendations of the Committee are a first step towards a much
more realistic grasp of the question of the Middle East,
and we are convinced that, if they are sincerely and
speedily implemented,
they will be able to bring about
such a change of attitude that a global and definitive
settlement will no longer appear to be unattainable.
Nevertheless, we are not so naive as to think that it will
10

‘degree of objectivity.
There can be no doubt that it
gives Israel every opportunity
to help to bring about
a peaceful settlement in the region.

over the Council for us to be taking up an issue of
such great importance as this. We are convinced that
your sure touch, your skill and your experience will
make it possible for the deliberations
of the Council
to culminate in success. May I also thank Ambassador Jackson, who presided over the Council earlier
this month with an effectiveness and skill which
greatly facilitated its work.

85. The Committee’s
report was based on Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions. We have
all read its contents, and I shall not go into detail;
I shall deal only with the most important points. The
Committee
recognizes the right of the Palestinian
people to return to its homeland in order to exercise
its right to self-determination,
independence
and
national sovereignty.
The Committee
recommends
the participation,
on an equal footing, of the Palestine
Liberation Organization,
which it regards as essential
in the efforts being made under United Nations auspices to reach a solution to the Middle East problem.
Finally, the Committee
emphasizes the need for .a
more important part to be played by our great organization in the search for a just and lasting solution.

81. The Security Council has met on a number of
occasions to debate the question of the Middle East,
but this is the first time it has broached the problem
which is the very starting point of the conflict. We are
here today to reaffirm that there can be no just and
lasting peace in the Middle East as long as Israel so
arrogantly continues to ignore the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people by indulging in practices which
are contrary to international law and the fourth Geneva
Convention.3 Furthermore, the Israeli authorities continue to defy the very clear-cut resolutions of the
Council and the General Assembly; they have expropriated the lands and property of the Palestinians,
acquired land by force, uprooted the population and
set up new Israeli settlements in its place. An innocent
population has thus been subjected to humiliation
and
discrimination
and refused the right to its own land.

86. The Council is apprised of the facts, and it has
before it the Committee’s
report. Now what it must
do is to give serious study to this document, which
represents a sound foundation for a just solution of
the Palestinian problem. As requested in the report,
the Council should take action and pay due attention
to this problem in order to preserve international
peace and security. It is essential that the full recognition of the national rights of the Palestinian people be
obtained. The Arab world has already had occasion
to express its viewpoint on this matter, and it is determined that these rights shall be restored. The world
community
itself is becoming increasingly aware of
the fact that it is impossible to conceive of any solution
of the Middle East problem which does not take
account of the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian
people. Those rights can be secured only if the occupation of Arab territories is brought to an end. We
demand that Israel immediately
withdraw from the
occupied territories. In so doing, it would demonstrate
its good faith and would show that it really intended to
seek peace. The Palestinian people, represented by
the Palestine Liberation
Organization,
will continue
its efforts to ensure that its rights are restored and
that it can return to its homeland.

82. However, in recent months we have seen that
the Palestinian people is not willing passively to accept
Israeli occupation or to see its rights ignored any
longer. An important event took place when elections
were held in the West Bank, and the result of those
elections amply demonstrates
that the Palestinians
do not intend to give up either their freedom or their
aspirations to independence and national sovereignty.
They are aware of belonging to the Palestinian people
and of living in part of Palestine; those are the facts
of the case for the inhabitants of the West Bank. At
the same time, those elections showed the attachment
of the Palestinian people to their representative,
the
Palestinian Liberation
Organization,
and the demonstations which took place in the occupied territories
cannot be divorced from the struggle being waged
outside by a much larger group of Palestinian people.
83. Israel must measure up to its responsibilities
not
only towards the population of the occupied territories
but also towards all those Palestinians who have been
forcibly displaced, who have the entirely legitimate
desire to return to their lands, and who are entitled
to recover their property and have their freedom and
autonomy guaranteed.

87. The right to self-determination
of the Palestinian
people must find its expression in Palestine, notwith
standing Israeli objections, and it is the duty of the
Council to ensure that this is’ achieved through the
strict implementation
of all the resolutions of the
United Nations. The situation in the Middle East
represents a constant threat to peace, and it is the duty
of the Council to find a just and lasting solution. The
exercise of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people is an integral part of a peaceful solution of the
situation in that region because it is the absolute prerequisite for peace in that area. The Council should
use all its influence and exert pressure on Israel to
make it recognize this essential truth.

84. We have before us the report of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, and Ishould like to take this opportunity
to thank its Chairman, Ambassador Fall of Senegal,
as well as the other members of the Committee,
who
have done such an excellent and objective piece of
work. I am certain that their task was a laborious one,
and in our view this report reflects great honesty visci-vis all the parties involved, as well as a praiseworthy

88. I would venture. to hope that the members of the
Council,
which bear the main responsibility
for
11

ensuring peace and security throughout the world,
will shoulder that responsibility,
endorse all the recommendations
contained in the report and do everything possible to implement the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people, thus bringing about a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East.

the Palestinian people, to participate in the work of
the General Assembly and of all international
conferences under United Nations auspices, Today, even
those who were striving to view the role of the Palestine Liberation Organization with a sceptical eye can
hardly deny its significant contribution to the activities
of the United Nations.

89. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Poland, whom I invite to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.

94. Another milestone along the same road was the
comprehensive debate on the Middle East conflict in
the Security Council last January. The present debate
and the report before the Council represent yet another breakthrough on the road to victory in the struggle for justice of the Palestinian people.

90. Mr. JAROSZEK
(Poland):
Mr. President, in
thanking you personally, and the other members of
the Council for granting me this opportunity to speak
before it on the important question on the Council’s
agenda, I cannot fail to pay a tribute to Guyana’s
statesmanlike
and very efficient presidency of the
Council in the month of June. Indeed, it has been a
fitting beginning for the second decade of Guyana’s
existence as an. independent State, one with which
Poland maintains
relations of friendship
and cooperation.

95. The problem we are discussing today is the
product of a continued policy of aggression, intolerance and occupation of the Arab lands. As such, its
political
content shoud be viewed. .as being twodimensional
First, the problem is part and parcel of
the Middle East conflict, whose elimination
would be
an important contribution
to the strengthening
and
universalization
of detente; and; secondly, it is an
example of the struggle for the. inalienable right to
self-determination
without external .interference and
for the right to national independence’and
sovereignty.
This dual nature of the issue accounts for the fact that
the Palestinian question is the core of the Middle East
problem, which can be satisfactorily solved only .by
a comprehensive
political
settlement,
a settlement
which must comprise three decisive elements, namely,
withdrawal by Israel from all Arab territories occupied
since 1967; safeguarding for the Palestinian people of
all its inalienable and legitimate rights, including the
right to establish its own independent
State; and,
securing peaceful and independent
development,
within their recognized and internationally
guaranteed
borders, for all countries of the region, without
exception.

91. May I also take this opportunity
to tell Ambassador Sherer of the United States how shocked and
sorry we were to learn of the tragic deaths of Ambassador Meloy and Counsellor Waring, who lost their
lives in the line of duty.
92. Poland is not a newcomer to the world community which seeks with concerted voice to ensure the
full and unhampered exercise of the inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people. In fact, in sponsoring General Assembly resolution 3376 (XXX), which established the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, we proceeded
on the assumption that our long-standing efforts and
those of the entire socialist community,
of which we
are an inseparable part, have greatly added to the new
political quality and the pressing urgency in recent
years of the problem of Palestine. This new dimension
of the problem has found its undisputed expression in
our organization’s
change of attitude towards the
Palestinian question from a so-called humanitarian
approach to one of political significance par excellence, a change which placed the Palestinian
cause in
a new political context.

96. It is the considered view of the Government of
Poland that the most appropriate forum in which to
work out such a comprehensive settlement, based on
the relevant decisions of the Security Council and the
Genera1 Assembly,
is the international
machinery
provided by the Geneva Peace Conference, with the
participation of all interested parties, including full and
equal participation by the representatives of the Palestine Liberation Organization,
a solution advocated by
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and supported by a great number of States.
,

93. We are happy to see that the last two years have
witnessed a real awakening in the progressivelyminded segment of the United Nations membership
with regard to the problem of Palestine. General Assembly resolution 3236 (XXIX), to which my country
gave its unreserved support, represented an important
step towards the realization of the fundamental goals
of the people of Palestine. It was an historic achievement of both the United Nations and the Palestinian
people. That same cause was served by the adoption
of Genera1 Assembly resolution 3237 (XXIX), granting
the Palestine Liberation Organization observer status
in the United Nations, and thus allowing representatives of that organization,
the sole representative of

97. The Polish delegation has been pleased to note
that in submitting its report, the Committee
on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People took into consideration
all the important political factors of the situation, basing itself on the
resolutions of United Nations organs. Consequently,
the Council has received a document which represents
an important
contribution
to the settlement of the
Palestinian problem and a basis for the Council’s reaffirmation of the inalienable rights of the Arab people
of Palestine.
12

98. It is in this spirit that the Polish People’s Republic will continue to promote the cause of the Palestinian people within a comprehensive
settlement of
the Middle East problem. As the Seventh Congress of
the Polish United Workers’ Party, held recently, put
it in its foreign policy programme resolution:

100. In view of the limited number of places available at the Council table, I invite the representative
of Cyprus to take the place reserved for himat the side
of the Council chamber, on the understanding that he
will be invited to take a place at the Council table when
it is his turn to speak.
At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Rossides
(Cyprus)
took the place reserveci for him at the side of
the Council
chamber.

“We shall continue to give our resolute support
to the just demands of the Arab,nations to remove
the results of aggression and peacefully settle the
problems of the Middle East, with all the States of
the region guaranteed full security and the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
nation duly recognized.”

101. Mr. SHERER (United States of America): My
delegation would like to express its appreciation and
gratitude to the representatives
of Panama, Mauritania, Japan, Algeria, Oman and Poland for their
expressions of condolence with regard to the deaths
in Beirut of Ambassador Meloy and his two colleagues
from the American Embassy there.

99. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of the Council that I have just received a letter
from the representative of Cyprus in which he asks
to be invited to participate in the discussion. Aecordingly, I propose, in accordance with the usual practice
and with the consent of the Council, to invite the representative of Cyprus to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote under the prov.isions of Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

The meeting

rose at 5.45 p.m.
Notes

13
/

T,”

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans Its librairics et les agences dkpositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
1: Nations Unies. Section
des ventes, New York ou Gensve.

COMO

CONSEGUlR

PUBLICACIOhZS

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Nacioncs Unidas estin en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes del mundo. Cons&e
a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Seccibn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in U&d

Nations,

New York

‘00300

83-60801-February

1985-2.200
