s

UNITED
NATIONS

Security Council

Distr.
GENERAL
S/25746
10 May 1993
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

Following co~sultations with the members of the Security Council, the
President of the Council made the following statement, en behalf of the Council,
at its 3210th meeting, on 10 May 1993, in connection with the Council's
consideration of the item entitled "The situation in the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina":
"The Security Council, recalling its statement of 21 April 1993
(S/25646) concerning the atrocities and killings in areas north and west of
Sarajevo, expresses ita grave concern at the major new military offensive
launched by Bosnian Croat paramilitary units in the areas of Mostar,
Jablanica and Dreznica.
"the Security Council strongly condemns this major military offensive
launched by Bosnian Croat paramilitary units which is totally inconsistent
with the signatura of the Peace Plan fer the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina by the Bosnian Croat party. The Council demanda that the
attacks against the areas of Mostar, Jablanica and Dreznica cease
forthwith; that Bosnian Croat paramilitary units withdraw immediately from
the area and that all the parties strictly comply with their previous
commitments as well as the cease-fire agreed to today between the
Government of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Bosnian Croat
party.
"The Security Council also expresses its deep concern that the
UNPROFOR battalion in the area has been torced under fire to redeploy as a
result of this latest offensive and condemns the refusal of Bosnian Croat
paramilitary units to allow the presence of United Nations military
observers, in particular in the city of Mostar.
"The Security Council once again reiterates its demand that UNPROFOR
personnel be allowed unimpeded access throughout the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and, in this particular case, demanda that the Bosnian Croat
paramilitary units ensure the safety and security of ·uNPROFOR as well as
all United Nations personnel in the areas of Mostar, Jablanica and
Drezni~a.
In this connection, the Council expresses ita deep concern at
the increasing hostile attitude of Bosnian Croat paramilitary units towards
UNPROFOR personnel.

93-27201 (E)

100593

100593

/ ...

S/25746
English
Page 2

"The Security Council calls upon the Republic of Croatia, in
accordance with the commitments under the Zagreb agreement of 25 April 1993
(S/25659), to exert all its influence on the Bosnian Croat leadership and
paramilitary units with a view to ceasing immediately their attacks
particularly in the areas of Mostar, Jablanica and Dreznica.
It further
calls on the Republic of Croatia to adhere strictly to its obligations
under Security Council resolution 752, including putting an end to all
forros of interference and respecting the territorial integrity of the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
"The Security Council once again reaffirms the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the inacceptability of the acquisition of territory by
force and the practice of 'ethnic cleansing'.
"The Security Council remains seized of the matter and is ready to
consider further measures to ensure that all parties and others concerned
abide by their commitments and fully respect relevant Council decisions."
