A /76/PV.76

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

76

th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 7 June 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)
“Progress Declaration of the International Migration
Review Forum”.

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 13 (continued)

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/76/L.58?

Improving global road safety
Draft decision (A/76/L.61)
The President: The Assembly will now take action
on draft decision A/76/L.61, entitled “Participation
of non-governmental organizations, civil society
organizations, academic institutions and the private
sector in the high-level meeting on improving global
road safety”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft decision A/76/L.61?
Draft
decision
(decision 76/565).

A/76/L.61

was

adopted

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 13.
Agenda items 15 and 119 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/76/L.58)
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/76/L.58, entitled

Draft
resolution
(resolution 76/266).

A/76/L.58

*2237341*

adopted

The President: I would like to express my sincere
appreciation to Her Excellency Ms. Rabab Fatima,
Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the United
Nations, and His Excellency Mr. Olivier Maes, Permanent
Representative of Luxembourg to the United Nations,
who ably and patiently conducted the discussions and
complex negotiations in the informal consultations
on resolution 76/266. I am sure that members of the
Assembly join me in extending our sincere appreciation
to them. I also wish to thank the experts of those two
missions, Ms. Julie Oppermann and Mr. Nirupam Dev
Nath, for their work and contributions.
Before giving the floor for explanations of
position after adoption, may I remind delegations that
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Ebner (Austria): As a country that abstained
in the voting on the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly
and Regular Migration, Austria would like to recall,
as stated on 20 May and here again for the record,
that by not objecting to the adoption of the Progress
Declaration, Austria’s general position on the Global
Compact has not changed.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-37341 (E)

was

A/76/PV.76

Ms. Csók (Hungary): Hungary wishes to recall
the statement made by our delegation on 20 May at the
adoption of the Progress Declaration of the International
Migration Review Forum. In that regard, I would like
to reiterate that Hungary disassociates itself from the
full text of the Progress Declaration and does not take
part in the implementation of the Global Compact
for Migration.
Mr. Seah (Singapore): Singapore affirms the right
of migrants to travel safely through legal pathways
without being exploited by traffickers and smugglers.
We will continue to participate constructively in those
efforts. We believe that every country has a sovereign
right to determine the conditions under which migrants
may enter, reside in and take up employment in their
territories, in accordance with national laws and
international obligations. We also believe that all States
have a sovereign right to decide whether and how to
implement the operating principles and policy options
listed under the objectives of the Global Compact for
Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration. Singapore’s
view is that, while the Progress Declaration is a
commendable effort, it does not achieve the balance
necessary to satisfy our concerns. We are therefore not
in a position to reaffirm the Compact in its entirety
and reserve our position on paragraphs 2 and 59 of
the Progress Declaration. We nevertheless joined
the consensus on resolution 76/266, in the spirit of
international cooperation.
For the full details of our position on this matter,
I refer the Assembly to the explanation of position
delivered at the adoption of the Progress Declaration of
the International Migration Review Forum.
Mr. Nenov (Bulgaria): Allow me to refer to the
statement we delivered following the adoption of the
Progress Declaration of the International Migration
Review Forum. In that regard, I wish to reaffirm
Bulgaria’s position on the Global Compact for Safe,
Orderly and Regular Migration and the International
Migration Review Forum, recalling that my country
does not consider them or their review outcomes to
be binding.
Ms. Minale (Ethiopia): Consistent with Ethiopia’s
objection during the consideration of the Progress
Declaration and our recorded vote at the closing meeting
of the International Migration Review Forum, our
country rejects paragraph 12 of the Declaration, which
attempts to establish an unfounded nexus between
2/3

07/06/2022

migration and water scarcity. We underscore that the
Progress Declaration is not a consensus document.
Ethiopia’s intention remains to preserve the
carefully negotiated document of the Global Compact
for Migration. Paragraph 12 of the Progress Declaration
amounts to amending the language of the Global
Compact. Distorting the agreed formulation of the
Global Compact undermines its status. For that
reason, irrespective of the non-binding status of the
Progress Declaration, Ethiopia disassociates itself from
paragraph 12. Ethiopia will not accept that paragraph
as a basis for discussions or negotiations in any
future deliberations.
We request that this statement and those made
during the consideration of the Progress Declaration
on 20 May to be included in the official records of
this meeting.
Ms. Garbacz (Poland): The Polish Government
does not support the Global Compact for Safe,
Orderly and Regular Migration. As a consequence,
Poland disengaged from the International Migration
Review Forum, the aim of which was to review the
implementation of the Global Compact. For that
reason, Poland disassociates itself from the Progress
Declaration adopted at the Forum.
Members can further refer to Poland’s explanation
of position delivered at the closing segment of the
Forum on 20 May.
Ms. Ozolina (Latvia): My delegation would like to
recall that Latvia has not joined the Global Compact for
Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration. Our country does
not consider itself bound by the Progress Declaration
of the International Migration Review Forum, as
explained in the statement we delivered following its
adoption at the Forum.
Mrs. Kafková (Czech Republic): With regard to
resolution 76/266, the Czech Republic wishes to refer to
its explanation of position delivered at the adoption of
the Progress Declaration of the International Migration
Review Forum on 20 May.
Mr. Salah (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): My country’s
delegation would like to refer to its non-objection to
the adoption by consensus of resolution 76/266, on the
Progress Declaration of the International Migration
Review Forum at its first session. That non-objection
does not mean that our position has changed regarding
resolution 73/195, on the Global Compact for Safe,
22-37341

07/06/2022

Orderly and Regular Migration. My delegation did not
vote in favour of that resolution for the reasons explained
at the General Assembly meeting held on 19 December
2018 (see A/73/PV.61). Given that the same reasons still
prevail, my country’s delegation therefore disassociates
itself from the Progress Declaration and requests the
Secretariat to include this statement in the official
record of the meeting.
Mr. Ghadirkhomi (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation reiterated its position regarding the Progress
Declaration of the International Migration Review
Forum during the meeting convened on 20 May.
We would like to underscore those observations as
previously stated.
The President: We have heard from the last speaker
in explanation of position after adoption.

A/76/PV.76

The endorsement of the Progress Declaration by the
General Assembly is a landmark decision that reaffirms
the Global Compact as the only comprehensive and
sufficiently ambitious framework for international
migration governance. It is designed to holistically
improve the well-being of both migrants and host
communities as yet another indication of the collective
will and intention of the international community to
tackle the challenges around migration. The Declaration
is the result of an inclusive, open and transparent
process, which included extensive consultations with
Member States, relevant stakeholders and United
Nations entities. I thank everyone for their dedication
and contribution to the process.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda items 15 and 119.
The meeting rose at 3.20 p.m.

22-373413/3
