S/2017/379

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 May 2017
Original: English

Letter dated 28 April 2017 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1031 (1995), I have the honour to
transmit the fifty-first report on the implementation of the Peace Agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina, covering the period from 2 2 October 2016 to 21 April
2017, which I received from the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina
(see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the report to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

17-06630 (E)

100517

*1706630*

S/2017/379

Annex
Letter dated 25 April 2017 from the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina addressed to the Secretary-General
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1031 (1995) of 15 December 1995, in
which the Council requested the Secretary-General to submit to the Council reports
from the High Representative on the implementation of the Agreement, in
accordance with annex 10 to the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the conclusions of the London Peace Implementation
Conference of 8 and 9 December 1995, I transmit herewith the fifty -first report of
the High Representative for Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I would ask that the report be distributed to the members of the
Council for their consideration.
This is my seventeenth regular report to the Secretary-General since I assumed
the post of High Representative and European Union Special Representative, on
26 March 2009. The present report covers the period from 22 October 2016 to
21 April 2017.
Should you or a member of the Security Council require any information
beyond what is provided in the report or have any questions regarding its contents, I
would be pleased to provide you with that information.
(Signed) Valentin Inzko

2/26

17-06630

S/2017/379

Fifty-first report of the High Representative for
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina
Summary
The present report covers the period from 22 October 2016 to 21 April 2017.
There have been several challenges during this period, in particular concerning the
political situation that has developed in Bosnia and Herzegovina as a result of the
attempt to submit a request for revision of the judgment of the International Court of
Justice of 26 February 2007 in the case concerning Application of the Convention on
the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Bosnia and Herzegovina v.
Serbia and Montenegro), 1 and the activities of the Republika Srpska authorities to
implement the results of an unconstitutional referendum by adopting the Law on the
“Republika Srpska Day” and by observing the “Republika Srpska Day” holiday on
9 January.
The often turbulent political atmosphere notwithstanding, there were also a few
positive developments with regard to the country’s efforts towards integration with
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the European Union. These
included the adoption by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency of the long outstanding defence review in November, the formal receipt of the European Union
questionnaire by the authorities in December and the signing of the Protocol on the
adaptation of the Stabilization and Association Agreement with the European Union
in December, which put an end to a long process of negotiations between the
European Union and Bosnia and Herzegovina on the issue.
As the close of the 10-year window within which Bosnia and Herzegovina
could submit a request for revision of the above-mentioned judgment of the
International Court of Justice approached in February, tensions arose between the
Sarajevo-based parties, who supported the revision, and their Republika Srpska
counterparts, who opposed it, including the Republika Srpska “Alliance for
Changes” parties, which are part of the State-level coalition. The controversy centred
around whether the previous agent, Sakib Softic, retained the mandate to submit such
a request, as the Party of Democratic Action (SDA) and Bosniak war victims’
associations maintained, or whether further action from the Presidency would be
needed to renew his mandate, as the Republika Srpska-based parties asserted.
Ultimately, the Court decided on 8 March not to consider the re quest for revision
submitted by Mr. Softic on the grounds that no decision had been taken by the
competent authorities on behalf of Bosnia and Herzegovina to request the revision.
These developments led to strong public criticism of the Bosniak member of
the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency and President of SDA from the ruling
coalition in the Republika Srpska and strained relations between SDA and its Serb
coalition partners in the State-level Government. The controversy played out within
the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency, which did not hold any regular sessions
between 25 January and 11 April. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary
Assembly was also briefly affected, including the cancellation of at least one session
due to lack of a quorum. The authorities in Serbia also negatively viewed the
submitting of a request for revision, but they did not overreact.

17-06630

3/26

S/2017/379

Continued developments relating to the referendum held on 25 September in
the Republika Srpska in contravention of the decisions of the Cons titutional Court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina also hindered political progress during the reporting period.
In October, the Republika Srpska National Assembly adopted the Law on the
Republika Srpska Day, which was presented as the implementing act of the
referendum. In December, the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina
decided that the Assembly decision of 15 July to hold a referendum was
unconstitutional and annulled the referendum results.
On 9 January, despite the decisions of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina determining the unconstitutionality of observing the date of 9 January
as the “Republika Srpska Day” holiday, the Republika Srpska organized “Republika
Srpska Day” celebrations in Banja Luka. Events included a parade of members of the
police and civil protection services, sports associations and other groups, as well as
the participation of some Serb members of the Armed Forces of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
During the reporting period, positive cooperation between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Serbia at the Government level continued, notwithstanding the
overall negative political atmosphere within Bosnia and Herzegovina. In January, a
delegation of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina met in Belgrade
with a delegation of the Government of Serbia to discuss bilateral cooperation, after
which the Prime Minister of Serbia, Aleksandar Vučić, expressed clear support for
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In March,
Mr. Vučić visited Sarajevo to meet with other prime ministers from the region ahead
of the annual Western Balkans Summit to be held in July 2017. Positive regional
cooperation continued in April, with the meeting in Mostar of political leaders of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia.
Even as Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to progress towards Euro -Atlantic
integration and regional relations improve, the country’s persistent internal political
turmoil remains a concern to its immediate neighbours. In an interview on
29 November, the President of Croatia cited “the instability of Bosnia and
Herzegovina” as the greatest threat in the surrounding region, indicating that a
potential internal conflict in that country could very quickly become a regional
conflict. 2
The rhetoric advocating for the dissolution of Bosnia and Herzegovina
emanating from the Republika Srpska authorities, primarily the President of
Republika Srpska, has lessened since the imposition of sanctions against him by the
United States of America. Nevertheless, statements to that effect have been made
during the reporting period, 3 and the possibility of a referendum on independence
remains on the party platform of the ruling party in the Republika Srpska. Likewise,
Croat leaders continue to advocate for the reorganization of the country along ethnic
lines. 4

4/26

17-06630

S/2017/379

Under the authority vested in me under annex 10 of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace, I take this opportunity to reiterate that the entities have no
right to secede from Bosnia and Herzegovina and that the Framework Agreement
guarantees the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
the constitutional position of the entities.

1

International Court of Justice, judgment of 26 February 2007 in the case concerning Application of
the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Bosnia and
Herzegovina v. Serbia and Montenegro), Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 2007 , p. 43. In its judgment, the
Court found that Serbia was neither directly responsible for nor complicit in the July 1995
Srebrenica genocide. The Court ruled that Serbia had committed a breach of the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide by failing to prevent the genocide, for not
cooperating with the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in punishing the perpetrators,
in particular former Republika Srpska Army General Ratko Mladić, and for violating its obligation
to comply with the provisional measures ordered by the Court. As the only available le gal remedy,
the Statute of the Court envisages that a request for revision of the original judgment may be filed
when based on the discovery of some fact of such a nature as to be a decisive factor and which was
at the time of the judgment unknown to the party asking for the revision. An application for
revision must be made not more than six months from the discovery of the new fact, and no later
than 10 years following the date of judgment. The deadline for the submission of a request for
revision was on 26 February 2017.
2
Jen Judson, “Interview: President of Croatia Kolinda Grabar-Kitrovic”, Defense News,
29 November 2016.
3
“We are not adventurers. But we do not exclude organizing a referendum on the status [of the
Republika Srpska] in the event that there is not a satisfactory solution for us.” The President of
Republika Srpska, Milorad Dodik, reported in Nezavisne Novine and other media from TASS,
2 March 2017.
4
“One of the ways to organize Bosnia and Herzegovina is clearly one in which Croats ha ve their
entity. That too can be an element of equality. I am personally working towards the organization of
Bosnia and Herzegovina comprised of four territorial units …” Croat member of Bosnia and
Herzegovina Presidency and President of HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina, Dragan Čović, N1 TV
interview, 14 December 2016.

17-06630

5/26

S/2017/379

I. Introduction
1.
This is my seventeenth periodic report to the Secretary-General since
assuming the post of High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina in 2009. It
provides a narrative description of progress made towards attaining goals outlined
in previous reports, registers factual developments, logs citations relevant to the
reporting period and provides my impartial assessment of the implementation of key
areas falling under my mandate. I have focused my efforts on addressing those
areas, in line with my responsibility to uphold the civilian aspects of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace. In that respect, I have consistently encouraged the
Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities to make progress on the five objectives and two
conditions necessary for the closure of the Office of the High Representative and
have worked to preserve measures that have been undertaken previously to
implement the Framework Agreement.
2.
I continue to direct my energies towards delivering my mandate as defined
under annex 10 of the General Framework Agreement for Peace and relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. In addition, my Office fully supports the efforts
of the European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) to assist
Bosnia and Herzegovina in moving towards closer integration with those bodies.

II. Political update
A.

General political environment
3.
Following a period of turbulence, the political situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has generally stabilized, with some positive developments, especially
in terms of regional relations. However, the overall dynamic whereby leading
politicians focus excessively on ethnically divisive issues, while demonstrating a
lack of urgency in addressing the need for real reforms, cannot be ignored.
4.
The situation with regard to the rule of law in the country continues to
deteriorate. Corruption is a serious problem, while authorities at all levels regularly
disregard or openly reject the decisions of courts. For example, the Republika
Srpska authorities continue to flaunt the constitutional order and the rule of law, not
just ignoring decisions of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina on
the “Republika Srpska Day” holiday, but also adopting acts that implement the
unconstitutional referendum and its annulled results. The Republika Srpska has also
disregarded the judgment of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Stat e Court concerning the
registration of defence property.
5.
On 17 January, the Office of Foreign Assets Control of the United States
Department of the Treasury imposed travel and financial sanctions against the
President of Republika Srpska, Milorad Dodik (Alliance of Independent Social
Democrats (SNSD)), noting in a press release of 17 January that he has played a
central “role in defying the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina in
violation of the rule of law … [and] poses a significant risk of actively obstructing
[the implementation of the Dayton Accords].”
6.
In the Federation, Croat parties continue to advocate for the “federalization” of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which increasingly appears to imply the further ethnic
division of the country into three to four “federal units”, one of which would have a
Croat majority.
7.
Equally troubling, the Bosniak member of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Presidency ignored the entreaties of his fellow Presidency members regarding the

6/26

17-06630

S/2017/379

role of the Presidency, and proceeded with his attempt to request a revision of the
judgment of the International Court of Justice of 26 February 2007 in the case
concerning Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide (Bosnia and Herzegovina v. Serbia and Montenegro), damaging
relations within a key Bosnia and Herzegovina institution.
8.
Increasingly, the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina appear unable to act
even in their own self-interest in a win-win situation, such as to address the
commitments made under the International Monetary Fund (IMF) Extended Fund
Facility arrangement with Bosnia and Herzegovina. The completion of the first
review of the performance of Bosnia and Herzegovina under the IMF Extended
Fund Facility arrangement, and the second IMF disbursement to the country, are
still awaiting the completion of several measures at the State and Federation levels.
The failure to meet the IMF deadline for the completion of the first quarterly
review, which allows for the release of the second tranche of funds, will additionally
increase fiscal pressures on the country.
9.
Even gains in regional relations appeared tenuous at times during the reporting
period. On 31 October, the Bosnia and Herzegovina State Investigation and
Protection Agency arrested 10 former members of the wartime Croat Defence
Council on suspicion of war crimes committed against Serbs between April 1992
and July 1993 in the Orasje area. Those who were arrested held dual citizenship of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia, which provoked reactions from neighbouring
Croatia. The incident also served to highlight the lingering divisions within Bosnia
and Herzegovina, given that the Croat member of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Presidency condemned the arrests, while the Serb and Bosniak members expressed
surprise at the reaction from Croatia and insisted that the matter was within the
jurisdiction of the judicial institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The indictments
against nine individuals for crimes against humanity and war crimes against
prisoners of war were ultimately confirmed.

B.

Decisions of the High Representative during the reporting period
10. Notwithstanding continued challenges to the rule of law and the General
Framework Agreement for Peace during the reporting period, I continued to refrain
from using my executive powers in line with the policy of the Steering Board of the
Peace Implementation Council to emphasize “local ownership” over international
decision-making.

C.

Five objectives and two conditions for closure of the Office of the
High Representative
Progress on objectives
11. Over the past six months, the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities made
limited progress towards meeting the outstanding requirements of the five
objectives and two conditions set by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council as prerequisites for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative.
Defence property and State property
12. On 24 November, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency adopted the longawaited Defence Review, as well as the accompanying decision on the size,
structure and location of the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina, pursuant to

17-06630

7/26

S/2017/379

which the number of prospective defence locations is to be reduced from 63 to 57.
The term “prospective defence property” refers to a defined list of immovable assets
which are needed by the Armed forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina and should be
registered to the Bosnia and Herzegovina State in line with the Agreement on
Succession Issues, the Law on Defence and relevant decisions of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Presidency. In addition to being part of the conditions under the NATO
membership action plan for the participation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, progress
on the issue is one of the outstanding objectives set as a prerequisite for the
transition of the Office of the High Representative.
13. Efforts to register prospective property under the ownership of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina State continued during the reporting period, but the number of
registered defence locations remains at 24, all located on the territory of the
Federation. In recent months, the completion of the registration of the remaining
properties located in the Federation has slowed considerably, primarily owing to
technical and legal (rather than political) problems.
14. In the Republika Srpska, the process of registration of prospective defence
property remains blocked due to political obstruction, as entity authorities have
rejected several registration requests. The most prominent e xample is the case of the
prospective defence location “Veliki Zep” in the municipality of Han Pijesak, in
which the Republika Srpska Administration for Geodetic and Property Affairs and
other authorities refuse to implement the final and binding July 2016 verdict of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Court, which determined that the ownership of the property
was that of the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina and instructed the geodetic
authorities to conduct the respective registration.
15. Instead of abiding by the Court’s instruction, the Republika Srpska
Administration for Geodetic and Property-related Affairs recently rejected the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Public Attorney’s request for registration, claiming that,
there are no conditions to implement the ruling of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Court in this case. Instead, the State has been directed to initiate a court case before
the District Court of the Republika Srpska, a clear attempt by Republika Srpska
authorities to bring the case concerning Han Pijesak within the jurisdiction of its
own judicial system rather than the State-level judiciary. In the meantime, following
the final and binding second-instance verdict of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Court,
the Republika Srpska submitted to the same court a request for re vision of the
verdict. The procedure is ongoing, but it is important to note that the extraordinary
legal remedy of revision does not stay the enforcement of the court ’s final judgment.
16. Progress on the broader issue of how State property assets are to be
apportioned between different levels of government remains elusive. Pursuant to the
ruling of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina of 13 July 2012, there
is a “true necessity and positive obligation of [Bosnia and Herzegovina] to resolve
this issue as soon as possible”. More concretely, comprehensive State-level
legislation must be adopted where the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as the
titleholder and owner of State property, would regulate the issue of apportionment
and distribution of State property assets by taking into consideration the interests
and needs of the entities.
Fiscal sustainability
17. The Office of the High Representative continued to follow, analyse and inform
its international partners on developments relating to fiscal sustainability, including
developments in the Bosnia and Herzegovina Fiscal Council and the Governing
Board of the Indirect Taxation Authority of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

8/26

17-06630

S/2017/379

18. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Fiscal Council held two sessions during the
reporting period. On 22 November, the Fiscal Council and the IMF mission reached
a staff-level agreement on the supplementary letter of intent, including measures
required to complete the first quarterly review of the country’s progress under the
Extended Fund Facility arrangement approved in September. The authorities have
failed to complete the agreed measures to date, thereby delaying consideration of
the first review by the IMF Executive Board and the second IMF disbursement to
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The 14 March Bosnia and Herzegovina Fiscal Council
session only addressed technical issues of relevance for its activities.
19. The Governing Board of the Indirect Taxation Authority met seven times
during the reporting period, which was more frequently than i n the previous period,
but with less substantive results. Continued disputes between the finance ministers
and experts who sit together on the Board hampered its decision -making. Also
evident were disagreements over issues of relevance to the IMF and the E uropean
Bank for Reconstruction and Development, as well as continued arguments over
outstanding inter-entity debt settlements based on past indirect tax revenue
allocations, which cumulatively show a Republika Srpska debt to the Federation of
BAM 27.8 million.
Brcko District
20. Following the confirmation of the local elections held in October 2016, parties
in the Brcko District quickly negotiated a majority, electing a mayor at the inaugural
session of the Brcko District Assembly, on 15 November, and t he new Brcko
District government was fully operational by 16 January. In view of Bosnia and
Herzegovina path towards integration with the European Union, a new Department
for European Integration was created.
21. My Office continued to provide expert assistance to the Brcko District
authorities, at their request, in preparing by-laws and addressing other issues needed
for the implementation of four key pieces of financial legislation adopted in June
2016. The legislation is intended to further integrate the Brcko District with the
legal system of Bosnia and Herzegovina, facilitate the implementation of the Bosnia
and Herzegovina economic programme negotiated with the IMF and empower the
District with instruments for increasing fiscal transparency, fighting t he grey
economy and generating revenues. My Office also provided support to the Brcko
District Finance Directorate in preparing a new law on budget. The Brcko District
has not yet adopted its 2017 budget and is functioning under a temporary financing
decision.
22. In October, Vitomir Popovic voluntarily withdrew from the post of Arbitrator
appointed by Republika Srpska in the Arbitral Tribunal for Dispute over the
Inter-Entity Boundary in the Brcko Area and was replaced in November by Sinisa
Karan, who previously headed the Republika Srpska Referendum Commission.
23. After the two arbitrators appointed by the Federation and the Republika Srpska
failed to agree on the appointment of the replacement for former Presiding
Arbitrator Roberts Owen, who passed away in March 2016, the President of the
International Court of Justice announced, on 13 January 2017, the appointment of
United States Ambassador John Clint Williamson. Mr. Williamson visited Bosnia
and Herzegovina for the first time in his new capacity on 7 and 8 March.
24. Although observing 9 January as the “Republika Srpska Day” holiday was
determined unconstitutional by virtue of decisions of the Constitutional Court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the holiday was nonetheless observed in Brcko District,
but on 10 January, with a reception hosted by the President of Republika Srpska,
Mr. Dodik.
17-06630

9/26

S/2017/379

25. Although the decision on Amendments to the Decision on Protection of
Civilian Victims of War entered into force on 18 June 2015, correcting
discriminatory provisions for the victims of rape and sexual abuse in Brcko, the
decision has thus far not been implemented.
Entrenching the rule of law
26. My Office continued to provide support to the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities in the implementation of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Law on Foreigners
and Law on Asylum, including assistance in the development of the rulebooks
necessary for implementing the legislation.

D.

Challenges to the General Framework Agreement for Peace
Challenges to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina
27. During the reporting period, there were numerous statements made which
challenged the territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, primarily by officials
from SNSD, the ruling party in the Republika Srpska. The President of Republika
Srpska, Mr. Dodik, who is also the leader of SNSD, continued to be the most
frequent and vocal exponent of the dissolution of Bosnia and Herzegovina. 5
Calls for redrawing of internal boundaries
28. Some Croat leaders continued to call for a new administrative and territorial
organization of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which would result in the formation of a
“federal unit” with a Croat majority. At the meeting of the Croat People ’s Assembly
Congress held on 28 January, the President of the Main Council of the Assembly,
Božo Ljubić, reaffirmed that goal as “the permanent aspiration of Croats in Bosnia
and Herzegovina”. 6
29. On 17 November, the Croat People’s Assembly organized a commemoration of
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the founding of the breakaway Croatian Republic of

__________________
5

“You cannot expect to resolve all national issues of other peoples in the Balkans, and yet to leave
the Serb people fragmented in several countries, and to try to unilaterally impose a solution in
each of those countries that is in its essence anti-Serb. … Hypothetically speaking, the territory
which would be organized so that Bosniaks have their state in which they are the dominant
majority, Serbs have theirs in which they are the dominant majority, Croats theirs, Albanians
theirs, seems to have the potential to be the best possible solution for long-term stability.”
Mr. Dodik, Sputnik, 6 March 2017. “If Kosovo becomes a full-fledged member of international
organizations like the United Nations, then the Republika Srpska will also take steps to that end. ”
Mr. Dodik, Izvestija interview, 6 March 2017. “Bosnia-Herzegovina cannot survive the future
with the competences it snatched from Republika Srpska … I think that the decades to come, not
necessarily 2018, are the time when the Serb national issue must be seen in tegrally.” Mr. Dodik,
Nezavisne novine/Sputnik, 5 March 2017. “In 1992 [Republika Srpska] was formed out of the
need of our people to live free, in freedom, to have their state, and that that state in time we
dream of joining and become a single part together with mother Serbia.” Mr. Dodik, speech on
the occasion of 9 January 2017. “The Republika Srpska is determined to assert the original
Dayton powers and position. If that is not possible, nobody will keep us in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.” Mr. Dodik, Faktor.ba, 9 January 2017. “This Bosnia is a country which has no
chance to succeed … and I am trying for that to be our dominant process, that we peacefully
separate along entity lines. We lay down a state line and in that way we resolve and then we turn
towards cooperation.” Mr. Dodik, N1/Beta, 8 January 2017.
6
“If Bosnia and Herzegovina wishes to become self-sustainable, then its administrative and
territorial reorganization is necessary, so as to include a federal unit with Croat majority. And
that remains a permanent aspiration of the Croat people in Bosnia and Herzegovina. ” Božo
Ljubić, Ljubuški.net, 28 January 2017.
10/26

17-06630

S/2017/379

Herzeg-Bosnia (previously the Croatian Community of Herzeg -Bosnia). At the
event, various speakers commended the concept of the Croatian Republic of
Herzeg-Bosnia, asserted that it was still valid and vowed that there would be no
Bosnia and Herzegovina without the Croatian Republic of Herzeg -Bosnia. 7 Some
Croat leaders continue efforts to rehabilitate the image of the Croatian Republic of
Herzeg-Bosnia, many of whose leaders were indicted and sentenced for war crimes
by the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
Republika Srpska National Assembly awards war criminals
30. On 24 October, the Republika Srpska National Assembly marked the twenty fifth anniversary of the withdrawal of Serb delegates from the Parliamentary
Assembly of the former Socialist Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
formation of the Assembly of Serb People in Bosnia and Herzegovina. On the
occasion, the current Republika Srpska National Assembly leadership gave special
awards to all former Speakers of the Republika Srpska National Assembly and
members of the first Republika Srpska Presidency, including convicted war
criminals Biljana Plavšić and Momčilo Krajišnik, as well as Radovan Ka radžić, who
was convicted in the first instance for crimes against humanity, genocide and war
crimes, and to Nikola Koljevic.
31. The event resulted in condemnations by various international organizations
and demonstrated the continued reluctance or inability of the Republika Srpska
leadership to break with the past.
Implementation of the referendum in Republika Srpska on observing
9 January as the “Republika Srpska Day” holiday
32. As detailed in my special report on a referendum in Republika Srpska against
the State Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina decisions, which I
submitted with my previous regular report (S/2016/911), the Republika Srpska
authorities held a referendum on 25 September 2016 concerning the support for
observing 9 January as the date of the “Republika Srpska Day” holiday, despite the
interim measure of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina of
17 September suspending the decision of the Republika Srpska National Assembly
of 15 July to hold a referendum pending a final decision of the Constitutional Court
concerning the aforementioned National Assembly decision.
33. On 25 October, the Republika Srpska National Assembly passed the Law on
the Republika Srpska Day, intended to implement the results of the referendum
conducted in violation of the decisions of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The law was subject to a vital national interest procedure raised by the
Bosniak Caucus in the Republika Srpska Council of Peoples.
34. On 1 December, the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina granted
the request of the Bosniak member of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency, Bakir
Izetbegović, and others “to resolve the constitutional dispute with the Entity of
Republika Srpska” in connection with the Republika Srpska National Assembly
decision of 15 July 2016 to conduct the referendum on “Republika Srpska Day” on
25 September 2016. The Court held that the Assembly decision was not in
conformity with article I (2) and article VI (5) of the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, since it defined the referendum as on a question that pertained to a
__________________
7

17-06630

“Had it not been for the [Croatian Community of Herzeg -Bosnia], we would have met the destiny
of Vukovar, and Croats would not exist in Bosnia and Herzegovina. That is why the [Croatian
Community of Herzeg-Bosnia] was created.” President of HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina/Croat
People’s Assembly, Dragan Čović, Mostar, 17 November 2016.
11/26

S/2017/379

matter already decided by the final and binding decision of the Court, which all
public authorities and institutions are obliged to respect.
35. The Court also annulled the referendum results on the grounds that the
referendum was held on the basis of a decision on a referendum that the Court had
declared incompatible with the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovi na and
contrary to the Court’s order set forth in its interim measure of 17 September 2016.
36. On 22 December, the Constitutional Court of the Republika Srpska decided
that the vital national interest of the Bosniak people was not violated by the Law on
the Republika Srpska Day. The law was published in the Republika Srpska Official
Gazette on 27 December 2016 and entered into force.
37. On 9 January, despite the decision by the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina that marking the date of 9 January as the “Republika Srpska Day”
holiday was unconstitutional, the authorities organized “Republika Srpska Day”
celebrations in Banja Luka. Events included a parade of members of the police and
civil protection services, sports associations and other groups, as well as the
participation of the Third Infantry Regiment of the Armed Forces of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which was present at the request of the Serb member of the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Presidency, Mladen Ivanić.
38. By organizing the referendum in direct contravention of the decisions of the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina and by implementing it, the
Republika Srpska affirmed its continued policy of disregarding the constitutional
order as set forth in annex 4 to the General Framework Agreement for Peace and the
authority of the State-level judiciary. By rejecting the final and binding decisions of
the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and in particular the Court ’s
decision ordering interim measures, the Republika Srpska authorities set a precedent
for the misuse of referendums to attempt to justify violating their obligations under
the Framework Agreement, irrespective of any eventual decision of the
Constitutional Court.
Decision of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
“Ljubić case”
39. On 1 December the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina adopted a
decision in the so-called “Ljubić case”, which concerns the request of the current
President of the Main Council of the Croat People’s Assembly, Mr. Ljubić, for a
review of the constitutionality of the provisions of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Election Law pertaining to the election of delegates to the Federation House of
Peoples. The Constitutional Court established that several challenged pro visions of
the Bosnia and Herzegovina Election Law are not in conformity with article I (2)
of the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and ordered the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly to harmonize those provisions with the
Constitution no later than six months from the date of delivery of its decision. The
Court’s decision was published on 6 January and sent to the Parliamentary
Assembly. Consequently, the deadline to harmonize the unconstitutional provisions
is in early July.
40. The decision in the “Ljubić case” includes political elements and
considerations and raises several difficult legal questions. Its effects cannot be
precisely predicted and depend on what the key political stakeholders and
authorities in charge of its implementation agree upon. Based on early reactions to
the decision, it is difficult to see how the Federation -based parties might reconcile
their conflicting views on its implementation.

12/26

17-06630

S/2017/379

41. While the President of SDA, the main Bosniak party, Mr. Izetbegović,
expressed the view that minor technical amendments to the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Election Law should be adopted to reflect the exact wording of the Constitution of
the Federation, the President of the Croatian Democratic Union of Bosnia and
Herzegovina (HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina), the main Croat party, Dragan Čović,
stated that provisions of the Law that affect the Federation House of Peoples must
be adopted in accordance with the principles set forth in the “Ljubić case” and that
the next indirect elections to the Federation House of Peoples, to be held subsequent
to the 2018 general elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina, cannot be held without the
adoption of appropriate amendments to the Law.
42. The opposing views, particularly between HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina and
SDA officials, centre on whether the elections to be held in 2018 for the Federation
House of Peoples can be carried out should the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Parliamentary Assembly fail to amend the unconstitutio nal provisions of the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Election Law and should the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina consequently repeal the provisions deemed unconstitutional. The issue
is even more important considering that, should elections to the F ederation House of
Peoples not be held, it would be impossible to elect delegates to the Bosnia and
Herzegovina House of Peoples, members of the Federation Presidency, and a new
Federation Government subsequent to the elections in 2018.
43. Moreover, looking at the broader potential implications of the decision, with
regard to the implementation of the judgments of the European Court of Human
Rights in the cases concerning Sejdić and Finci, Zornic, and Pilav, conflicting
views among certain political stakeholders emerged as to whether the principle of
proportional and legitimate representation developed by the Constitutional Court in
the “Ljubić case” would also have an impact on the rules concerning the elections of
the members of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency.
44. My Office will continue to closely follow the developments regarding the
implementation of the decision in the “Ljubić case”.
Issue of foreign fighters
45. According to various Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities, Bosnia and
Herzegovina recorded no new departures of its citizens to join Islamic State of Iraq
and Levant (ISIL) during the reporting period. The Office of the Prosecutor in
Bosnia and Herzegovina continued its activities relating to the investigation and
prosecution of citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina who had left or planned to leave
Bosnia and Herzegovina with the aim of joining ISIL, despite having knowledge of
the 30 May 2013 press release of the Security Council indicating that the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities had approved the listing of ISIL as
a terrorist organization.

III. State-level institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina
A.

Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency
46. During the reporting period, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presid ency was
affected by the political fallout from wider controversies, in particular the attempt to
submit a request for revision to the International Court of Justice described above.
47. The revelation that the International Court of Justice had communica ted its
position to the disputed Bosnia and Herzegovina agent, in May 2016, that a request

17-06630

13/26

S/2017/379

for revision of the judgment would require a new formal authorization by the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Presidency transformed a controversial issue into a political
scandal. The Chair of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency, Mr. Ivanić, and other
Serb political leaders insisted that Mr. Izetbegović had acted unilaterally and outside
the scope of the Bosnia and Herzegovina institutions and that he should bear the
political and possibly legal responsibility. Mr. Ivanić also stated that the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Presidency might never again function normally.
48. Several Bosniak political leaders who had supported Mr. Izetbegović ’s efforts
called for his resignation, while the President of the National Democratic
Movement, a Republika Srpska political party, Mr. Čović, submitted criminal
complaints against Mr. Izetbegović and the disputed Bosnia and Herzegovina agent
with the Office of the Prosecutor in Bosnia and Herzegovina. To date, the Office has
confirmed that it has only opened a case against the disputed Bosnia and
Herzegovina agent.
49. In a welcome development, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency resumed
its work on 11 April, discussing several accumulated items and decisions.
50. Among the notable decisions taken by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency
during the reporting period was the adoption of the defence review on 24 November.
On 20 December, the Presidency submitted the candidacy of Bosnia and
Herzegovina for membership on the World Heritage Committee of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. In addition, the
Presidency adopted a decision extending the mandate of the Armed Forces of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in NATO-led peacekeeping operations in Afghanistan, and
gave initial support to the possible contribution of the Armed Forces to the Common
Security and Defence Policy of the European Union through the engagement of 40
persons in an European Union training mission in the Ce ntral African Republic.
51. On 17 November, the Serb member of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency,
Mr. Ivanić, assumed the Chair of the Presidency from the Bosniak member,
Mr. Izetbegović.

B.

Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina
52. The Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina continued to meet
regularly during the reporting period, holding 21 regular sessions and four
extraordinary sessions, focusing with some success on issues relating to the path of
Bosnia and Herzegovina towards integration with the European Union and
addressing technical and economic topics. At the same time, the overall legislative
output of the sessions was relatively small.
53. The Council of Ministers adopted only two new laws, the 2017 State Budget
and the Law on Insuring Bank Deposits in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and eight sets
of amendments to existing legislation, including a set of amendments required by
the IMF letter of intent, including amendments to the Law on Excise Tax, the Law
on Payments to the Single Account and the Law on the Indirect Taxation System.
54. The Council of Ministers adopted its work plan for 2017 and its action plan for
2017 on 1 February, including nearly 100 development -investment projects relating
to European Union accession and fulfilling requirements from the Partnership for
Peace and further enhancing regional and international cooperation. The action plan
envisages the adoption of more than 40 laws and 650 decisions, reports, strategies
and international treaties on the agenda of the Council of Ministers in 2017.
55. The Council of Ministers also established an inter-agency working group to
analyse and propose modalities, including new technology in the electoral process

14/26

17-06630

S/2017/379

in Bosnia and Herzegovina. At the same time, the inter -agency working group
established in 2015 to prepare changes to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Election Law
and the Law on Political Party Financing, has continued its work in 2017.
56. The Council of Ministers engaged in regional cooperation, leading a Bosnia
and Herzegovina delegation in a visit to Belgrade on 23 January to discuss potential
improvements in bilateral relations.

C.

Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly
57. During the reporting period, the work of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Parliamentary Assembly was lackluster, with both houses bogged down by boycotts
or threats of boycotts by delegates from Republika Srpska parties and an unstable
ruling majority coalition, resulting in lower output. Sessions often became the stage
for politicking between various parties.
58. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly was affected by the
political crisis that resulted from the request for revision of the judgment of the
International Court of Justice of 26 February 2007 in Bosnia and Herzegovina v.
Serbia and Montenegro. In February and March, sessions of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina House of Representatives and the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of
Peoples were disrupted by the threat of Republika Srpska delegates that they would
not attend, because they disputed the legitimacy of the request for revision. In the
session of the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Representatives on 7 March, even
the Bosnia and Herzegovina coalition partner the “Alliance for Changes” refused to
participate in voting on any issue. SNSD delegates have repeatedly boycotted
sessions of the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Representatives since December
over the issue of the rotation of SDA delegate Sefik Dzaferovic to the House of
Representatives Speaker position and their accusations of his involvement in war
crimes.
59. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly also has yet to adopt the
excise and banking deposit insurance-related legislation required for the completion
of the first review under the IMF Extended Fund Facility arrangement. At the end of
March, the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina adopted the legislation
and sent it to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly in an urgent
procedure to meet the 7 April deadline set by IMF. At its session on 5 April, the
House of Representatives rejected the urgent procedure, after which the Council of
Ministers resubmitted the same proposals, again with a request for considering it
under urgent procedure. The House of Peoples adopted the le gislation on 7 April,
whereas the House of Representatives declined to consider the legislation under
urgent procedure at its session on 20 April. Consequently, the laws remain among
the outstanding requirements delaying the disbursement of the second tran che of
funds under the IMF Extended Fund Facility arrangement.
60. The Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Representatives held only eight regular
sessions and one urgent session during the reporting period, and the Bosnia and
Herzegovina House of Peoples held only five regular sessions and one urgent
session. The parliament adopted three new laws and five changes to existing
legislation.
61. The parliament ultimately rejected the proposed removal of Deputy Minister
of Defence of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Sead Jusić, over his role in approving the
participation of members of the Third Infantry Regiment of the Armed Forces of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in the “Republika Srpska Day” holiday events in Banja
Luka on 9 January.

17-06630

15/26

S/2017/379

IV. Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
Federation coalition developments
62. During the reporting period, the Federation Government worked fairly
consistently, holding 25 regular sessions and 19 extraordinary sessions. However,
frequent disagreements over proposed legislation plagued the ruling SDA-HDZ
Bosnia and Herzegovina-Party for a Better Future coalition, disrupting the
functioning of parliament. Although both Houses of the Federation Parliament went
several months without holding sessions, owing primarily to disputes over proposed
amendments to the Law on Lotteries and amendments to restore benefits to some
6,000 Croat war veterans, the Federation Parliament adopted a total of seven new
laws and 12 amendments to existing laws during the reporting period.
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina dismisses the challenge of the
Republika Srpska National Assembly against the constitutionality of laws
adopted in the Federation House of Peoples
63. In October, 30 delegates in the Republika Srpska National Assembly submitted
to the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina a request for review of the
constitutionality of all laws and by-laws adopted by the Federation Parliament since
the 2014 general elections, arguing that the Federation House of Peoples was not
fully constituted because only 13 of 17 Serb delegates had been appointed and that
the Serb caucus was unable to invoke the mechanism for protection of vital national
interest in decision-making. On 19 January, the Constitutional Court dismissed the
request, clarifying that, under the Constitution of the Federation and the Election
Law, there were no provisions that prevented the Federation House of Peoples from
being constituted before all delegates were elected and that the Serb caucus in the
Federation House of Peoples had not been prevented from invoking the vital
national interest mechanism.
Federation Constitutional Court strikes down amendments to the Law on Civil
Service in the Federation
64. On 7 December, the Federation Constitutional Court decided that amendme nts
to the Law on Civil Service in the Federation adopted in October 2015 were not in
accordance with the Constitution of the Federation.
Stolac repeat elections
65. On 19 February, the Stolac municipality, where the 2 October 2016 local
elections had been suspended owing to several incidents, successfully conducted
repeat elections without further incident. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Central
Election Commission removed several candidates from the ballot over the earlier
incidents, including the only Bosniak mayoral candidate. The Central Election
Commission has confirmed the election results, and the Stolac municipal council
has been partially constituted. The HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina candidate won the
mayoral race. At the inaugural session of the municipal council, a deputy speaker
from HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina was elected, and negotiations are ongoing about
the position of speaker.
Federation House of Representatives adopts resolution against
“ethnic federalization”
66. In a 21 March extraordinary session of the Federation House of
Representatives, an SDP delegate proposed a resolution condemning calls for the
further federalization of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Croat delegates in the Federation
16/26

17-06630

S/2017/379

House of Representatives called the SDP-proposed resolution an attack against
Croats and left the session, with the remaining 70 delegates unanimously adopting
the resolution.
67. Subsequently, Croat political parties called the adopted resolution “anti -Dayton”
and “anti-European Union”, claiming that it promoted a “unitary and nationalistic
Bosniak agenda”. In an open letter of 23 March, the Croat People’s Assembly
warned that if Bosniak delegates did not revoke the resolution, the Assembly would
launch unspecified measures. The resolution has not been revoked, and there have
been no further actions.
Two schools under one roof in Jajce
68. In March, Central Bosnia Canton authorities moved forward with the
foundation of a secondary school in which Bosniak and Croat students, who have
heretofore attended classes together, would attend classes separately according to
their national (i.e., ethnic) curricula. This marks the first attempt to found such a
school, a so-called “two schools under one roof”, in the Federation in nearly
15 years. Authorities insist that they founded the school according to requests from
the local community, but some Bosniak and Croat students, parents and teachers
have protested the decision. On a positive note, it seems that some of the authorities
previously advocating for the foundation of a new school may be exploring ways to
concentrate their efforts on finding a solution within the current school system.
No agreement to enable local elections in Mostar
69. Regrettably, no political agreement was reached during the reporting period to
enact amendments to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Election Law that would enable
the holding of local elections in the City of Mostar. In a communiqué of
7 December 2016, the Political Directors of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council again “deplored the utter failure of the political parties over
the past six years to meet their obligations to implement the ruling of the
[Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina] on the electoral system for
Mostar” and “called upon all parties, in particular SDA and [HDZ Bosnia and
Herzegovina], to reach a compromise to allow voters in Mostar to exercise their
basic right to vote”.

V. Republika Srpska
70. During the reporting period, the ruling coalition led by SNSD remained
functional, with the Republika Srpska Government meeting regularly. The
Republika Srpska National Assembly held four regular and four special sessions,
and adopted 10 new laws and 19 sets of amendments to existing laws.
71. There are two major trends affecting the political situation Republika Srpska,
both of which have perpetuated the ongoing crisis in the country. The first was
caused by rising tensions between Sarajevo and Banja Luka over two issues,. the
referendum on the 9 January “Republika Srpska Day” holiday and the attempted
request for revision of the judgment of the International Court of Justic e of
26 February 2007 in Bosnia and Herzegovina v. Serbia and Montenegro). The
second trend has been the constant political power struggle between the ruling
coalition in Republika Srpska led by SNSD and its president, President of Republika
Srpska Mr. Dodik, and the opposition parties gathered under the “Alliance for
Changes”.

17-06630

17/26

S/2017/379

72. In October, the Republika Srpska National Assembly decided to give special
awards to former Assembly Speakers and members of the first Republika Srpska
Presidency, including convicted war criminals Momčilo Krajišnik and Biljana
Plavšić, as well as Radovan Karadžić, who has been convicted of genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes at first instance by the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia.
73. Republika Srpska authorities also decided to continue with observing the
“Republika Srpska Day” holiday on 9 January, despite the ruling of the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina that the date (not the holiday itself)
is unconstitutional. The President of Republika Srpska, Mr. Dodik used the
ceremony marking the date as an opportunity to reiterate his position on the
dissolution of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
74. Reacting to the attempt to submit a request for revision of the judgment of the
International Court of Justice of 26 February 2007 in Bosnia and Herzegovina v.
Serbia and Montenegro, on 27 February, the Republika Srpska National Assembly
adopted a set of wide-ranging conclusions condemning the effort and seeking to
block decision-making at the State level except on issues of importance to the
Republika Srpska. Notably, the “Alliance for Changes” parties indicated that they
would not observe the latter.
75. Several weeks after the municipal elections held in Bosnia and Herzegovina in
2016, the President of Republika Srpska, Mr. Dodik, stated that the Republika
Srpska Government would no longer support municipalities run by the Republika
Srpska opposition parties. In turn, on 14 November, the “Alliance for Changes”
parties condemned Mr. Dodik’s statement as illegal and announced they would no
longer cooperate with his party, SNSD.
76. On a positive note, on 9 March, the Republika Srpska and Federation
Governments held a joint session in Banja Luka to discuss the reform agenda for
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the implementation of the IMF Extended Fund Facility
arrangement, focusing on implementing measures aimed at reducing the gray
economy. Generally speaking, the cooperation between the entity governments, led
by Prime Minister of Republika Srpska, Željka Cvij anović, and Prime Minister of
the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Fadil Novalić, could be characterized as
positive and pragmatic.
Non-cooperation with the High Representative
77. On 12 January, the Republika Srpska Government decided to cease al l
communication and contact with my Office over my alleged comparison of the
“Republika Srpska Day” holiday and the day of the founding of the Nazi -era
Independent State of Croatia. Needless to say, my statement was misinterpreted, and
I immediately clarified that I was not drawing a parallel between the Republika
Srpska and the Independent State of Croatia.
78. The Republika Srpska Government continues to deny my Office the access to
official information and documents required under annex 10 of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace. Article IX of annex 10 obliges all authorities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to fully cooperate with the High Representative, as well as
with the international organizations and agencies. Repeated calls by the Steering
Board of the Peace Implementation Council reminding the Republika Srpska
authorities of their obligations in this regard have had no impact. The practice of the
Republika Srpska Government’s not providing information and documents as
requested by the Office of the High Representative dates to 2007 and contradicts
frequent claims by Republika Srpska that the entity respects the letter of the
Framework Agreement.
18/26

17-06630

S/2017/379

VI. Entrenching the rule of law
Draft law on Bosnia and Herzegovina courts
79. The jurisdiction of the Bosnia and Herzegovina State Court is still a major
point of contention between the Republika Srpska and other political authorities,
preventing the adoption of a new law on Bosnia and Herzegovina courts. A working
draft includes provisions for the Bosnia and Herzegovina State to maintain its
current criminal jurisdiction over organized crime and corruption, alongside
alternate provisions reflecting the view of the Republika Srpska, which seeks
limitations on Bosnia and Herzegovina State jurisdiction. Th e Minister of Justice of
Bosnia and Herzegovina attempted to introduce a new draft that sought to
substantially diminish State-level criminal jurisdiction. However, within the
European Union-led structured dialogue on justice, it is expected that work will
continue on the previous draft, which would not diminish State -level jurisdiction. I
have made it clear that the State-level jurisdiction must not be diminished, given
that it follows the division of competencies between the State of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the entities under the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitution.
Non-execution of court judgments
80. During the reporting period, one of the most serious violations of the rule of
law in Bosnia and Herzegovina to date, which necessitated my previous special
report to the Security Council, continued, as the Republika Srpska violated its
obligations under the General Framework Agreement for Peace, in particular annex
4 thereto containing the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina. After the
Republika Srpska authorities conducted a referendum on 25 September 2016, in
violation of two final and binding decisions of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, on 25 October, the Republika Srpska National Assembly passed
the Law on the “Republika Srpska Day” with the aim of implementing the results of
the referendum that had been conducted, in further violation of those decisions.
81. The Office of the Prosecutor in Bosnia and Herzegovina is conducting an
investigation into the organization and conduct of the referendum in Republika
Srpska, which, under article 239 of the Criminal Code of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Failure to Enforce Decisions of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Human Rights Chamb er and
the European Court of Human Rights, constitutes a criminal offense, with a sanction
of six months’ to five years’ imprisonment.
82. After previous refusals to submit to questioning in the matter, the President of
Republika Srpska, Mr. Dodik appeared before the Office of the Prosecutor in Bosnia
and Herzegovina on 30 December to give his statement. The Office has also
questioned the Prime Minister of Republika Srpska and the former head of the
Republika Srpska Referendum Commission, among others.
83. Another example of the deterioration in the entrenchment of the rule of law
that requires my attention is the direct rejection by the Republika Srpska authorities
of the applicability of Bosnia and Herzegovina -level judicial decisions in that entity.
Thus, the Bosnia and Herzegovina State Court decision on a prospective defence
property location in Han Pijesak, located in the Republika Srpska, continues to be
ignored by the Republika Srpska authorities.
Entity anti-corruption efforts
84. In the Republika Srpska, organizational changes within the Republika Srpska
prosecution introduced by the new Law on Repressing Corruption, Organized and

17-06630

19/26

S/2017/379

Most Serious Forms of Economic Crime, were implemented during the reporting
period. In the Federation, however, legislation from 2014 on a special prosecutor
and court department for fighting corruption and organized crime remains
unimplemented.

VII. Public security and law enforcement, including
intelligence reform
85. The practice of improper political interference in operational policing has not
diminished during the reporting period.
86. The Sarajevo Canton Law on Internal Affairs, adopted in January 2016,
remains unimplemented in its most important aspect, which is establishing the
operational and financial independence of the police organization, given that the
Sarajevo cantonal government has not yet adopted an essential by -law. An initiative
by the Sarajevo Cantonal Assembly to introduce major changes to the still to be
implemented law would lead to more political control over the police and would
disrupt the harmonization of police-related legislation in the Federation.
87. In November, the Sarajevo cantonal government dismissed its Police
Commissioner. In March, the Sarajevo Cantonal Independent Board issued the
vacancy announcement for a new commissioner. The international community
pushed back earlier efforts to reduce the criteria for the new commissioner, thereby
resulting in the delay in issuing the vacancy announcement.
88. The appointment of a new police commissioner in Canton 10 has been
outstanding since December 2014. The appointment of the Federation
Administration Police Director in January 2015 remains unresolved to date due to
an ongoing court dispute. After long delays, West Herzegovina Canton appointed a
new police commissioner on 1 December. The appointment of the Federation
Independent Board remains outstanding since 2015, and the procedure is ongoing in
Herzegovina-Neretva Canton.
89. On 8 December 2016, the Federation House of Peoples adopted the Law on
Police Officials. On 7 February 2017, the Sarajevo Cantonal Assembly adopted its
Law on Police Officials. Both laws are currently in further parliamentary procedure.
90. The Office of the High Representative and its main international community
partners continue to monitor changes to police legislation and to encourage
harmonization in jurisdictions throughout the country. However, attempts to
disharmonize the legislative frameworks are on the rise.

VIII. Economy
91. Available economic indicators for 2016 show a mixed picture. Although
foreign trade and industrial production were slightly higher compared with
production in 2015, the Directorate for Economic Planning of the Council of
Ministers noted a substantial decline in the rate of growth to almost half that of
2015.
92. Although unemployment has dropped by 5.1 per cent, that there are more than
half a million persons registered as unemployed as at December 2016 remains of
concern. The administrative unemployment rate is 40.9 per cent, while the real
unemployment rate is about 25.4 per cent. The share of youth unemployment in the
total unemployment figure is estimated at 54.3 per cent.

20/26

17-06630

S/2017/379

93. According to preliminary data from the Central Bank of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, foreign direct investment in 2016 amounted to BAM 504.4 million, a
5.8 per cent increase compared with 2015. Living standards are poor. With the
average December salary of BAM 853 and the average pension of BAM 358, even
those with a steady income struggle to make ends meet. In addition, the number of
pensioners increased by 1.9 per cent.
94. Available economic indicators also show a decline across several areas and in
comparison with the region. The United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development World Investment Report 2016 ranked Bosnia and Herzegovina fourth
in foreign direct investment inflows in South-eastern Europe in 2015. The Heritage
Foundation 2016 Index of Economic Freedom ranked Bosnia and Herzegovina
109th of 178 countries and thirty-ninth of 43 countries in Europe, with its overall
score below global and regional averages. The World Bank report Doing Business
2017 ranked Bosnia and Herzegovina eighty-first of 190 economies in terms of ease
of doing business, the worst of all Balkan countries. The Human Development
Report 2015 of the United Nations Development Programme ranked Bosnia and
Herzegovina eighty-fifth of 188 countries in terms of human development. The
Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index ranked Bosnia and
Herzegovina eighty-third of 176 countries for 2016, behind neighbouring Croatia,
Serbia, and Montenegro. In the Economic Freedom of the World 2016 Annual
Report, Bosnia and Herzegovina ranked ninety-first of 159 countries and territories,
and in the World Economic Forum Global Competitiveness Report 2016-2017,
Bosnia and Herzegovina ranked 107th of 138 economies, again the lowest ranked
country in the region. The Report also showed the country’s poor capacity to retain
talent; in terms of brain drain, Bosnia and Herzegovina ranked 134th of 138
countries.
95. Bosnia and Herzegovina’s credit rating remains the same. On 10 March,
Standard & Poor’s Ratings Services affirmed the credit rating at “B with stable
outlook”, based on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s fiscal performanc e, robust indirect tax
revenues and still comparably low debt burden, among other factors. The constraints
stem from the country’s political divisions, rising external indebtedness and
substantial external financing requirements.
96. The banking sector is assessed as generally stable and liquid and should be
further strengthened following the adoption of the full legislative package prepared
by the authorities as part of their commitments under the IMF Extended Fund
Facility arrangement. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Deposit Insurance Agency, with
the efficient handling of deposit refunds following the bankruptcy of two banks
based in Republika Srpska (Bobar Banka and Banka Srpske) contributed to the
sector’s stability.
Fiscal issues
97. Indirect tax revenues continued to grow, which is essential for fiscal stability
at all levels of government in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In 2016, the Indirect
Taxation Authority of Bosnia and Herzegovina collected a record annual collection
of BAM 6.638 billion, 4.48 per cent more than in 2015.
98. During the reporting period, Bosnia and Herzegovina did not benefit from IMF
disbursements, given that the responsible authorities failed to complete all measures
required for the completion of the first performance review und er the IMF Extended
Fund Facility arrangement. Following a visit in March 2017, IMF identified the
outstanding issues as the adoption of an increase in fuel excises and amendments to
the Bosnia and Herzegovina Law on Deposit Insurance Agency by the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly; a decision to limit 2017 employment in the
17-06630

21/26

S/2017/379

Bosnia and Herzegovina institutions by the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina; the adoption by the Federation Parliament of amendments to the
Federation Law on Banking Agency; and a due diligence procedure for BH Telecom
and HT Mostar by the Federation Government. The completion of these tasks will
pave the way for the consideration of the first review by the IMF Executive Board
and, in case of approval, for the second IMF disbursement to Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
99. In the absence of IMF assistance, the sustained growth of indirect tax revenues
and the continued reliance on domestic borrowing were key to maintaining fiscal
stability during the reporting period. However, fiscal challenges are evident and
likely to increase in the case of further delays in IMF disbursements and also due to
a 31 per cent increase in foreign debt payment obligations (BAM 1.011 billion),
among other factors, which has an impact on the budget revenues of the entities and
the lower levels of government.
100. The challenges may be somewhat alleviated by the settlement of the Russian
Federation “clearing debt” of US$ 125.2 million towards Bosnia and Herzegovina,
stemming from the commodity exchange between the former Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
Following its acceptance by the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina on
10 November and the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency o n 24 November, the
Minister of Finance and Treasury of Bosnia and Herzegovina Vjekoslav Bevanda
(HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina) signed the debt settlement agreement with the
Deputy Finance Minister of the Russian Federation, Sergei Anatolievich Storchak,
on 21 March 2017 in Moscow. The debt will be settled upon ratification of the
agreement, and the resulting financial assets will be apportioned to the State (10 per
cent), the Federation (58 per cent), the Republika Srpska (29 per cent) and the
Brcko District (3 per cent).
101. The adoption process for the budget for 2017 was completed prior to
31 December at the State and entity levels. Brcko District, half of the cantons and
the city of Mostar failed to comply with the budget adoption calendar and were
forced to operate on temporary financing or, in the case of Mostar, without any
financing until the adoption of the budget.
102. On 15 December 2016, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly
adopted the Law on the Budget of Bosnia and Herzegovina Institutions and
International Obligations of Bosnia and Herzegovina for 2017 in the amount of
BAM 1.961 billion, a 14 per cent increase compared with the previous budget. The
financing of State institutions has been locked at the same level since 2012, in term s
of both the total amount (BAM 950 million) and the amount of indirect tax revenues
(BAM 750 million), which is 78.9 per cent of the total State budget revenue. Other
revenue sources for State institutions are limited, and they do not benefit from IMF
financing. There are concerns that these financial constraints may affect their ability
to fully meet their obligations.
103. The Federation Parliament completed the adoption of its budget for 2017 on
29 December 2016. The adopted budget totals BAM 2.747 bill ion, a 6 per cent
increase compared with the previous budget, which includes BAM 562.6 million for
foreign debts (39 per cent increase), BAM 530 million for domestic borrowing (33
per cent increase) and BAM 42.7 million for internal debts (74 per cent decr ease).
The total projected domestic revenue in 2017 are BAM 1.985 billion, and the BAM
762.6 million deficit is to be covered by proceeds from the sale of financial assets
(BAM 120 million), short-term borrowing (BAM 360 million) and long-term
borrowing (BAM 282.6 million).

22/26

17-06630

S/2017/379

104. Fiscal challenges in the Federation may arise in the case of further delays in
IMF disbursements, the underperformance of domestic revenue or a lack of interest
for government securities. There is also continued concern over the sta bility of the
Federation Pension and Disability Fund, which struggles to secure regular and
timely payments of pensions in the Federation. The new Federation Law on Pension
and Disability Insurance currently in parliamentary procedure should address this
issue by including the Fund in the Federation treasury system. However, judging
from experience in the Republika Srpska, although the inclusion of the Pension
Fund in the treasury system ensures timely pension payments, it causes delays in
other budget payments. A serious budget challenge for the Federation also stems
from demands to restore military pension rights to some 11,000 demobilized
soldiers of the former army of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Croat Defence
Council.
105. In December 2016, the Federation Parliament adopted amendments to the Law
on Budgets in the Federation to provide a legal basis for the continued financing of
the city of Mostar, which has no functioning city council to adopt the budget. The
amendments empowered the Mayor of Mostar, with the consent of the head of the
Finance Department of Mostar, to announce the city budget for 2017 in February.
106. On 24 December, the Republika Srpska National Assembly adopted the
Republika Srpska budget for 2017, which totals BAM 3.2 billion, a 2. 3 increase
compared with the previous year. Budget revenues are set at BAM 2.7 billion, with
a deficit of BAM 522 million (6 per cent decrease), to be covered by domestic and
foreign borrowing. With similar concerns as the Federation, of particular concern in
the Republika Srpska is the accumulated debt of the healthcare sector, which
exceeds BAM 1 billion. The Republika Srpska Pension Fund also faces challenges
to its sustainability, owing to poor revenue collection and an increasing number of
pensioners, among other factors. The inclusion of the Fund in the budget for 2016
resolved the issue of delayed pension payments but led to delays in other Republika
Srpska payments.
International obligations and other issues
107. The Energy Community reintroduced sanctions against Bosnia and
Herzegovina on 1 April, following the country’s failure to follow through on an
earlier commitment to support the adoption of a State law addressing persistent
breaches of obligations under the Energy Community Treaty. Althoug h the Ministry
of Foreign Trade and Economic Relations of Bosnia and Herzegovina, led by Mirko
Šarović (SDS), attempted to negotiate an acceptable solution, the entity authorities
failed to agree on regulation of the gas sector at the State level.
108. On 16 March, the Republika Srpska Government adopted a conclusion
requesting the Ministry of Transport and Communications of Republika Srpska to
initiate a review of the agreement between the Federation and the Republika Srpska
on the establishment of a joint public railway corporation as part of the
transportation corporation, concluded in 1998 under annex 9 of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace. The Republika Srpska Government also requested
the Ministry to assess the justification for the continued e xistence of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Public Railway Corporation. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Public
Railway Corporation is the only corporation established thus far under annex 9 and
is crucial for smooth, safe and regular inter-entity and international railway traffic,
including the allocation of rail routes for inter-entity and international traffic in a
non-discriminatory manner and the harmonization of signaling, safety,
telecommunications and other systems.

17-06630

23/26

S/2017/379

IX. Return of refugees and displaced persons
109. Upholding the right of refugees and displaced persons to return to their
pre-war homes remains central to the full implementation of annex 7 of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace, which requires authorities at all levels to create in
their territories the political, economic, and social conditions conducive to the
voluntary return and harmonious reintegration of refugees and displaced persons,
without preference for any particular group.
110. The continued observation by Republika Srpska authorities of the “Republika
Srpska Day” holiday on 9 January in contravention of several rulings of the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina does not contribute positively
towards social conditions or the harmonious reintegration of refugees and displaced
persons in this regard.
111. I also remain concerned by ongoing difficulties faced by returnees in the field
of education in several local communities, in particular in the light of the ruling of
25 November of the Banja Luka Basic Court that Bosniak students in Vrbanjci,
Kotor Varos, have not been discriminated against, notwithstanding the local primary
school’s failure to offer the national group of subjects.
112. The period following the elections held in October 2016 in Srebrenica, the si te
of the 1995 genocide against the Bosniak population of the former enclave protected
by the United Nations and now an area of significant return, was marked by initial
disputes of the election results. For the first time in the post -war era, a Serb was
elected to lead the municipal administration, while Serb parties won a majority of
seats in the municipal assembly. That development raised concerns within the
Bosniak returnee population and caused divisions among their political
representatives. Subsequently, some Bosniak representatives formed a ruling
coalition with their Serb counterparts, whereas others joined the opposition. The
new Serb mayor has continued to focus on general development issues. Nonetheless,
distrust remains between the Bosniak and Serb communities, and it is continuously
fuelled by political rhetoric at the higher levels in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

X. Media developments
113. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Public Broadcasting System continued to face
challenges in terms of financing and independence from political influence.
Authorities have attempted to extend the arrangement of financing public
broadcasting through taxes collected by the three main telecom operators, but it is
unlikely that that will be realized, bearing in mind the current political situation and
the lack of political will to facilitate a solution for supporting the State public
broadcaster.
114. Due to the ongoing failure to find a permanent financing solution and the
resulting inability to fulfil its regular obligations towards both the domestic
authorities in terms of taxes and employer contributions, as well as to the European
Broadcasting Union, the State public broadcasting service is in serious financial
trouble.

XI. Defence matters
115. In early January, the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina were drawn
into the political controversy surrounding the marking of 9 January as the
“Republika Srpska Day” holiday, despite the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and
24/26

17-06630

S/2017/379

Herzegovina ruling that the marking of “Republika Srpska Day” on that date is
unconstitutional. The Minister of Defence of Bosnia and Herzegovina informed
Republika Srpska authorities that the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina
would participate in ceremonies on 8 January honouring military personne l and
civilians who died during the war, but would not participate in the “Republika
Srpska Day” parade on 9 January as had been done previously. Serb politicians,
including the Serb Deputy Minister of Defence of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
encouraged Serbs serving in the armed forces to make their way to Banja Luka and
to participate in the parade regardless of orders to the contrary.
116. On 9 January, elements of the Serb band of the military orchestra of the Armed
Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina and an honour guard of Serb troops from the
Third (Republika Srpska) Infantry Regiment rendered honours to the serving Chair
of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency, Serb member of the Presidency,
Mr. Ivanić, on his direct orders. In addition, all top -ranking Serb officers were
present at the event.
117. This circumvention of the chain of command, and the political encouragement
to disobey orders, constituted the gravest threat to the integrity of the Armed Forces
of Bosnia and Herzegovina since its establishment as a unified force in 2006. An
investigation ordered by the Minister of Defence of Bosnia and Herzegovina has
placed the blame for the incident on a lack of regulatory clarity regarding the
rendering of military honours to members of the Bosnia and Herzegov ina
Presidency, but has thus far not addressed the behaviour of individual officers who
attended the event, which is potentially a matter of concern under annex 1A to the
General Framework Agreement for Peace.
118. On a positive note, the Ministry of Defence of Bosnia and Herzegovina is
actively planning for the implementation of the defence review adopted in
November 2016, in line with the political consensus agreed upon by the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Presidency, and is also reinvigorating its legal and tec hnical efforts in
relation to the registration of immovable defence property.

XII. European Union military force
119. The European Union-led peacekeeping force in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(EUFOR) continues to play a vital role in supporting the efforts of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to maintain a safe and secure environment, which in turn assists my
Office and other international organizations in fulfilling their respective mandates.
The presence of EUFOR on the ground, including its liaison and observation t eams,
remains an important contributing factor to stability and security.

XIII. Future of the Office of the High Representative
120. The Political Directors of the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council met in Sarajevo on 6 and 7 December 2016 to underline the progress in
implementing the General Framework Agreement for Peace, as well as their
unequivocal commitment to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The Steering Board also emphasized the need to complet e the five
objectives and two conditions necessary for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative. The next meeting of the Steering Board is scheduled for 6 and
7 June 2017 in Sarajevo.
121. My Office continues its fiscally responsible approach to budget planning and
the results are evident. Since my mandate began in March 2009, the budget of the
17-06630

25/26

S/2017/379

Office of the High Representative has been reduced by more than 47 per cent and
my staff by over 53 per cent. Given the deep and ongoing nature of the c uts, it is
important to highlight that, given the realities of the situation on the ground and as I
am entitled to under annex 10 of the General Framework Agreement for Peace, it is
essential that I am equipped with the budget and the staff required to car ry out my
mandate effectively.

XIV. Reporting schedule
122. In keeping with the practice of submitting regular reports for onward
transmission to the Security Council, as required under Council resolution 1031
(1995), I herewith present my seventeenth regular report. Should the Secretary General or any member of the Council require further information at any time, I
would be pleased to provide an additional written update. The next regular report to
the Secretary-General is scheduled for October 2017.

26/26

17-06630
