United Nations

S/PV.9281

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9281

st meeting
Wednesday, 15 March 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Afonso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mozambique)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mrs. Koumba Pambo
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Shino
Ms. Gatt
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Abushahab
Ms. Jacobs
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in South Sudan (S/2023/135)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-07595 (E)
*2307595*

S/PV.9281

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

namely Gabon, Mozambique and my own country,
Ghana.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in South Sudan (S/2023/135)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of South Sudan to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

15/03/2023

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2023/188, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/135, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in South Sudan.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, Ecuador, France, Gabon, Ghana,
Japan, Malta, Mozambique, Switzerland, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America

At the outset, let me, on behalf of the A3, express
our deepest sympathies and condolences to the
Governments of Mozambique and Malawi for the tragic
deaths and extensive infrastructural damage resulting
from the devastating effects of Cyclone Freddy, which
struck parts of the two countries. Our thoughts and
prayers are with the peoples of the two countries
at this difficult time. The A3 would like to take this
opportunity to call for urgent international support for
the emergency response in the two countries, to enable
the affected populations to rebuild their lives.
The A3 welcomes the extension of the mandate of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
until 15 March 2024. We voted in favour of the resolution
(resolution 2677 (2023)) because we strongly believe
that UNMISS continues to be a stabilizing factor in the
brotherly country of South Sudan and remains critical
in addressing the multifaceted socioeconomic, political
and security challenges in South Sudan, towards our
collective quest for the much-desired peace and stability
in the country.
As A3, we engaged constructively during the
negotiations. Indeed, we worked to ensure that the
African perspective, including the concerns of the
South Sudanese authorities, to the extent possible, were
reflected in the text. While we acknowledge that more
could have been done, we are convinced that the present
text is the outcome of best efforts and forms a good
basis for future improvements that may be required.

Abstaining:
China, Russian Federation

The A3 stands in solidarity with the South Sudanese
people and encourages bold political actions to further
the national reconciliation efforts and the effective
implementation of the 2018 Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan.

The President: The draft resolution received
13 votes in favour, none against and two abstentions. The draft resolution has been adopted as
resolution 2677 (2023).

In conclusion, we wish to commend the penholder
for the professional manner in which the negotiations
were approached and thank all Council members for
their exceptional cooperation and flexibility.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.

Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The Russian Federation abstained in the
voting on resolution 2677 (2023), on extending the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS), proposed by the United States.

Against:
None

Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour to deliver
this explanation of vote after the voting on behalf of the
three African members of the Security Council (A3),
2/6

23-07595

15/03/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We support the work of UNMISS in that African
State, which makes a significant contribution to
stabilizing the situation and implementing the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. Despite the
lack of logistical resources and shortage of personnel,
the efforts made by the Blue Helmets are recognized by
the local population and deserve all due respect.
However, we still have concerns about the
version of the UNMISS mandate on the protection of
civilians proposed by our United States colleagues,
which provides for very broad freedom of action for
peacekeepers without the necessary coordination
with the country’s Government. Such an approach to
resolving the problem of intercommunal violence does
not take into account the specific nature of the situation
in South Sudan. It is intrusive and carries the risk of
undermining the peace process at such a crucial stage
for the country, with the end of the transition period
and the start of preparations for the elections scheduled
for December 2024. The country is now in particular
need of support. We are convinced that successfully
settling intercommunal conflicts can be undertaken
only in close coordination with local authorities and
by adopting a comprehensive approach to eliminating
the root causes of violence and South Sudanese
capacity-building, including by strengthening the
joint armed forces currently being established. We call
on peacekeepers to be guided by such principles in
their activities.
We would also like to express our regret over the
refusal of the United States sponsors of the South
Sudan dossier to continue constructive dialogue
on fine-tuning other language in the resolution,
particularly with respect to climate, including giving
peacekeepers roles in that regard that are not theirs, as
well as retaining the language of resolution 2417 (2018),
on hunger and conflict.
We believe that the newly demonstrated
unwillingness of the United States informal facilitators
of the South Sudan dossier to negotiate with all Security
Council members in good faith and the abuse of their
status to promote national interests is further evidence
of the deep crisis in the current penholder system,
which is fraught with efforts to artificially undermine
host State trust in United Nations activities, including
its peacekeeping operations. That once again affirms
the need for a fairer distribution of such responsibilities
among the members of the Security Council.

S/PV.9281

Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
commends the tremendous work being done by the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
to maintain peace and stability and to help expedite
nation-building in the country. Since the establishment
of UNMISS in 2011, as a key troop-contributing country,
China has sent nine peacekeeping infantry battalions
and 13 peacekeeping engineering and medical teams to
South Sudan, where Chinese Blue Helmets made the
ultimate sacrifice.
On South Sudan’s path to peace and development,
China has always stood with South Sudan. We are willing to continue to actively participate in the work of
UNMISS and make positive contributions to the realization of peace and stability in South Sudan.
Regrettably, elements of resolution 2677 (2023),
just adopted by the Security Council, put one-sided
pressure on South Sudan. The mandate entrusted to
UNMISS fails to fully take into account the situation on
the ground and is mixed with the political self-interest
of some countries. China therefore had to abstain in the
voting. I would like to make the following clarifications.
First, South Sudan is the newest State Member of
the United Nations. It has experienced years of war and
has a weak development foundation. The international
community should take an objective view of South
Sudan’s development stage and the difficulties and
challenges that it faces in improving its governance
and should offer South Sudan the necessary patience
and encouragement.
However, the resolution is harshly worded and
unbalanced in content, and blames communal conflict
in South Sudan on violence at the national level and
corruption by civil war actors in the capital. Such
accusations are clearly not objective. Despite China’s
repeated requests for revisions, the overall tone of the
resolution remains, regrettably, negative.
Secondly, issues such as elections, finances and
resource management are internal affairs for any
country. The Security Council should express its views
on such issues based on the principle of non-interference
in internal affairs. It is up to the Government and
the people of South Sudan to decide how to conduct
elections in the country, allocate financial resources
and sell oil resources. In making demands and imposing
conditions regarding such issues without South Sudan’s
consent, the resolution clearly exceeds normal and
reasonable limits.

23-075953/6

S/PV.9281

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Thirdly, South Sudan is one of the countries hardest
hit by climate shocks. The international community
should focus on helping South Sudan to strengthen
capacity-building and enhance climate resilience.
During the consultations, China repeatedly requested
the inclusion of text calling on the international
community, particularly developed countries, to step
up actions and support, including funding, capacitybuilding and technology transfer, to improve South
Sudan’s ability to adapt and reduce its vulnerability to
the impacts of climate change. That text was supported
by the African members as soon as it was proposed. It
is difficult for us to understand why such a proposal
to encourage useful and concrete efforts to help
South Sudan to meet the challenges of climate change
was rejected.
Fourthly, the protection of civilians is an important
task of UNMISS. Peacekeepers from dozens of
countries, including China, have worked tirelessly and
even sacrificed their lives to that end. At the same time,
in authorizing peacekeeping mandates, the Security
Council must bear in mind that the country concerned
has the primary responsibility to protect civilians.
The task of a peacekeeping mission is not to replace
the Government of the country concerned, but to help
it to strengthen its capacity-building and support it in
fulfilling its responsibility to protect civilians. The
consent of the countries concerned, impartiality and
the non-use of force except in self-defence or to fulfil
Security Council mandates are fundamental principles
of peacekeeping, which cannot be transgressed.
Surprisingly, the initial draft text explicitly called
for offensive action by UNMISS and provided for
the Mission to take all necessary measures to engage
any actor credibly preparing to launch attacks or
engaging in attacks against civilians, including the
Government of South Sudan and its proxies. It also
provided for UNMISS to execute its mandate without
the prior consent of the Government of South Sudan.
Such statements go far beyond the basic principles
of peacekeeping operations and seem to establish
UNMISS as a locus of power above the South Sudanese
Government, transforming the United Nations
peacekeeping force into a multinational force.
Following firm requests by many parties,
including the troop-contributing countries, the relevant
controversial content was eventually revised, but there
is still an overemphasis on the use of force as the
preferred means of protecting civilians. In a side-by4/6

15/03/2023

side comparison, this resolution’s mandate on the
protection of civilians also far exceeds the language
of the mandate resolutions of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic. Such a mandate is likely to create
new difficulties for UNMISS in carrying out its
work and put more than 19,000 peacekeepers at risk.
As a main troop-contributing country to UNMISS,
China has strong reservations concerning that matter.
It is not a privilege but a responsibility to serve as a
penholder. Penholders should always remain objective
and impartial, should fully take into account the views
of the countries concerned and should address the
legitimate concerns and demands of all parties. They
should not dismiss or deliberately ignore other views,
insist on placing national interests above the views of
the countries concerned and the collective views of the
Council, or even stop consultations to force a vote on
a draft resolution when differences remain unresolved.
That has occurred repeatedly in recent weeks and
does no good in terms of maintaining the unity of the
Council and ensuring its effectiveness. We urge the
relevant countries to demonstrate the impartiality and
inclusiveness that are expected of penholders and to
make genuine efforts to reach a consensus.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me join
others in expressing Brazil’s solidarity with you,
Mr. President, with Mozambique, and with Malawi and
the people of Malawi, who are facing the devastating
effects of Cyclone Freddy.
On behalf of the Brazilian delegation, I would
like to reiterate our unwavering support for the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). The
situation in South Sudan is of great concern. The
South Sudanese face a catastrophic humanitarian
crisis, with millions of people in need of food, water
and health-care assistance. In addition, the ongoing
intercommunal violence has caused significant
suffering. In addressing the impact of climate change in
South Sudan, the Security Council must acknowledge
that peacekeeping operations are ill suited to dealing
with the issue. We therefore call on the international
community, in particular the developed countries, to
increase their support for South Sudan. Food insecurity
is our main concern. We are deeply concerned that one
of the world’s youngest populations lacks sufficient
access to food. By scaling up humanitarian support,
23-07595

15/03/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the international community can alleviate the suffering
of those most vulnerable. Moreover, financial and
technical support can enhance South Sudan’s capacity
to adapt to environmental shocks, reduce the country’s
vulnerability to the worst effects of climate change and
pave the way for long-term resilience.
Brazil recognizes the importance of regional
cooperation in South Sudan. Accordingly, we call for
continued partnership among the United Nations, the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development to assist with the peace process and
ensure lasting peace and stability in the country. We
appreciate the South Sudan’s growing cooperation
with the Peacebuilding Commission. Local initiatives
that address the root causes of conflict and promote
reconciliation will benefit from additional emphasis on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace. South Sudan can
count on Brazil’s support for further engagement with
the Commission. We acknowledge the importance of
peacekeeping operations and their role in maintaining
international peace and security.
We trust that the adopted mandate will enable
UNMISS to continue its vital work in South Sudan,
protecting civilians, supporting the peace process,
ensuring the delivery of humanitarian assistance and
monitoring the violations of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. We commend the
Mission’s proactive deployment and mobile operations.
That flexible approach is critical to protecting those
impacted by intercommunal violence in several conflict
hotspots across South Sudan. The Mission has been vital
in providing stability and establishing trust among local
communities. We appreciate the courage and dedication
of UNMISS personnel, who work tirelessly in complex
and often dangerous conditions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Let me express our
sympathy to you, Sir, and our sister country Malawi
with regard to the victims of the cyclone. Our prayers
are with you.
On behalf of my Government, I would like to
express our gratitude for the opportunity to address the
Security Council on the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
I would like to extend our sincere appreciation to the
Council members who sought our views on the mandate
in order to work with us to produce a balanced text. We

S/PV.9281

also thank the troop-contributing countries for their
tireless commitment to ensuring lasting peace in South
Sudan. During the negotiation of the UNMISS mandate,
it is important for the Council to observe the principle
of consent, which is a fundamental aspect of the United
Nations engagement in conflicts and peacekeeping
operations. Adherence to that principle will enhance the
mandate’s credibility and legitimacy and help UNMISS
carry out the mandate effectively. The respect of UNMISS
for the principle of consent is crucial for the Mission’s
success in South Sudan. That will ensure that its work
is seen as collaborative rather than as an imposition, and
that it can carry out its mandate effectively to build a
lasting peace in South Sudan.
We acknowledge the efforts of UNMISS in
enhancing stability, protecting civilians and providing
humanitarian assistance to the people of South Sudan.
We urge UNMISS to continue working in close
collaboration with the South Sudanese Government
and to engage with communities to gain their trust.
We recognize that the protection of civilians is of the
utmost importance. But there is also a need to support
the Government of South Sudan on its journey to
fully implementing the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan and road map. The Government is committed
to finding a sustained, lasting peace in South Sudan.
To that end, despite the destabilizing behaviour of the
non-signatories, the Government rejoined the Rome
talks to continue engaging in dialogue with the holdout
groups in the hope of reaching an amicable solution to
their grievances.
We commend UNMISS and its partners for their
humanitarian assistance efforts, which have helped to
alleviate the suffering of people affected by the famine
caused by displacement, economic instability, climate
change and natural disasters. However, the need
remains for sustained efforts by all friends of South
Sudan to address the humanitarian needs and tackle the
root causes of famine. That will require a coordinated
and holistic approach that addresses the underlying
challenges facing the country, including by working to
establish a sustainable peace and stability, investing in
economic development, improving access to food and
other basic needs, and building resilience to climate
change and other natural disasters.
In that regard, on behalf of the people of South Sudan,
we would like to express our heartfelt appreciation to the
International Monetary Fund for supporting our nation

23-075955/6

S/PV.9281

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

in stabilizing food prices and stimulating the economy.
Its financial assistance and technical expertise have
been instrumental in reducing inflationary rates and
enhancing the availability of food supplies on the market.
We recognize that the path to economic stability is a
long and challenging one, but its unwavering support
has brought us one step closer to achieving our goal.
We look forward to continued collaboration.
As the Council is aware, my Government sought
technical and electoral assistance from the United
Nations. We are grateful that the United Nations has
accepted to extend the necessary assistance towards the
preparations for the elections. However, resolution 2677
(2023), just adopted, made the assistance conditional,
which does not conform to the letter and spirit of United
Nations support.
The Council repeatedly reminds South Sudan
about the involvement of women, youth and persons
with disabilities in the affairs of the State. I would like
to reaffirm South Sudan’s commitment through its
constitutionally provided 35 per cent quota allocated to
women and girls in all public positions. That quota has
not yet been met, but it is our objective. It is therefore
the responsibility of the international community
to endeavour to constructively help South Sudan to
achieve that goal.

6/6

15/03/2023

Despite the numerous challenges faced by South
Sudan, my country retains its sovereignty and its
sovereign right as a State and a Member of this
Organization. The Council should bear that in mind
when considering matters concerning my country.
If the penholder had considered the proposals from
my delegation and from some Council members, the
resolution just adopted would have been more balanced
and reflective of facts and realities on the ground in
South Sudan. We therefore encourage the penholder to
adopt a collaborative spirit in the coming resolutions.
In conclusion, we affirm our commitment
to implementing the road map and appeal to the
international community to support our peacebuilding
and development efforts, particularly through technical
resources to sustain our institutions as we head
towards elections. We further affirm our commitment
to working constructively with UNMISS and other
international partners towards the attainment of lasting
peace and development in South Sudan. Together, we
can build a more peaceful and prosperous future for all
of our people.
The meeting rose at 10.35 a.m.

23-07595
