UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/1
7 January 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3327th meeting of the Security Council, held on 7 January 1994, in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item "The situation in the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina", the President of the Security Council made
the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council expresses its deep concern at the continuing
widespread hostilities in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It
deplores the failure of the parties to honour the agreements they have
already signed, in the context of the International Conference on the
Former Yugoslavia, to implement a cease-fire and to permit the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. It condemns the flagrant violations of
international humanitarian law which have occurred, for which it holds the
perpetrators personally responsible.
"The Security Council condemns any hostilities in the United Nationsdesignated safe areas, especially in the Sarajevo area. In particular it
strongly condemns the continuing military pressure on and the relentless
bombardment by Bosnian Serb forces of the capital city, Sarajevo. It
demands the immediate end to attacks against Sarajevo, which have resulted
in a high number of civilian casualties, seriously disrupted essential
services and aggravated an already severe humanitarian situation. In this
regard, the Council once again reaffirms its commitment fully to implement
all its relevant resolutions, in particular resolution 836 (1993).
"The Security Council strongly deplores the abhorrent practice of
deliberate obstruction of humanitarian relief convoys by any party and
reiterates its demand that there be unimpeded access of humanitarian relief
assistance to their intended destinations. The Council further demands
that all parties fully abide by their commitments in this regard and
facilitate timely delivery of humanitarian aid.
"The Security Council also condemns recent attacks against the
personnel of the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) as well as of
UNHCR and other humanitarian organizations. It reiterates the demand that
all parties ensure the safety and security of UNPROFOR, as well as all

94-01045 (E)

070194

/...

S/PRST/1994/1
English
Page 2

other United Nations personnel and those of non-governmental organizations,
and their unimpeded access throughout the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
"The Security Council calls on all the parties to cease hostilities
throughout the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to honour the
commitments they have entered into. It calls upon them to negotiate in
earnest in the framework of the International Conference on the Former
Yugoslavia to achieve an early settlement.
"The Security Council remains seized of the matter and is ready to
consider further measures to ensure that all parties and others concerned
abide by their commitments and fully respect relevant Security Council
resolutions."

-----
