United Nations

A/RES/62/189

General Assembly

Distr.: General
11 February 2008

Sixty-second session
Agenda item 54 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 19 December 2007
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/62/419/Add.1)]

62/189. Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the
Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes
of the World Summit on Sustainable Development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 55/199 of 20 December 2000, 56/226 of 24 December
2001, 57/253 of 20 December 2002 and 57/270 A and B of 20 December 2002 and
23 June 2003, respectively, and its resolutions 58/218 of 23 December 2003, 59/227
of 22 December 2004, 60/193 of 22 December 2005 and 61/195 of 20 December
2006,
Recalling also the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, 1
Agenda 21, 2 the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21, 3 the
Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development 4 and the Plan of
Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg
Plan of Implementation”), 5 as well as the Monterrey Consensus of the International
Conference on Financing for Development, 6
0F

1F

2F

3F

4F

5F

Reaffirming the commitment to implement Agenda 21, the Programme for the
Further Implementation of Agenda 21, the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation,
including the time-bound goals and targets, and the other internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals,
Recalling the 2005 World Summit Outcome, 7
6F

_______________
1
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
2
Ibid., annex II.
3
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
4
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–
4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I,
resolution 1, annex.
5
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
6
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18-22 March
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
7
See resolution 60/1.

07-47511

A/RES/62/189

Reaffirming the decisions taken at the eleventh session of the Commission on
Sustainable Development, 8
7F

Reiterating that sustainable development in its economic, social and
environmental aspects is a key element of the overarching framework for United
Nations activities, and reaffirming the continuing need to ensure a balance among
economic development, social development and environmental protection as
interdependent and mutually reinforcing pillars of sustainable development,
Noting that challenges remain in achieving the goals of the three pillars of
sustainable development,
Reaffirming that eradicating poverty, changing unsustainable patterns of
production and consumption and protecting and managing the natural resource base
of economic and social development are overarching objectives of and essential
requirements for sustainable development,
Recognizing that eradicating poverty is the greatest global challenge facing the
world today and an indispensable requirement for sustainable development, in
particular for developing countries, and that although each country has the primary
responsibility for its own sustainable development and poverty eradication and the
role of national policies and development strategies cannot be overemphasized,
concerted and concrete measures are required at all levels to enable developing
countries to achieve their sustainable development goals as related to the
internationally agreed poverty-related targets and goals, including those contained
in Agenda 21, the relevant outcomes of other United Nations conferences and the
United Nations Millennium Declaration, 9
8F

Reaffirming the role of full and productive employment and decent work for
all as one of the key elements in ensuring the eradication of poverty, the
improvement of economic and social well-being for all, and the achievement of
sustained economic growth and sustainable development for all nations,
Recognizing that good governance within each country and at the international
level is essential for sustainable development,
Recalling that the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation designated the
Commission to serve as the focal point for discussion on partnerships that promote
sustainable development and contribute to the implementation of intergovernmental
commitments in Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of
Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation,
Recalling also that the Economic and Social Council should increase its role in
overseeing system-wide coordination and the balanced integration of economic,
social and environmental aspects of United Nations policies and programmes aimed
at promoting sustainable development, and reaffirming that the Commission on
Sustainable Development should continue to be the high-level commission on
sustainable development within the United Nations system and serve as a forum for
consideration of issues related to integration of the three dimensions of sustainable
development,
Recalling further the decision of the Commission at its eleventh session that
the Commission, during review years, should discuss the contribution of
_______________
8
9

2

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 9 (E/2003/29), chap. I.
See resolution 55/2.

A/RES/62/189

partnerships towards supporting the implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme
for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation with a view to sharing lessons learned and best practices,
identifying and addressing problems, gaps and constraints, and providing further
guidance, including on reporting, during policy years, as necessary, 10
9F

Recalling that agriculture, rural development, land, drought and desertification
are interlinked and should be addressed in an integrated manner, taking into account
economic, social and environmental dimensions of sustainable development, related
sectoral policies and cross-cutting issues including means of implementation, as
identified at the eleventh session of the Commission,
Recognizing the problems and constraints that African countries are facing in
the areas of agriculture, rural development, land, drought and desertification, and
emphasizing that those problems and constraints should be adequately addressed
during the sixteenth session of the Commission,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 11
10F

2.
Reiterates that sustainable development is a key element of the
overarching framework for United Nations activities, in particular for achieving the
internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development
Goals, and those contained in the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;5
3.
Calls upon Governments, all relevant international and regional
organizations, the Economic and Social Council, the United Nations funds and
programmes, the regional commissions and the specialized agencies, the
international financial institutions, the Global Environment Facility and other
intergovernmental organizations, in accordance with their respective mandates, as
well as major groups, to take action to ensure the effective implementation of and
follow-up to the commitments, programmes and time-bound targets adopted at the
World Summit on Sustainable Development, and encourages them to report on
concrete progress in that regard;
Calls for the effective implementation of the commitments, programmes
4.
and time-bound targets adopted at the World Summit on Sustainable Development
and for the fulfilment of the provisions relating to the means of implementation, as
contained in the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;
Reiterates that the Commission on Sustainable Development is the high5.
level body responsible for sustainable development within the United Nations
system and serves as a forum for the consideration of issues related to the
integration of the three dimensions of sustainable development;
Encourages countries to present, on a voluntary basis, in particular at the
6.
Commission’s review sessions, national reports focusing on concrete progress in
implementation, including achievements, constraints, challenges and opportunities;
Emphasizes the importance of a consensus outcome and action-oriented
7.
policy sessions;
8.
Encourages Governments to participate at the appropriate level with
representatives, including ministers, from the relevant departments and
_______________
10
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 9 (E/2003/29), chap. I,
sect. A, draft resolution I, para. 23 (e).
11
A/62/262.

3

A/RES/62/189

organizations working in the areas of agriculture, rural development, land, drought,
desertification, and Africa, as well as finance, in the sixteenth session of the
Commission;
Recalls the decision of the Commission at its eleventh session that
9.
activities during Commission meetings should provide for the balanced involvement
of participants from all regions, as well as for gender balance; 12
1F

10. Invites donor countries to consider supporting the participation of
representatives from the developing countries in the sixteenth session of the
Commission;
11. Reaffirms the objective of strengthening the implementation of
Agenda 21,2 including through the mobilization of financial and technological
resources, as well as capacity-building programmes, in particular for developing
countries;
12. Also reaffirms the objective of enhancing the participation and effective
involvement of civil society and other relevant stakeholders, as well as promoting
transparency and broad public participation, in the implementation of Agenda 21;
13. Requests the secretariat of the Commission to coordinate the
participation of the relevant major groups in the thematic discussions at the
sixteenth session of the Commission and the reporting on the fulfilment of corporate
accountability and responsibility with respect to the thematic cluster of issues, in
accordance with the provisions of the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;
14. Reaffirms the need to promote corporate responsibility and accountability
as envisaged by the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;
15. Also reaffirms the need to promote the development of microenterprises
and small and medium-sized enterprises, including by means of training, education
and skill enhancement, with a special focus on agro-industry as a provider of
livelihoods for rural communities;
16. Requests the secretariat of the Commission to make arrangements to
facilitate the balanced representation of major groups from developed and
developing countries in the sessions of the Commission;
17. Encourages contributions by the regional implementation meetings and
other regional events to the Commission at its sixteenth session;
18. Invites the relevant specialized agencies, including the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the International Fund for
Agricultural Development, United Nations funds and programmes, the Global
Environment Facility and international and regional financial and trade institutions,
as well as the secretariat of the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, Particularly in Africa, 13 and other relevant bodies, to actively
participate, within their mandates, in the work of the Commission;
12F

19. Encourages Governments and organizations at all levels, as well as
major groups, to undertake results-oriented initiatives and activities to support the
_______________
12
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 9 (E/2003/29), chap. I,
sect. A, draft resolution I, para. 2 (j).
13
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1954, No. 33480.

4

A/RES/62/189

work of the Commission and to promote and facilitate the implementation of
Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 213 and the
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, including through voluntary multistakeholder partnership initiatives;
20. Underlines the importance of the review of the implementation of the
decisions of the thirteenth session of the Commission on water and sanitation; 14
13F

21. Requests the Secretary-General, in reporting to the Commission at its
sixteenth session, on the basis of appropriate inputs from all levels, to submit
thematic reports on each of the six issues contained in the thematic cluster of issues
on agriculture, rural development, land, drought, desertification and Africa, taking
into account their interlinkages, while addressing the cross-cutting issues, including
means of implementation identified by the Commission at its eleventh session, and
also takes into account the relevant provisions of paragraphs 10, 14 and 15 of draft
resolution I of the eleventh session of the Commission;8
22. Notes the convening of the Third International Expert Meeting on the
Ten-year Framework of Programmes for Sustainable Consumption and Production
under the Marrakech Process in Stockholm from 26 to 29 June 2007;
23. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-third session the
sub-item entitled “Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further
Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development”, and requests the Secretary-General, at that session, to
submit a report on the implementation of the present resolution.
78th plenary meeting
19 December 2007

_______________
14
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 9 (E/2005/29), chap. I,
sect. C, resolution 13/1.

5
