S/PV.7116

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7116th meeting

Saturday, 22 February 2014, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Murmokaitė . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Lithuania)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Errázuriz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Araud
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein
Ms. Lucas
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Gasana
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

14-24253 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1424253*

S/PV.7116

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.

need support in caring for more than 2.5 million
refugees.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2014/115, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Australia, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, the Republic of Korea, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Chad, Chile, China, France,
Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria, Republic
of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 2139 (2014).
I wish to welcome the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon. I now give him the floor.
The Secretary-General: I very much welcome the
adoption of resolution 2139 (2014). We are all keenly
aware of the profound and prolonged desperation of the
Syrian people. If this resolution is implemented quickly
and in good faith, at least some of the suffering can be
eased.
The resolution builds on presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/15, adopted last year, and strengthens
the Council’s engagement in protecting civilians and
ensuring the delivery of relief. The humanitarian
situation in Syria continues to deteriorate. Half of the
country’s people need urgent assistance. Host countries

2/16

22/02/2014

Civilians continue to bear the brunt of the conflict.
They are the daily victims of brutal violence and
indiscriminate attacks, including the use of heavy
weapons, aerial bombings, mortars and car bombs
in populated areas. There are continued reports of
massacres and atrocities throughout the country.
Women and girls have been subjected to sexual and
gender-based violence.
The Syrian Government and allied militias have
been responsible for countless killings, disappearances,
the horrendous use of barrel bombs and torture on a
massive scale. Opposition groups have carried out
summary executions, the recruitment of children for
combat and the use of terror tactics in civilian areas.
Attacks against civilian infrastructure, including
schools and hospitals, continue unabated. These heinous
acts are unacceptable and must stop immediately.
All combatting parties in Syria must abide by their
obligations under international humanitarian law.
I commend United Nations humanitarian personnel,
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and our other partners for
their bravery and commitment. Despite the dangerous
circumstances, United Nations humanitarian agencies
and our partners are reaching millions of people.
But too many millions are beyond our reach, and
funding continues to fall short. I urge the international
community to step up its contributions.
This resolution should not have been necessary.
Humanitarian assistance is not something to be
negotiated; it is something to be allowed by virtue of
international law.
It is profoundly shocking to me that both sides are
besieging civilians as a tactic of war. Some 200,000
people are under siege in Government-controlled areas,
and 45,000 in opposition-controlled areas.
More broadly, this resolution highlights again the
urgent need to end the conflict.
While the political process continues, we will
continue to do all we can to provide relief and protection
to people in need on the ground.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.

14-24253

22/02/2014

The situation in the Middle East

Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2139 (2014) on the Syrian humanitarian
crisis.
The aim of the resolution is simple: it seeks to protect
civilians affected by the conflict in Syria. It demands
that rapid, safe and unhindered humanitarian access be
authorized across conflict lines and across borders, so
that humanitarian assistance can be conveyed along the
most direct routes to the people who need it. It recalls
that starvation of civilians as a method of combat is
prohibited under international humanitarian law. It
reaffirms that those who have committed violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights in
Syria must be brought to justice. Finally, it underscores
the importance of finding a political solution to the
Syrian conflict.
In recent weeks, along with our colleagues from
Australia and Jordan, we worked to build a consensus
around a strong resolution that would enable us to
change the situation on the ground.
By adopting resolution 2139 (2014), the Security
Council is sending a clear and unified message to all
parties to the conflict in Syria with a view to ensuring
that humanitarian access to all Syrians in need is
guaranteed, that the siege of cities where civilians are
trapped is lifted, and that an end be put to the senseless
atrocities and indiscriminate bombings and to the use
of barrels bombs, whose only goal is to the civilian
population.
The requests that the Security Council made in
the presidential statement adopted on 2 October 2013
(S/PRST/2013/15) unfortunately were not followed
up on. The humanitarian situation has continued
to deteriorate at an unacceptable pace. Today
approximately 10 million Syrians, half of whom are
children, are in need of urgent humanitarian assistance.
More than 3 million of them are living in areas that are
difficult to access. More than 2.4 million Syrians, more
than half of whom are children, have had to take refuge
in neighbouring countries, primarily Lebanon and
Jordan. Given that tragic deterioration of the situation,
the Security Council had to act.
With today’s unanimous vote, the Security Council
is shouldering its responsibilities. Henceforth it is up
to the parties to the conflict in Syria, primarily the
Syrian authorities, to fully and swiftly implement the
provisions of the resolution that we have just adopted

S/PV.7116

and the provisions of the presidential statement of
2 October 2013.
The Syrian authorities must endorse without
further delay the Geneva communiqué of 30 June 2012
(S/2012/522, annex). The parties must work towards a
genuine political transition that meets the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people.
The resolution includes provisions that will enable
the Security Council to verify in a precise manner
whether its demands have been implemented on the
ground. The Council expresses its intent, in the case
of non-compliance with the resolution, to take further
steps to support the vital humanitarian efforts in Syria.
Today, to the Council’s credit, international
humanitarian law and the needs of the Syrian people
have prevailed over the interests of those who cling
to power in Syria. Luxembourg is proud to have
contributed actively to this result. We sincerely hope
that this will mark a turning point for the Syrian people.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): In adopting resolution
2139 (2014) this morning unanimously, all members
of the Security Council have recognized that the
humanitarian situation in Syria is desperate.
The country has disintegrated, and neighbouring
countries are threatened by the effects. Almost half of
Syria’s population needs urgent assistance. A third of
the housing has been destroyed and over 60 per cent of
the hospitals destroyed or damaged. Almost a third of
the people are internally displaced. Three million have
fled; two and a half million are refugees; 2.3 million
are now out of school; and one in five schools are either
occupied or destroyed. Medical workers and hospitals
have been directly targeted, and a majority of Syria’s
health workers have fled. At least a quarter of a million
people scratch to survive in besieged cities and towns
with no food or medical relief for over a year.
Dag Hammarskjöld famously said that the United
Nations was not created to take humanity to heaven but
to save it from hell. But by any measure, the Syrian
people long ago descended into hell. It should not have
taken the Council so long to take today’s action, indeed,
as the Secretary-General has just said, it should not
have been necessary.
The Council has demanded that this resolution be
implemented in full. If it is, it will make a difference to
the lives of millions of Syrians.

14-242533/16

S/PV.7116

The situation in the Middle East

The Council’s core demand is that the Syrian parties
to the conflict, and, above all, the Syrian authorities,
reverse course now and start to put the interests of their
own citizens first. The Syrian military must cease its
systematic and indiscriminate attacks on civilians. The
devastating aerial bombing campaign in Aleppo, which
has seen a further 500,000 people displaced, must
end. The use of barrel bombs — a weapon designed
to create civilian terror and cause maximum injury
to civilians — must cease immediately. Aid must be
allowed to reach all those who need it by the most direct
means possible, including across battle lines and across
borders. It must be allowed to those people living under
siege, and people in such areas who want to leave must
be allowed to do so.
Armed opposition groups must also comply with
the calls made in the resolution to end abuses of human
rights, abide by international humanitarian law and
facilitate the provision of humanitarian assistance in
the areas they control. The Council has said plainly that
Al-Qaida and associated groups have no place in Syria
and that all foreign fighters should leave the country.
We have acknowledged again that the only
sustainable solution to the Syrian conflict is a political
transition. The challenges are self-evident, but we must
continue efforts to achieve this. And, as the Council has
recognized in this resolution, there must be no impunity
for violations of international humanitarian law and
violations and abuses of human rights. Australia also
reiterates its call for the Council to refer the situation in
Syria to the International Criminal Court.
The Council’s unanimity today has been necessary,
but it is not enough. The resolution can benefit the
Syrian people only if it is implemented in full. The
primary responsibility, as I have said, lies with the
Syrian authorities. Others on the ground, including
opposition groups, must also comply. The resolution
is also binding on all of us. Council members and the
wider United Nations membership must themselves do
what they can to pressure the Syrian authorities and the
opposition groups to implement it.
The resolution has made very clear the Council’s
expectations that its demands will be met and that there
will be consequences for non-compliance. We will
remain determined in this.
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke
in Arabic): Jordan welcomes the unanimous adoption by
the Security Council of resolution 2139 (2014). Jordan

4/16

22/02/2014

is proud to have been one of its authors, along with
Australia and Luxembourg, in implementation of an
Arab Ministerial mandate. We negotiated the text of
the resolution with the other members of the Security
Council and made every effort to achieve the broadest
possible consensus.
In that respect, we would like to thank all members
of the Council, both permanent and non-permanent, for
the good faith they showed during the consultations.
We commend the Council’s unified position.
The resolution just adopted deals with the various
dimensions of the humanitarian tragedy in Syria, which
is now untenable at the internal level. It does not only
entail attacks against civilians by all kinds of prohibited
and non-prohibited weapons, but it went even further
by imposing a suffocating blockade on many regions of
the country, which has led to starvation and widespread
violations of international humanitarian law throughout
Syria, some of which amounted to crimes against
humanity.
According to the statistics, nearly 9.3 million
Syrians need humanitarian assistance, of whom
6.5 million are internally displaced persons. In additon,
250,000 Syrians are trapped in besieged areas and almost
2 million Syrians require humanitarian aid in regions
that are difficult to reach. The negative consequences
of this internal humanitarian tragedy has gone beyond
Syria’s borders into neighbouring countries, thereby
creating an international problem of humanitarian
refugees. That has affected all aspects of economic and
social life in, and the security of, those neighbouring
countries. The number of refugees who have been
forced to leave Syria has reached 2.9 million people,
with 2.4 million having found refuge in neighbouring
countries. In Jordan, we have welcomed 1,300,000
refugees from Syria — 600,000 since the beginning of
the crisis, almost three years ago. The cost of hosting
those refugees amounted to $1.7 billion in 2013. That is
expected to rise to $2.8 billion in 2014.
Such negative consequences for the neighbouring
countries will have a long-term impact, which will
require an effective approach by the Council and the
international community towards the Syrian refugee
crisis. The continuing humanitarian situation of such
a dimension threatens the security and stability of
the Middle East. How the Council approaches the
humanitarian situation should therefore not depend
upon politics. We reaffirm that this resolution should

14-24253

22/02/2014

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7116

not negatively affect the political aspect but should
strengthen and reaffirm that element, as reaffirmed in
paragraph 15 and the eleventh preambular paragraph of
the resolution.

results. Far from reaching all those in need throughout
Syria, humanitarian assistance remains inaccessible in
besieged areas and sporadic in areas that are difficult
to reach.

We underscore the importance of the parties
to the conflict in Syria now immediately and fully
implementing all the provisions of the resolution. All
parties, in particular the Syrian authorities, must allow
humanitarian relief operations through borders and
through lines of fire. The parties must immediately
begin to dismantle the blockades imposed on certain
towns and regions and must put an end to all attacks
against civilians, in particular in residential areas,
including aerial bombardments and the use of barrel
bombs.

The Syrian regime is trying to make us believe
that it is a reliable and responsible partner in the
humanitarian sphere. The examples of evacuations
from Moadamiya and Homs a few weeks ago show us
the opposite. Far from being ideal, they were slow in
implementation, limited in effect and tragic in their
follow-up. Many of those evacuated were arrested and
are still missing. For some days, the Government has
stepped up media reports of local ceasefires. Let us not
be deceived: such ceasefires are imposed on scared,
exhausted and starving people as part of a deliberate
policy pursued by the Government for people to starve
to death or surrender.

The Council will closely monitor the commitment
of the parties to the conflict in fully implementing this
resolution.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I
welcome the unanimous adoption of this resolution
on humanitarian acccess in Syria resolution 2139
(2014). Given the tragedy taking place, which has been
escalating daily for three years, the contrary would have
been incomprehensible. How could the Council have
remained silent in the face of 140,000 people losing
their lives or 3 million Syrians without humanitarian
assistance and the desperate flight of nearly half the
population, who are now refugees or displaced?
The resolution was urgent and necessary. That is
why from the beginning France supported the draft
text initiated by Australia, Jordan and Luxembourg, to
whom we express our gratitude. This urgent resolution
demands that the Government of Syria, carried away
by its own violence, respect international humanitarian
law and stop bombing civilians, starving its people and
torturing prisoners. It demands the immediate lifting
of sieges. It demands that the Government authorize
humanitarian organizations to help all those in need
across the front lines and borders. It demands an end
to attacks on United Nations personnel, humanitarian
actors and journalists.
This crucial resolution must put an end to the
deafness of the Syrian Government to the appeal
by humanitarian actors and the Council, which on
2 October made specific demands for the provision of
humanitarian access. We must all admit — and that is
the reason for the resolution — that the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2013/15) did not produce tangible

At the same time, the Syrian Government is using
increasingly barbarian and deadly bombs against the
civilian population. After the cluster bombs, ballistic
missiles and chemical weapons, the authorities are
now launching barrel bombs against civilians — the
ultimate weapon of terror. The use of such weapons is
not a detail, as some people have said. They have no
military justification. They seek only to kill civilians
and combatants indiscriminately. For the thousands of
civilians who die as a result of those bombs and for the
hundreds of thousands of civilians who flee terrorized,
it is not a detail. France welcomes the courage and
determination of the Syrian people. We cannot abandon
them in the hands of those torturers.
With the adoption of this resolution, the Security
Council avoids the dishonour of silence. It is now up to
us collectively to ensure that the parties to the conflict,
in particular the regime, heed the strong and urgent
message conveyed to it and translate the Council’s
requests into specific actions.
I wish to underscore the intention expressed by the
Council to adopt additional measures if the resolution
is not implemented. We will therefore return to the
Chamber in 30 days to hear the report of the SecretaryGeneral and, if the Syrian Government remains deaf to
our demands, we should take the necessary measures.
France will not forget about the meeting.
The humanitarian suffering can be resolved only
by means of a political transition. We cannot accept an
end without follow-up to the discussions in Geneva.
There again, it is the Syrian regime that bears the

14-242535/16

S/PV.7116

The situation in the Middle East

responsibility for the failure by refusing the agenda
for the talks proposed by Mr. Brahimi and accepted
by the opposition. It is up to us to show collectively
the same urgency and resolve. France will continue to
stand beside the Syrian people. Criminals should pay
for their crimes.
Ms. Power (United States of America); At long
last, the Security Council has spoken clearly and
unanimously about the devastating humanitarian
catastrophe unfolding in Syria. For a body that has long
been too divided to acknowledge even the basic facts of
the horror in Syria, today’s resolution (resolution 2139
(2014)) is a long overdue and altogether necessary step
towards reality.
Whatever has or has not transpired in the Security
Council for the past three years, the Syrian people have
had the grave misfortune of living in the real world.
That real world is what was captured in this week’s
report from the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights — that more than 173,000 people are
believed to be trapped in Ghouta, including several
thousands who have hardly any food and have been
given permission by the religious authorities to eat
cats and dogs. That real world is what was recounted
recently by the Secretary-General, when he informed
the Council of the unspeakable abuses being committed
against children, including kidnapping, sexual violence,
beatings with whips, electric shocks and imprisonment
without cause.
The real world in Syria today is a medical system that
has collapsed; a school system that barely functions; a
city of Aleppo that once had 5,000 doctors and now has
some 36; a country where a quarter of a million people
are trying to survive in neighbourhoods under siege,
2.5 million are refugees and 6.5 million are displaced;
a country with countless hungry children, untreated
infections, shrapnel wounds and lost limbs; a country
where some mothers are denied the nourishment they
require to sustain the infants that they hold in their
arms; and a country where the bombs continue to fall,
the shelling goes on and the agony deepens.
Some say that all of that is the inevitable consequence
of war. I say it is the result of actions intentionally and
wilfully taken by specific individuals, and what those
individuals have the power to do, they have the power
and responsibility to stop. I refer to the Syrian regime,
led by Bashar Al-Assad, who has put his devotion to
preserving power above the welfare of tens of millions

6/16

22/02/2014

of people. I refer to him and his security forces, who
pummel civilian neighbourhoods with barrel bombs,
his snipers who delight in picking off children who are
walking with their parents so as to watch both suffer
unbearably, and I refer to terrorist groups like Al-Nusra
and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, who in
the name of revolution have, in parts of Syria, imposed
a new terror on Syrians, supplementing Al-Assad’s
dictatorial fanaticism with religious fanaticism.
The resolution adopted today and the day-to-day
reality in Syria are not about politics or ideology. We
came here as representatives from around the world
to do what we could to try to help people who are in
desperate need of help to live and breathe as we do.
That is all.
It is remarkable to the world that it has taken
three years for the Security Council to recognize
basic facts and to call for such basic principles of
humanity — simply that Syrians in need should not be
held under siege, that they should not be bombed by
barrel bombs and that they should not be starved. It is
a gross understatement to say it should not have taken
this long.
The resolution is important for two reasons. It has
a clear demand for specific and concrete actions, and it
is a commitment to act in the event of non-compliance.
It was a difficult resolution to agree on, but it should
not have been. Many of the issues that come before this
body are complicated. This is not.
It is because the United States believes that civilians
should not be starved, should not be bombed and should
not be denied access to the most basic things required
to sustain life that we welcome today’s action by the
Security Council. It is now our fervent hope that the
Council will show similar courage to ensure that our
unanimous demands result in changes to ease suffering,
especially for the hundreds of thousands of civilians
who have been encircled by snipers and trapped in
besieged communities. Our goal here today is to ensure
that help is received by people who will die without it
and that innocent civilians are not killed while waiting
for that assistance to arrive.
It remains to be seen whether our action today will
have the beneficial results we intend. Given its track
record to date, the Syrian regime can be trusted only
to deny what it has done and lie about what it will do.
Accordingly, I call upon all Council members and
all members of the international community to join

14-24253

22/02/2014

The situation in the Middle East

in pressing Damascus — and any actor who fails to
comply — to fulfil the terms of the resolution on a
comprehensive and urgent basis. There should be no
more broken promises, no more delays and no more
coupling minor concessions with crimes that are so
horrific, so systematic and so recurrent that they have
lost some of their power to shock the conscience.
Today, the Council has achieved consensus. Now
we must insist upon action. Our common security,
our common humanity and our collective conscience
demand nothing less.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Security Council decided relatively
recently to consider the humanitarian situation in
Syria, and only after it became clear that attempts to
use the deterioration of the humanitarian situation to
effect regime change were unsuccessful.
The Russian Federation supported the resolution just
adopted (resolution 2139 (2014)) because, in the process
of negotiating its text, many Russian considerations
were taken into account, and the resulting document
was thus of a balanced nature.
The main aim of international efforts concerning
the humanitarian crisis in Syria, including today’s
resolution, is to improve the situation in Syria and
facilitate the provision of humanitarian assistance to
the population in need. In order to achieve that, all
parties must cooperate with international humanitarian
agencies. Those agencies, in coordination with the
Syrian authorities and with the active assistance of
the Russian Federation, are carrying out difficult,
painstaking work in very difficult conflict conditions.
That work has seen positive and concrete results,
although not as quickly as we would have liked. There
has been a gradual opening up of the population
centres. Recent examples include the southern
suburbs of Damascus — Yalda, Babila, Bayt Sahm
and Aqraba — where until very recently, residents
were firing weapons against soldiers. They are now
patrolling with them and pooling their efforts to combat
banditry and terrorism. The established ceasefire in
Barzeh and Moadamiya is important. Thousands of
civilians have returned home. Progress is being made
on the reconstruction of the infrastructure in all the
population centres mentioned, and soon there are going
to be functioning medical centres and schools.

S/PV.7116

Progress in improving the difficult situation for
civilians has shown the value of effective humanitarian
operations and of providing support with the coordinated
action of all participating parties. That experience
needs to be expanded to other areas of Syria as well.
There need to be agreements on localized ceasefires,
access for humanitarian supplies and the exchange of
prisoners.
There have also been other advances. An air
bridge to provide humanitarian access to Qamishli has
been organized. Humanitarian terminals have been
opened. Vaccination campaigns against polio have
been successfully carried out throughout the country,
reaching over 3.4 million children.
Despite the difficult conditions on the ground,
areas that are difficult to access in Aleppo, Idlib,
Homs, Hama and Dayr Al-Zour and Raqqa have
received more than 51 convoys. Work is under way to
normalize the humanitarian situation in the Palestinian
Al-Yarmouk camp. However, the armed rebels in Syria
are continuing to plunder convoys, kill humanitarian
workers and attack civilian facilities, using civilians as
human shields and carrying out terrorist attacks. There
is still no way to provide assistance to the besieged
areas of Nubul and Zahra, besieged by the rebels, in
Aleppo, Fuah and Kifarya in the Idlib governorate,
Adra in the suburbs of Damascus, and the northeast
province of Hasakah.
Similar activities by the opposition to undermine
humanitarian operations must be swiftly and firmly
condemned by all members of the international
community. We believe that the resolution appropriately
assesses such actions, and the appropriate signals will
reach those who are sabotaging humanitarian efforts in
Syria.
The resolution adopted today focuses on the need
to provide humanitarian access based on a mutual,
unpoliticized and impartial approach and in line with
the guiding principles of the United Nations in the
area of providing humanitarian assistance. That fully
applies to the provisions of the resolution regarding the
provision of humanitarian assistance across front lines
and the borders of neighbouring countries. We believe
that humanitarian workers will adhere to those rules
and the Secretary-General will bear this in mind in his
reports to the Security Council. We trust that Syrian
authorities and the opposition will implement the

14-242537/16

S/PV.7116

The situation in the Middle East

resolution appropriately by freeing besieged areas and
so-called remote regions.
The Security Council, irrespective of the progress
achieved by this resolution and its implementation
by all sides, can consider further steps. However, we
would like to underscore that the resolution does not
provide for an automatic imposition of sanctions — the
Security Council would not have allowed that.
The resolution once again draws attention to the
fact that, given the lack of a political settlement, the
humanitarian situation will continue to deteriorate.
We believe that an improvement in the humanitarian
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic, just as a solution
to the problems that are causing the ongoing and bloody
conflict in the country, will be possible only through
a comprehensive political settlement. That is possible
by ensuring sustainable progress in negotiations among
the Syrian parties based on the Geneva communiqué
of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex). That document
is based on the understanding that decisions on
fundamental matters of developing the Syrian State
will be taken by the Syrian people themselves, based
on mutual consent. Only decisions taken in such a way
can be viable and lead to the settlement of the conflict
in the country, which has already suffered so much.
A central element of the resolution is its strong
anti-terrorism component, which is in line with the
June 2013 declaration adopted by the Group of Eight
Heads of State and Government meeting at Lough Erne.
It calls on all Syrian sides to break with terrorists. In
that regard, we underscore the need for the opposition
groups not only to assume their responsibilities but to
support the fight against terrorism in Syria in order to
eradicate the problem and to work together with the
Government to overcome that challenge.
We believe that the Security Council should
swiftly proceed to discuss a further draft document on
countering terrorist activities in Syria.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2139 (2014), on Syria. Today, the Council has
finally shown that, whatever its political differences
over Syria, it was not entirely indifferent to the
devastating humanitarian crisis. We applaud the efforts
of Australia, Jordan and Luxembourg in leading the
negotiating process.

8/16

22/02/2014

It has been nearly three years now since the Syrian
people bravely stood up to demand their legitimate and
universal rights. Since then, Al-Assad has waged a
brutal war against his own people. He is responsible for
the biggest humanitarian crisis in the world and some of
the worst human rights abuses in the world.
Four-and-a-half months ago, the Security Council
adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/15) that
was designed to alleviate the humanitarian impact of
this conflict. The Council urged all parties, in particular
the Syrian authorities, to take a number of specific steps
to improve access and to protect civilians. But not only
has that statement been roundly ignored by the Syrian
regime; the situation has got drastically worse.
My Russian colleague suggests that there has been
humanitarian progress, but the reality on the ground
tells a very different story. There are now 9.3 million
people in need — an increase of more than one third
since 2 October. Over the same period, the number of
internally displaced persons has risen by 50 per cent,
to 6.5 million people. And an estimated 140,000 people
have been killed since the crisis began — an increase of
40 per cent since six months ago.
Last week, Valerie Amos came to the Council
and laid bare the scale of this humanitarian crisis
(see S/PV.7109). She called on the Council to take
urgent action to improve the reach of humanitarian
organizations. Today, the Council has answered that
call. We hope that the adoption of resolution 2139 (2014)
will lead to action on the ground, bringing some relief
to the millions of Syrians in dire need of humanitarian
assistance.
The resolution demands that the Syrian regime
lift the siege of besieged areas, end the abhorrent and
indiscriminate use of barrel bombs in populated areas
and allow the United Nations and its partners to deliver
aid across borders. The Syrian regime must immediately
comply with those demands. To cite just one example,
more than 1 million people in the most extreme need
would immediately benefit from United Nations aid
delivered across borders. The Security Council will
review the humanitarian situation every 30 days and,
as the resolution makes clear, we fully intend to take
further steps if the demands set out in the resolution
are ignored.
Although this resolution is an important step
forward, we know that only an outcome on the political
track will provide a lasting solution to the humanitarian

14-24253

22/02/2014

The situation in the Middle East

crisis in Syria. The United Kingdom will intensify its
support with our allies for the “Geneva II” process
to bring about a political settlement of the conflict
in Syria. The international community must apply
the same sense of unity in support of the Geneva II
negotiations as it has shown today.
The message from the Council to the Syrian regime
is clear: end the killing of your own people; stop the
aerial bombardment, in particular barrel bombs; lift
the sieges; and allow humanitarian aid to reach those
in desperate need.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of Argentina would like to express its
gratitude to the delegations of Australia, Jordan and
Luxembourg for driving this initiative forward and for
their efforts to achieve a consensus text, in which they
conducted themselves with openness and transparency.
We also wish to highlight the constructive attitude
taken by all members of the Council, who, despite their
different positions on the situation in Syria, managed to
put unity first and agreed to speak with a single voice to
help alleviate the grave humanitarian crisis afflicting
the Syrian people.
It is clear that neither the presidential statement of
2 October 2013 (S/PRST/2013/15), despite its binding
character, nor the various initiatives undertaken by
the United Nations and the international community
to improve the humanitarian situation in Syria have
been able to attain the results we sought — insofar as
the violence and killing have not stopped, and almost
half of the population of the country is now in need of
assistance.
The number of victims, while hard to pinpoint, is
nonetheless compelling, demanding that the Security
Council fulfil its institutional mandate, historic
responsibility and moral conscience by ensuring it
is not an obstacle but an instrument up to the task of
helping reverse this tragic situation by taking new and
more effective decisions.
The reports we receive week after week
bring us to the realization that Syria and all of its
people — especially the weakest and most vulnerable:
women , young people and children — cannot and do
not deserve to continue to be torn apart in the spiral of
violence, cruelty, suffering, death, fear, despair, pain,
slaughter, desolation and hunger. Nor do they deserve
to be plunged into the even more chilling darkness of
feeling that their suffering will never end.

S/PV.7116

While it is true that there have been some recent
positive developments — such as the Homs ceasefire
agreement, access to the Yarmouk camp, the positive
results of the polio-vaccination campaign, the greater
flexibility from the Government in issuing visas for
humanitarian workers or the progress in establishing
humanitarian aid distribution centres for in Aleppo and
Qamishli — all of those things, even though they can be
taken as encouraging signs, are clearly insufficient. We
say this because, at the same time, flagrant violations
of international humanitarian law continue unabated,
as do deliberate attacks against people and property
that are under specific protections — aid workers,
medical personnel, patients, hospitals and schools.
Indiscriminate attacks continue, with no distinction
being made between civilians and combatants, as do
horrendous sectarian massacres, such as that which
occurred in Ma’an on 9 February. Without a doubt,
these bleak events do nothing to slow the shocking
deterioration of the humanitarian situation; on the
contrary, their effect is to exacerbate the downward
spiral.
Argentina voted in favour of resolution 2139 (2014)
based on the conviction that the Security Council
must assume its responsibility under the Charter of
the United Nations and explore all means and actions
that may have a positive impact on the ground in order
to alleviate the suffering the Syrian people and help
the countries of the region affected directly by the
consequences of this crisis, who have not shied away
from accepting thousands of people on a daily basis, the
vast majority of whom are fragile, frightened victims.
The resolution adopted today contains elements of
great significance for Argentina, of which I will mention
only a few. I underscore the fundamental importance
of ensuring unrestricted access for humanitarian
assistance. We must emphasize the responsibility to
protect civilians, combat terrorism in all of its forms,
call upon all of the parties to put an end to violence,
ensure respect for human rights and for the norms of
international humanitarian law, and urge the Syrian
people to demonstrate, through pacific means and
dialogue, their will to live in a society that respect life,
preserves diversity and safeguards its cultural heritage.
As we reaffirm Argentina’s commitment to the
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Syria, we reiterate that the fight against
impunity and the full applicability of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law

14-242539/16

S/PV.7116

The situation in the Middle East

are not an obstacle to peace but, rather, an indispensable
prerequisite for achieving it.
Along the same lines, we reiterate that those
responsible for serious crimes and crimes against
humanity must be held accountable for their actions and
brought to justice. We also believe that humanitarian
assistance is urgent and crucial and that the suffering
and deprivation experienced by the Syrian people are
a consequence and not the cause of the conflict. We
fully agree with those who believe that there can be no
military solution to the conflict, only a political one.
Death cannot be resolved by causing more death, said
our President in this very forum.
Only through an inclusive political dialogue without
preconditions or extortion can the Syrian people move
forward and find a path that will lead them to lasting
peace and security. For that reason, we reiterate our
call on all parties to make a decisive commitment to
the negotiations begun in Geneva last month and the
need for the principal regional and international players
to help create the conditions necessary for all of the
different actors in the Syrian conflict to overcome
their differences through peaceful means, dialogue and
substantive agreements.
As the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Argentina
said at the Security Council meeting at which resolution
2118 (2013) was adopted:
“With today’s resolution, the Council is finally
assuming its responsibility for stabilizing the
situation in Syria and contributing to achieving
a lasting peace, reaffirming the strength of
multilateralism as a cornerstone of the collective
security system established by the Charter of
the United Nations as the world’s only guarantee
against the hegemony of might-is-right.” (see
S/PV.7038, p. 13).
Argentina believes that this resolution, which
focuses on the humanitarian emergency affecting Syria,
can in no way be used as an excuse for any unilateral
use of force, nor can it give rise to militarization as a
way of resolving the conflict.
Allow me to conclude by recalling what Pope
Francis said on 7 September 2013, in a homily calling
for dialogue and reconciliation in Syria. I am sure that
the words of Pope Francis convey with deep simplicity
the silent cry of the victims:

10/16

22/02/2014

“We have perfected our weapons, our conscience
has fallen asleep, and we have sharpened our
ideas to justify ourselves. As if it were normal, we
continue to sow destruction, pain, death. Violence
… lead[s] only to death … Peace expresses itself
only in peace.”
We hope that this resolution, the step we are taking
today, will help to achieve this much-needed, longsought-after objective.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): Over
the past three years, the Syrian conflict has continued
to escalate, causing heavy casualties and serious loss
of property, as well as the displacement of millions
of civilians. China is seriously concerned at the
ever-worsening humanitarian situation in Syria and
sympathizes with the Syrian people who have sustained
profound suffering. The current humanitarian situation
in Syria must not continue.
China supports the efforts made by the international
community, especially the United Nations, to ease the
humanitarian situation in Syria and appreciates the
contribution made by neighbouring countries in hosting
a large number of Syrian refugees.
China has on many occasions provided
humanitarian assistance to Syria and the neighbouring
countries through multiple channels and will continue
to provide help to the best of its ability to the Syrian
people, including Syrian refugees outside Syria, so as
to ease their suffering.
As the core of the collective security mechanism,
the Security Council bears primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The adoption by the Council of resolution 2139 (2014)
is yet another unanimous action taken by the Council
on the question of Syria since the adoption of resolution
2118 (2013) last year. This is the result of the common
efforts of the members of the Council.
In the current circumstances, the actions taken by
the Security Council on the humanitarian situation in
Syria should be objective, balanced and conducive to
the maintenance of international humanitarian norms
and of the momentum for the political settlement of the
Syrian crisis.
Resolution 2139 (2014) reiterates respect for
the independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of Syria, states the responsibility of all
parties concerned in Syria for the improvement of the

14-24253

22/02/2014

The situation in the Middle East

humanitarian situation, stresses the imperative for all
parties to abide by the guiding principles of United
Nations humanitarian relief work, expresses support
for the political settlement of the Syrian question and
sends a unanimous and powerful message for the early
improvement of the humanitarian situation in Syria. As
such, it is of great significance.
Going forward, the international community
should ensure the implementation of resolution
2139 (2014). We urge all parties in Syria to set their
sights on the interests of their nation and their
people, comprehensively implement the resolution,
fully cooperate with the United Nations and other
organizations and make common efforts for the
improvement of the humanitarian situation in their
country. The international community should continue
to provide humanitarian assistance to Syria and actively
support the efforts made by neighbouring countries in
hosting Syrian refugees.
Humanitarian measures can offer only temporary
relief of the suffering of the Syrian people. It is only
by seeking a political settlement to the question of
Syria that it will be possible to achieve a fundamental
improvement in the humanitarian situation in Syria.
Thanks to the common efforts of all parties, including
China, the second Geneva conference was held last
month. That was an important step in the political
settlement of the question of Syria.
Resolution 2139 (2014) gives fresh impetus to
the political process in Syria. The question of Syria
is complex and sensitive and not easy to resolve. We
hope that the international community will insist on
the political settlement of the question of Syria, insist
on letting the Syrian people decide the future of their
country themselves, continue to promote an inclusive
political transitional process and continue efforts to
foster the realization of national reconciliation and unity
in Syria and to ensure the delivery of humanitarian
assistance in Syria and in neighbouring countries. We
hope that the parties concerned in Syria will comply
with this resolution, engage in dialogue and negotiations
to establish mutual trust, meet one another halfway
and draw on other useful experiences so as to reach a
settlement on the basis of the claims of all parties that
is in line with the national conditions of Syria and that
accommodates the interests of all parties.
As a permanent member of the Security Council
and a responsible member of the international

S/PV.7116

community, China will continue to make a positive
contribution to the promotion of the early realization of
the comprehensive, lasting and appropriate resolution
of the question of Syria.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): The humanitarian situation
in Syria is a consequence of the unabated brutal
violence which has so far defied any logic or solution.
Syria’s centrality to stability in the region
underscores the imperative for the Council to act
in concert to ensure rapid, safe and unimpeded
humanitarian access to populations in need of
assistance across the country. It is for this reason that
Nigeria recognizes the imperative of supporting any
peaceful initiative that seeks to alleviate the suffering
of Syrians and leads to a permanent political solution to
the protracted conflict.
We are confident that the collective action that we
have taken today in adopting this resolution (resolution
2139 (2014)) is a significant and giant step towards
protecting the defenceless civililans, including women
and children, in Syria, who continue to bear the brunt
of the deadly confrontation between opposing forces.
We express regret that there was no consensus on
the inclusion of a paragraph in the final text calling
upon all States to refrain from transferring arms to
the parties in the Syrian conflict, given that such
arms could be used to commit or to facilitate Syria’s
violations or abuses of international human rights or
humanitarian law.
Nonetheless, the adoption of this resolution today
is a powerful and visible demonstration of the renewed
commitment of the Council to work in the higher
interests of the Syrian people. We expect that concerted
effort to be replicated subsequently in the Council’s
future efforts.
We want in particular to commend Australia,
Jordan and Luxembourg not only for their leadership,
but especially for accommodating the views of Council
members in the course of the negotiations.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to begin my statement by thanking the delegations
of Australia, Luxembourg and Jordan for preparing this
resolution (resolution 2139 (2014)) and for the flexibility
that they showed in negotiating it.
Through the unanimous adoption of resolution 2139
(2014), the Security Council has taken an important

14-2425311/16

S/PV.7116

The situation in the Middle East

and necessary step in helping to address the critical
humanitarian situation in Syria, which deteriorates
daily and which has tragically affected the Syrian
people. The situation has had a serious impact on the
neighbouring countries and has become a threat to
international peace and security. A void has thus been
filled, given that the presidential statement of 2 October
2013 (S/PRST/2013/15) has not been implemented, nor
did it lead to progress on the ground.
My delegation voted in favour of the resolution,
which is a forceful message that obliges all parties to
comply with international humanitarian and human
rights law, to ensure the protection of civilians and to
establish specific measures on the ground to enable
prompt, safe and unhindered humanitarian access to
the affected population throughout Syria.
We believe the reference to accountability before
the law for those who have committed human rights
violations and abuses to be of particular importance.
For my delegation, the cases that could constitute war
crimes or crimes against humanity should be referred
to the International Criminal Court.
The resolution that we have adopted must be
fully implemented in all its provisions. In the case of
non-compliance, the Council should consider additional
measures. In accordance with the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, the States Members of
the United Nations agree to accept and carry out the
decisions of the Security Council.
It is our conviction that only through a political
solution can we put an end to the humanitarian crisis.
We agree with the call by the Secretary-General and
his Special Envoy concerning the need to seek such a
political solution to the conflict. With that in mind, it is
crucial to put an end to the militarization of the conflict,
as stated in the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex).
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): The Republic of
Korea welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution
2139 (2014). This resolution is a new landmark in the
Council’s work but also one that is long overdue. For
nearly three years, the humanitarian crisis in Syria
has deteriorated while the Council has been seemingly
unable to take proper action to provide relief to the long
suffering of the Syrian people. Hopefully, our unity
today will ensure the Council’s effective role in dealing
with the crisis from this day forward. We express our
appreciation to the authors of the resolution — Australia,

12/16

22/02/2014

Jordan and Luxembourg — for their advocacy of
humanitarian causes.
The Republic of Korea voted in favour of the
resolution, as it lays out important steps to alleviate
the suffering of all civilians in Syria, especially those
who are trapped in besieged areas. The resolution
demands that all parties, in particular the Syrian
authorities, promptly allow rapid, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access for all United Nations agencies
and their partners, including across conflict lines and
across borders. As we welcome the resolution, we are
also aware that it will not end the conflict. We urge both
parties in Syria to engage more seriously in political
negotiations.
In that regard, we reaffirm our unqualified support
for the mediation efforts of Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and Special Envoy Brahimi.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Rwanda would like
to explain its vote on resolution 2139 (2014), just
adopted, on the humanitarian situation in Syria. First
of all, I commend Australia, Jordan and Luxembourg
for proposing this important resolution, which was
necessary following the failure by all Syrian parties to
fully implement the presidential statement of 2 October
2013 (S/PRST/2013/15).
Rwanda voted in favour of the resolution because
we are appalled by the worsening humanitarian
situation on the ground, as reported on many occasions
to the Council by the United Nations Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos.
We are particularly concerned about the siege on many
cities and populated areas in Syria, including the Old
City of Homs, where innocent civilians, including
women and children, were trapped for months without
any access to basic humanitarian assistance.
Rwanda has on various occasions expressed its
position on the Syrian crisis. Like all Council members,
we believe that there can be no military solution to the
conflict. We reiterate our call on all parties to remain
engaged for a peaceful and political settlement through
the ongoing second Geneva Conference on Syria, which
is the only viable solution that will end the security,
political and humanitarian crisis in Syria.
It is in that context that we deeply regret that the
important amendments on the responsibility of States
that are supplying weapons to the Syrian parties were
not included in the final version of the resolution. Those

14-24253

22/02/2014

The situation in the Middle East

reasonable amendments, based on agreed language,
merely expressed grave concern at the negative impact
of the transfer and use of weapons in Syria in terms
of loss of life, security and stability. The amendments
also underlined that the increased arms transfers
to all parties in Syria hurt the prospect of a political
settlement to the conflict, and called upon all States
to refrain from transferring arms to the parties in the
Syrian conflict when they assessed that they would be
used in committing crimes.
It is therefore a shame that, after three years of
a conflict in which over 100,000 people have been
killed, 6.5 million have been internally displaced and
9.3 million are in need of humanitarian assistance, we
instead continue to supply more and more weapons.
We therefore urge that the Secretary-General’s call
be heeded, as he has been telling us to stop fuelling
this conflict with deadly weapons and, rather, use our
influence in convincing both parties to make significant
progress in the Geneva peace talks. I think that is very
wise.
To conclude, we hope that, unlike the presidential
statement of 2 October 2013 (S/PRST/2013/15),
resolution 2139 (2014) will be fully implemented by
both parties, including through the lifting of the siege
on all cities and populated areas and the granting of full
access to humanitarian assistance.
I have the feeling that the Syrian crisis has been
gravely undermining the credibility of the Security
Council for three years now. Nonetheless, following the
resumption of the peace talks and the ongoing process
for the destruction of Syrian chemical weapons, which
was all facilitated by permanent members of the
Council, we express the wish that they will use the
same influence to ensure a significant improvement on
the humanitarian front.
Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): Chad
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution
2139 (2014), on the humanitarian situation in Syria,
following lengthy negotiations in which everyone made
commendable efforts to reach a compromise. We thank
the Security Council members who took the initiative to
promote this resolution, which will certainly contribute
to relieving the suffering of the civilian population
of Syria, who have been attacked with barrel bombs,
besieged, displaced and become refugees.
Chad is very aware of the humanitarian issues
in Syria, and we hope that the implementation of the

S/PV.7116

provisions of the resolution will enable the population
to have access to the humanitarian assistance that they
are unjustly deprived of. The Syrian authorities are
called upon to put an end to violence against the civilian
population and violations of international humanitarian
law and pave the way for true negotiations in order to
reach acceptable solutions to the Syrian crisis.
We welcome the firmness shown by Council
members and their commitment to the Syrian people,
and we encourage the Council to continue efforts in
that direction.
The resolution is a call on the Syrian parties to
shoulder their responsibilities and prioritize dialogue
in order to bring an end to the abuses that innocent
civilians have fallen victim to. We believe that speeding
up the destruction of chemical weapons and ending
the use of barrel bombs would help create conditions
conducive to a return to stability in Syria.
Chad supports the efforts of the international
community in seeking a lasting solution in Syria, and
resolution 2139 (2014) is a very important step in that
direction.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Lithuania.
Lithuania welcomes the unanimous adoption of this
resolution on humanitarian issues in Syria (resolution
2139 (2014)). The unanimous vote today is a message
of vital importance for those Syrians who have been
for long months desperately waiting for humanitarian
assistance: that the Council is ready to step up its efforts
in addressing one of the most horrendous humanitarian
situations of this century.
For too many Syrians, this moment of Council
unity has come too late. What has transpired during the
three years of mounting atrocities defies description.
Yet today we have a moment of hope — hope for those
under siege, hope for those watching their loved ones
succumb to starvation and hope for those living under
the constant threat of aerial bombardments, mortar
attacks and barrel bombs.
We strongly hope that today’s unanimous vote
by the Council will make a tangible difference in
addressing the humanitarian needs of the Syrian people
and ensuring rapid, safe and unhindered humanitarian
access and the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel.

14-2425313/16

S/PV.7116

The situation in the Middle East

It is now up to the parties to the conflict to act
immediately and decisively to implement the resolution
in full and to put an end to the horrific abuses of
international humanitarian and human rights law.
Compliance by all parties to the conflict, especially
the Syrian Government, which bears the primary and
ultimate responsibility to protect its population, is
paramount. My delegation underlines that the Council
should and must be ready to take the necessary further
steps in the event that the parties to the conflict fail to
heed the call of the resolution. The Council’s credibility
is at stake.
Let me also underline the importance of
accountability for all the war crimes, crimes against
humanity and gross violations of human rights that have
taken place during these three long years. Impunity
breeds violence and perpetuates conflict. Impunity
cannot be allowed to continue. The Council must use
the all tools at its disposal, including referrals to the
International Criminal Court, to address the issue
and render justice to the nearly 140,000 dead and the
millions made refugees and displaced by this conflict.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I had wanted to welcome the presence of His
Excellency the Secretary-General here with us, but he
has now left the Chamber. I shall therefore proceed
directly with my statement.
Since the beginning of the crisis, the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic has been eager to improve the
humanitarian situation of its people. Therefore, on the
basis of its constitutional and international obligations,
it has continued to work day and night to fulfil all the
humanitarian needs of its citizens. In parallel to that,
the Syrian Government has worked to restore peace and
stability to the entire country.
The Syrian Government is fully committed to,
and fully abides by, its international commitments,
including its commitment to cooperate with the United
Nations and its agencies in the humanitarian field, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 46/182
and the guidelines laid out therein, first and foremost of
which is respect for the national sovereignty of States.

14/16

22/02/2014

Accordingly, in the context of the Syrian
Government’s implementation of the presidential
statement of 2 October 2013 (S/PRST/2013/15), the
Syrian Government has implemented a number of
administrative and logistic measures that enable the
United Nations and humanitarian organizations to
expand their activities and increase their effectiveness.
That would not have been possible had it not been for the
cooperation of the Syrian Government and the measures
it has taken to facilitate them as a full partner. I would
like to give just one example in that regard, namely, the
agreement by the Syrian Government to open a third air
bridge to carry humanitarian assistance from the Iraqi
city of Erbil to the Syrian city of Qamishli. That air
bridge entailed 11 flights, while the first and second
had 13 and 10, respectively. The Syrian Government
has also offered to use its own air fleet to carry out
those flights as a gesture of goodwill.
In addition to the partnership I have just detailed,
I would like to remind the Council of the fact that
the Syrian Government has borne the brunt of the
distribution of humanitarian assistance in Syria. We
have covered 75 per cent of such assistance, whereas
United Nations bodies and other international
organizations operating in Syria have covered only
25 per cent of the total amount of assistance distributed.
Certain Governments, some of which are
members of the Council, have, in response to Syria’s
openness, cooperation and positive commitment in the
humanitarian field, persisted in and maintained their
campaign of deception, sowing doubts and spreading
crude claims. That clearly reveals their evil intentions
in principle against Syria. That has also revealed that
some of them have sadistic intentions. They want
to prevail in international relations at the expense of
the pain, suffering and destroyed hopes of the Syrian
nation.
Some States have exposed their deep frustration
at the emergence of positive developments in the
humanitarian and political fields. That frustration was
reflected in destruction and terrorism. The Syrian
Government has paid the price, and continues to do so.
In addition, there has been a campaign of
increasingly provocative statements and inflammatory
meetings to encourage and provoke, clearly and
crudely, the armed terrorist groups, which are under
the command of certain Member States. Those States
sponsor and train the groups with a view to depriving

14-24253

22/02/2014

The situation in the Middle East

Syrian citizens of their daily bread and livelihoods. The
Syrian people are left to sink deeper into suffering, as
my dear colleague from Argentina said.
The fact that some members of the Council have
sought to reduce the situation in Syria to a politicized
humanitarian issue alone itself exacerbates the
humanitarian crisis and trades on the suffering of the
Syrian people. It is also a biased and subjective reading
of the situation, which masks the serious interventionist
agenda that seeks to manipulate the humanitarian crisis
and mislead international public opinion. Suffice it to
say that some members of the Council have objected
eight times to the adoption of even a press statement
denouncing terrorist acts that have taken the lives
of thousands of innocent Syrian civilians. Those
same States that are so very eager to discuss the
humanitarian situation in Syrian have also refused to
provide ambulances and wheelchairs for people with
special needs.
The Syrian Government has long welcomed all
sincere efforts to improve the humanitarian situation
in Syria and has cooperated positively with the United
Nations. We also welcomed the presidential statement
of October 2013 and abided by its provisions.
Humanitarian support to the Syrian people cannot
be effective unless it is accompanied in word and deed
by an end to the efforts to politicize humanitarian
issues and an end to terrorist acts. The activities of
the armed terrorist groups, including those associated
with Al-Qaida, are the main cause of the humanitarian
suffering of the Syrian people. Those armed terrorist
groups systematically target infrastructure, destroying
the country and bleeding it of its resources. In addition,
they are intentionally targeting in a premeditated way
humanitarian convoys, which they have repeatedly
plundered. They have also attacked and killed several
humanitarian workers, in addition to mounting attacks
and blockades against a number of areas of Syria,
depriving the civilian inhabitants of humanitarian aid
for long periods. Such use of civilians as humanitarian
hostages and human shields seeks to prevent the Syrian
security forces and army from taking action against the
terrorists.
In that context, the Syrian Government, like those
of all other States Members of this Organization, is
upholding its constitutional right and obligation to
fight terrorism, which is indiscriminately targeting

S/PV.7116

Syria. It is doing so based on international law and the
resolutions of the Council.
Law enforcement is at the heart of State authority,
and that includes countering terrorist activities carried
out on our territory. No one can deny the duty of and
exclusive right of the State to do so.
In addition to the terrorist activities I just
mentioned, it is well known that the coercive unilateral
economic measures illegitimately imposed by certain
States against the Syrian people have had a negative
impact on the livelihoods and living conditions of the
Syrian people.
There is also the additional obstacle of the lack
of humanitarian financing. The financing of the
humanitarian response plan for 2014 has not exceeded
7 per cent of the required funding, in spite of the highly
publicized conferences being held left and right. The
amount of financing for the regional response plan for
Syrian refugees has not exceeded 13 per cent.
The Syrian Government announced early on that
it was serious and sincere in seeking to resolve the
crisis through a political process built on dialogue with
all political actors and civil, cultural and economic
constituencies within the country, including the national
opposition and those armed groups that lay down their
weapons and give priority to the language of reason
and law in order to preserve the country and safeguard
its institutions. In that context, the Government has
provided genuine judicial, security and political
guarantees to those who wish to be involved in that
national process. Indeed, the Government approach has
led to concrete results on the ground in several areas
of Syria. Recently, a number of local reconciliation
processes have been implemented, sending a clear
message to the world that the people of Syria are
capable of resolving this crisis by themselves, free of
any outside manipulation of their interests.
What we have just heard from a colleague — that
the security forces arrested some Syrians following
their surrender within the reconciliation process — is
entirely untrue and I hereby deny it in front of all present.
In that context, the Government is working round
the clock to make sure that all service facilities in
those areas will be ready to provide for the needs of
the residents and to receive the remaining displaced
persons who are willing to return to their homes to
live in peace and stability. In the end, their homeland
is the final refuge for its people, especially if we take

14-2425315/16

S/PV.7116

The situation in the Middle East

into consideration the fact that the suffering of Syrian
refugees has become a political commodity to be traded
crassly; likewise for the suffering, deteriorating health,
living and security conditions and unethical indignities
imposed on the Syrians living in refugee camps.
The Syrian Government has abided by all of the
provisions of the presidential statement issued by
the Security Council on 2 October 2013. I myself
welcomed it a few minutes after its adoption. Many
of its provisions are reiterated in the resolution just
adopted by the Council. That resolution, in turn,
clearly and unequivocally confirmed that international
terrorism was being carried out by groups associated
with Al-Qaida, after having denied, in an unjustified
and incomprehensible way, its existence throughout the
Syrian crisis.
The time has come for the Council to carry out
seriously and firmly its duties in dealing with the
roots of the humanitarian situation, namely, the
terrorist activities perpetrated by Takfirist groups
against civilians in Syria with the support of wellknown Governments, individuals and entities that have
become known to everybody — support in which the
Israeli occupying forces are taking part publicly and
with the knowledge of the peacekeeping department in
the disengagement zone in the occupied Syrian Golan.
Delivering humanitarian assistance across borders
can never be done in a manner that violates Syrian
national sovereignty as guaranteed by the Charter of
the United Nations. Here we would like to warn against
going beyond the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 46/182 and the guidelines for the provision of
humanitarian assistance, creating the false impression

16/16

22/02/2014

that merely allowing cross-border humanitarian
operations, with neighbouring States that are involved
in escalating the humanitarian situation, supporting,
arming, training and funding Daesh, Al-Qaida, the Al
Nusra Front and the “Islamist” Front as well as others,
would resolve and put an end to the humanitarian crisis
for millions of Syrians — this is nothing more than
a delusion, a parody of the children’s bedtime story,
“The magic wand”, that is told to them to make them
fall asleep. That is because these borders with some
neighbouring States are the source of terrorism into
Syria and bloodshed of the Syrian people.
Yes, as my dear colleague the Ambassador of
Nigeria said, the violence has reached the threshold
of nonsense and illogic, that is true. But the more
important question remains, why is this happening
in Syria, and why this unjustified silence concerning
forms of the flagrant external intervention in Syrian
internal affairs? The prevailing mentality among some,
unfortunately, is that of a diplomacy of hyenas, not of
international humanitarian law.
One last remark. A colleague stated that the Syrian
Government delegation in Geneva had rejected the
draft agenda submitted by Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi. I am
here formally denying that, because I was there in the
room and I approved the draft agenda one minute after
it was presented. It was the other party that rejected
the draft agenda, and you can ask the international
mediator, Mr. Brahimi, when he meets with the Council
soon, about the details of that story.
The President: The Security Council has thus
concluded its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

14-24253
