United Nations

A/RES/71/168

General Assembly

Distr.: General
2 February 2017

Seventy-first session
Agenda item 27

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 19 December 2016
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/71/477)]

71/168. Intensifying global efforts for the elimination of female
genital mutilation
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 53/117 of 9 December 1998, 56/128 of 19 December
2001, 67/146 of 20 December 2012, 68/146 of 18 December 2013 and 69/150 of
18 December 2014, Commission on the Status of Women resolutions 51/2 of
9 March 2007, 1 52/2 of 7 March 2008 2 and 54/7 of 12 March 2010 3 and Human
Rights Council resolutions 27/22 of 26 September 2014 4 and 32/21 of 1 July 2016, 5
and all relevant agreed conclusions of the Commission on the Status of Women,
Reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 6
Reaffirming also that the Convention on the Rights of the Child 7 and the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 8 and
all the relevant conventions, together with the optional protocols thereto, a s
appropriate, constitute an important contribution to the legal framework for the
protection and promotion of the human rights of women and girls,
Reaffirming further the Beijing Declaration 9 and Platform for Action, 10 the
outcomes of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly, entitled
“Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the twenty -first

_______________
1

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2007, Supplement No. 7 (E/2007/27), chap. I,
sect. D.
2
Ibid., 2008, Supplement No. 7 (E/2008/27), chap. I, sect. D.
3
Ibid., 2010, Supplement No. 7 and corrigendum (E/2010/27 and Corr.1), chap. I, sect. D.
4
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigenda
(A/69/53/Add.1 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. IV, sect. A.
5
Ibid., Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/71/53), chap. V, sect. A.
6
Resolution 217 A (III).
7
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
8
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
9
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
10
Ibid., annex II.

16-21875 (E)

*1621875*

Please recycle

A/RES/71/168

Intensifying global efforts for the elimination of female genital mutilation

century”, 11 the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population
and Development 12 and the Programme of Action of the World Summit for Social
Development 13 and their 5-, 10-, 15- and 20-year reviews, as well as the United
Nations Millennium Declaration, 14 and the commitments relevant to women and
girls made at the 2005 World Summit 15 and reiterated in Assembly resolution 65/1
of 22 September 2010, entitled “Keeping the promise: united to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals”, and those made in the outcome document of the
United Nations summit for the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda,
entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”, 16
Recognizing the role of regional and subregional instruments and mechanisms
in the prevention and elimination of female genital mutilation, where they exist,
Recalling the Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights
on the Rights of Women in Africa, adopted in Maputo on 11 July 2003, which
contains, inter alia, undertakings and commitments on ending female genital
mutilation and marks a significant milestone towards the elimination and ending of
female genital mutilation,
Recalling also the decision of the African Union, adopted in Malabo on 1 July
2011, to support the adoption by the General Assembly at its sixty -sixth session of a
resolution banning female genital mutilation,
Recalling further the recommendation of the Commission on the Status of
Women at its fifty-sixth session that the Economic and Social Council recommend
to the General Assembly the adoption of a decision to consider the issue of ending
female genital mutilation at its sixty-seventh session under the item entitled
“Advancement of women”, 17
Recognizing that female genital mutilation constitutes irreparable, irreversible
harm and an act of violence against women and girls that impairs their human
rights, and recognizing also that it affects about 200 million women and girls
worldwide and that each year an estimated further 4 million girls are at risk of being
subjected to the practice throughout the world, which can be an impediment to the
full achievement of gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls,
Reaffirming that female genital mutilation is a harmful practice, constituting a
serious threat to the health of women and girls, including their physical, mental,
sexual and reproductive health, increasing their vulnerability to HIV, as well as
hepatitis A and B, and possibly having adverse obstetric and prenatal outcomes, as
well as fatal consequences for the mother and the newborn, and that the elimination
of this harmful practice can be achieved as a result of a comprehensive movement
that involves all public and private stakeholders in society, including girls and boys,
women and men,
_______________
11

Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
13
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
14
Resolution 55/2.
15
See resolution 60/1.
16
Resolution 70/1.
17
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2012, Supplement No. 7 and corrigendum
(E/2012/27 and Corr.1), chap. I, sect. A.
12

2/7

Intensifying global efforts for the elimination of female genital mutilation

A/RES/71/168

Recognizing that female genital mutilation is inherently linked to deep -rooted,
negative norms, stereotypes, perceptions and customs that are obstacles to the full
enjoyment of human rights,
Concerned about evidence of an increase in the incidence of female genital
mutilation being carried out by medical personnel in all regions in which it is
practised,
Recognizing that negative discriminatory and stereotypical attitudes and
behaviours have direct implications for the status and treatment of women and girls
and that such negative stereotypes impede the implementation of legislative and
normative frameworks that guarantee gender equality and prohibit discrimination on
the basis of sex,
Stressing that men and boys play an important role in the acceleration of
progress in preventing and eliminating harmful practices such as female genital
mutilation by being agents of change,
Recognizing that the campaign of the Secretary-General entitled “UNiTE to
End Violence against Women” and the Global Database on Violence aga inst Women
have contributed to addressing the elimination of female genital mutilation,
Welcoming the efforts of the United Nations system to end female genital
mutilation, in particular the commitment of 10 United Nations entities, 18 announced in
their joint inter-agency statement of 27 February 2008 on eliminating female genital
mutilation, as well as the Joint Programme on Female Genital Mutilation/Cutting:
Accelerating Change of the United Nations Population Fund and the United Nat ions
Children’s Fund, to accelerate the elimination of the practice,
Commending the continued efforts and actions undertaken by States,
individually and collectively, regional organizations and United Nations agencies
for the elimination of female genital mutilation as well as the implementation of its
resolution 69/150,
Welcoming the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and
underscoring the importance of its implementation with a view to eliminating
female genital mutilation,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 19
Deeply concerned that, despite the increase in national, regional and
international efforts and the focus on the elimination of female genital mutilation,
the practice continues to persist in all regions of the world and is often on the rise
for migrant and refugee women and girls,
Deeply concerned also that a tremendous gap in resources continues to exist
and that the shortfall in funding has severely limited the scope and pace of
programmes and activities for the elimination of female genital mutilation,

_______________
18

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Joint United Nations Programme
on HIV/AIDS, United Nations Development Programme, Economic Commission for Africa, United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, United Nations Population Fund, Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, United Nations Children’s Fund, United Nations
Development Fund for Women and World Health Organization.
19
A/71/209.

3/7

A/RES/71/168

Intensifying global efforts for the elimination of female genital mutilation

1.
Stresses that the empowerment of women and girls is key to breaking the
cycle of discrimination and violence and for the promotion and protection of human
rights, including the right to the highest attainable standard of mental and physical
health, including sexual and reproductive health, and calls upon States parties to
fulfil their obligations under the Convention on the Rights of the Child 7 and the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 8 as
well as their commitments to implement the Declaration on the Elimination of
Violence against Women, 20 the Programme of Action of the International
Conference on Population and Development, 12 the Beijing Platform for Action 10 and
the outcomes of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly, entitled
“Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the twenty -first
century”, 11 and of the special session of the General Assembly on children; 21
2.
Calls upon States to place a stronger focus on the development and
implementation of comprehensive prevention strategies, including the enhancement
of educational campaigns, awareness-raising and formal, non-formal and informal
education and training in order to promote the direct engagement of girls and boys,
women and men and to ensure that all key actors, government officials, including
law enforcement and judicial personnel, immigration officials and parliamentarians,
health-care providers, civil society, the private sector, community and religious
leaders, teachers, employers, media professionals and those dire ctly working with
girls, as well as parents, families and communities, work to eliminate attitudes and
harmful practices, in particular all forms of female genital mutilation, that
negatively affect women and girls;
3.
Also calls upon States to strengthen advocacy and awareness-raising
programmes, to mobilize girls and boys to take an active part in developing
preventive and elimination programmes to address harmful practices, especially
female genital mutilation, and to engage families, local community and religious
leaders, educational institutions, the media and civil society and provide increased
financial support to efforts at all levels to end discriminatory social norms and
practices;
4.
Urges States to condemn all harmful practices that affect women and
girls, in particular female genital mutilation, whether committed within or outside a
medical institution, and to take all necessary measures, especially through
educational campaigns, including enacting and enforcing legislation, to prohibit
female genital mutilation and to protect women and girls from this form of violence,
and to hold perpetrators to account;
5.
Also urges States to complement punitive measures with awareness raising and educational activities designed to pro mote a process of consensus
towards the elimination of female genital mutilation, and further urges States to
protect and support women and girls who have been subjected to female genital
mutilation and those at risk, including by developing social and psychological
support services and care and appropriate remedies, and to take measures to improve
their health, including sexual and reproductive health, in order to assist women and
girls who are subjected to the practice;

_______________
20
21

4/7

Resolution 48/104.
Resolution S-27/2, annex.

Intensifying global efforts for the elimination of female genital mutilation

A/RES/71/168

6.
Further urges States to promote gender-sensitive, empowering
educational processes by reviewing and revising, as appropriate, school curricula,
educational materials and teacher-training programmes and elaborating policies and
programmes of zero tolerance for violence against girls, inc luding female genital
mutilation, placing special emphasis on education about the harmful effects of
female genital mutilation, and to further integrate a comprehensive understanding of
the causes and consequences of gender-based violence and discrimination against
women and girls into education and training curricula at all levels;
7.
Urges States to ensure that the protection and provision of support to
women and girls subject to, or at risk of, female genital mutilation are an integral
part of policies and programmes that address the practice, and to provide women
and girls with coordinated, specialized, accessible and quality multisectoral
prevention and response, including education, as well as legal, psychological,
health-care and social services, provided by qualified personnel, consistent with the
guidelines of medical ethics;
8.
Calls upon States to ensure that national action plans and strategies on
the elimination of female genital mutilation are comprehensive and
multidisciplinary in scope and that they include projected timelines for goals and
incorporate clear targets and indicators for the effective monitoring, impact
assessment and coordination of programmes among all relevant stakeholders and
promote their participation, including the participation of affected groups, practising
communities and non-governmental organizations, in the development,
implementation and evaluation of such plans and strategies;
9.
Urges States to take, within the general framework of integration policies
and in consultation with affected communities, effective and specific targeted
measures for refugee women and women migrants and their communities in order to
protect girls from female genital mutilation, including when the practice occurs
outside the country of residence;
10. Calls upon States to develop information and awareness-raising
campaigns and programmes to systematically reach the general public, relevant
professionals, families and communities, including through the media, featuring
television and radio discussions about the harmful effect of female genital
mutilation and the fact that this practice still exists, as well as about national and
international levels of support for the elimination of female genital mutilation;
11. Urges States to pursue a comprehensive, culturally sensitive, systematic
approach that incorporates a social perspective and is based on human rights and
gender-equality principles in providing education and training to families, local
community leaders and members of all professions relevant to the protection and
empowerment of women and girls in order to increase awareness of and
commitment to the elimination of female genital mutilation;
12. Also urges States to ensure the national implementation of international
and regional commitments and obligations undertaken as States parties to various
international instruments protecting the full enjoyment of all human rights and the
fundamental freedoms of women and girls;

5/7

A/RES/71/168

Intensifying global efforts for the elimination of female genital mutilation

13. Calls upon States to develop policies and regulations to ensur e the
effective implementation of national legislative frameworks on eliminating
discrimination and violence against women and girls, in particular female genital
mutilation, and to put in place adequate accountability mechanisms at the national
and local levels to monitor adherence to and implementation of those legislative
frameworks;
14. Also calls upon States to develop unified methods and standards for the
collection of data on all forms of discrimination and violence against women and
girls, especially forms that are underdocumented, harmful practices such as female
genital mutilation, to develop additional indicators to effectively measure progress
in eliminating the practice and to reinforce the sharing of good practices relating to
the prevention and elimination of the practice at the subregional, regional and global
levels;
15. Urges States to allocate sufficient resources to the implementation of
policies and programmes and legislative frameworks aimed at eliminating female
genital mutilation;
16. Calls upon States to develop, support and implement comprehensive and
integrated strategies for the prevention of female genital mutilation, including the
training of social workers, medical personnel, community and religious leaders and
relevant professionals, and to ensure that they provide competent, supportive
services and care to women and girls who are at risk of or who have undergone
female genital mutilation and encourage them to report to the appropriate authorities
cases in which they believe women or girls are at risk;
17. Also calls upon States to support, as part of a comprehensive approach to
eliminate female genital mutilation, programmes that engage local community
practitioners of female genital mutilation in community-based initiatives for the
elimination of the practice, including, where relevant, the identification by
communities of alternative livelihoods for them;
18. Calls upon the international community, the relevant United Nations
entities and civil society and international financial institutions to continue to
actively support, through the allocation of increased financial resources and
technical assistance, targeted comprehensive programmes that address the needs and
priorities of women and girls at risk of or subjected to female genital mutilation;
19. Calls upon the international community to strongly support, including
through increased financial support, a third phase of the Joint Programme on Female
Genital Mutilation/Cutting: Accelerating Change of the United Nations Population
Fund and the United Nations Children’s Fund, which will run until 2020, as well as
national programmes focused on the elimination of female genital mutilation;
20. Stresses that some progress has been made in combating female genital
mutilation in a number of countries using a common coordinated approach that
promotes positive social change at the community, national, regional and
international levels, and recalls the goal set out in the United Nations inter-agency
statement that female genital mutilation is to be eliminated within a generation , with
some of the main achievements being obtained by 2030, in line with the Sustainable
Development Goals;

6/7

Intensifying global efforts for the elimination of female genital mutilation

A/RES/71/168

21. Encourages men and boys to take positive initiatives and to work in
partnership with women and girls to combat violence and discriminatory pra ctices
against women and girls, in particular female genital mutilation, through networks,
peer programmes, information campaigns and training programmes;
22. Calls upon States, the United Nations system, civil society and all
stakeholders to continue to observe 6 February as the International Day of Zero
Tolerance for Female Genital Mutilation and to use the day to enhance awareness raising campaigns and to take concrete actions against female genital mutilation;
23. Calls upon States to improve the collection and analysis of quantitative
and qualitative data and, where appropriate, to collaborate with existing data
collection systems, which are crucial for evidence-based legal and policy
development, programme design and implementation and the monitoring of the
elimination of female genital mutilation;
24. Acknowledges that intensifying efforts is urgently needed for the
elimination of female genital mutilation, and in this regard also acknowledges the
importance of giving the issue due consideration in the efforts to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals by 2030;
25. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all relevant organizations
and bodies of the United Nations system, in particular the United Nations
Population Fund, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN -Women), the World Health
Organization, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
the United Nations Development Programme and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, individually and collectively, take into
account the protection and promotion of the rights of women and girl s against
female genital mutilation in their country programmes, as appropriate and in
accordance with national priorities, in order to further strengthen their efforts in this
regard;
26. Renews its request to the Secretary-General that he submit to the General
Assembly, at its seventy-third session, an in-depth multidisciplinary report on the
root causes of and factors contributing to the practice of female genital mutilation,
its prevalence worldwide and its impact on women and girls, including evidence and
data, analysis of progress made to date and action-oriented recommendations for
eliminating this practice, on the basis of information provided by Member States,
relevant actors of the United Nations system working on the issue and other relevant
stakeholders.
65th plenary meeting
19 December 2016

7/7
