S/PV.6494 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6494th meeting
Thursday, 10 March 2011, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wang Min . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Durmić
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Suquet
Ms. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Roessel
Mr. Vinay Kumar
Mr. Ramadan
Mr. Adamu
Mr. Vaz Patto
Mr. Kravchenko
Mr. Crowley
Ms. Rickett
Mr. Donegan

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Comprehensive strategy for the realization of peace and security in Somalia
Letter dated 3 March 2011 from the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2011/114)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-25878 (E)

*1125878*

S/PV.6494 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I wish to
remind all speakers to limit their statements to no more
than four minutes in order to enable the Council to
carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Indonesia.
Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me begin,
Mr. President, by expressing our profound appreciation
to you for having convened this open debate on the
situation in Somalia. Before proceeding, let me convey
our heartfelt condolences to the bereaved families of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
troop casualties in the wake of the latest deplorable
attacks.
Two decades of violent conflict have shattered
the dreams and lives of innocent Somalis, young and
old, including women and children. A child born
20 years ago in Somalia who has lived there
throughout his childhood might not be able to envisage
an alternative, peaceful life. The list of grievances is
indeed long. The many international meetings held,
including this one, are replete with such references.
More gatherings will be organized in the coming
months and years. This meeting should be a building
block in facilitating the end of conflict and a return to
normalcy in Somalia. Added value is key, and it must
be of a strategic nature.
The report is unequivocally clear on the fact that
there are multiple sources of instability. The situation,
as the report rightly urges, requires the completion of a
comprehensive strategy that addresses the social,
political, economic and security issues in Somalia.
But before any meaningful progress can be
achieved, there must be, first and foremost, genuine
and strong political will on the part of all stakeholders,
from within and outside Somalia. Allocating time to,
and pouring finite resources into, addressing this issue
has been the main choice in the context of our work.
Unfortunately, however, little headway has been
achieved.
The Council might also need to reflect on its
fundamental approach and see if it might have
overlooked key aspects of the peace process, which has
fallen short in terms of bringing tangible results. The
report recommended that the constitution-drafting

2

process be inclusive and meet the targets for the
political transition. We support that approach, but the
constitution should also reflect the wishes of society
and the stakeholders, as well as the cultural diversity of
the country.
Indonesia is deeply concerned for the security
and well-being of the Somali people. The humanitarian
crisis, worsened by the current drought, has caused
additional suffering for the population, a large part of
which is already internally displaced. It is also a matter
of concern that, along with the threats to human life
inside Somalia, including terrorism, the threats off its
coast remain very serious. The internal conflict
demands strong local institutions that can cope with the
fundamental challenges of governing a country as large
and diverse as Somalia. Building effective local
institutions is crucial to establishing a viable and
peaceful Somalia. Through that avenue, we can see the
Government regain its foothold in the country.
We share the view that the issue of piracy off the
coast of Somalia is not a stand-alone problem. It is an
extension of the continuing instability in Somalia. But
the issue of piracy, which has vast implications beyond
the country’s territory, should also not be seen through
the single prism of security. We must accept the fact
that many people who become pirates are economically
marginalized and have no viable alternative. Therefore,
while we are grateful to the Secretary-General for the
report, we also look forward to receiving a
comprehensive report that will also elaborate the
economic difficulties faced by society. Deploying
troops and naval armadas would be a solution, but it
would be a short-term solution. A comprehensive one
would have to include ways to find alternative
livelihoods for pirates.
Indonesia commends the leading role played by
the African Union in deploying its Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and lauds its troop- and policecontributing countries. Like other peacekeeping
operations authorized by the Security Council,
AMISOM should be provided with the needed
resources and equipment in an adequate and
predictable fashion. The Security Council should find
ways and means to address this precarious
circumstance. It has to act with resoluteness. AMISOM
should become the nucleus of a future United Nations
peacekeeping force in Somalia. The implementation of
the incremental approach must therefore be supported.
AMISOM acts on our behalf. It is the duty of the

11-25878

S/PV.6494 (Resumption 1)

international community, in particular the Security
Council, to fulfil its commitment to AMISOM. We
need to respond positively to the calls of the African
Union.
In closing, I wish to commend the work of the
personnel of the United Nations, the African Union,
humanitarian organizations and other partners who
have persevered and continued their work in Somalia
despite adverse security conditions. Let me also
underline that it is presently the responsibility of the
Transitional Federal Government to steer Somalia
through its wide-ranging challenges, now and not later.
Somalia, with the support of the international
community, must continue charting its path to peace,
security, democracy and prosperity in full consonance
with the wishes of the Somali citizens.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like to echo
previous speakers in thanking Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon; Mr. Mohamed, Prime Minister of the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) of Somalia;
and Mr. Diarra, Special Representative of the
Chairman of the Commission of the African Union for
Somalia, for their presence here today and for their
statements.
Japan welcomes the timely convening of this
open debate, which provides a valuable opportunity to
discuss the situation in Somalia at this important
juncture, with fewer than six months remaining before
the expiration of the mandate of the TFG.
Japan is deeply concerned about the slow
progress of the political process, in particular the
delays in the constitutional process and the recent
declaration by the Puntland Government that it was
suspending its cooperation with the TFG. We would
like to join others in urging the TFG to effectively
address the remaining political tasks before the end of
the transitional period, including the formulation of a
Somali constitution and inclusive consultations with all
political groups in Puntland and Somaliland, as well as
with other clans.
The key problem in Somalia lies in the
interrelatedness of a number of critical issues —
including the political process, security, the
humanitarian crisis, terrorism and piracy — that
hamper the resolution of any of the others. Japan

11-25878

supports the idea that the international community
should join forces to implement a comprehensive
strategy that takes into account all of those issues.
Japan is firmly committed to contributing to such
collective efforts, and various actions and assistance
that we are undertaking in areas such as security,
anti-piracy measures and humanitarian support testify
to our determination in that regard. For instance, an
additional $77 million in assistance to support stability
and to cope with humanitarian crises is being
processed for immediate disbursement.
We welcome the enlarged coverage by TFG
forces and the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) of the area under TFG control, and we
highly commend the efforts and sacrifices of Ugandan
and Burundian troops in that endeavour. The
international community should continue to support
them so that they can fully meet their mandate. We
sincerely hope that the Council will continue
consultations on how to provide predictable support to
AMISOM. It is also essential to maintain security in
the controlled areas, and in order to do so a functioning
police force is essential.
To that end, Japan is vigorously contributing to
the capacity-building and deployment of the Somali
police force. The training of 500 police officers in
Djibouti through our financial contribution of
$10 million to the United Nations Trust Fund for the
Somali security institutions has just been completed. In
addition, Japan recently authorized an additional
$10 million to cover the cost of the salaries of trained
police officers and the construction of police facilities
in Mogadishu. We expect the TFG to make full use of
its enhanced security and to seize the current
momentum for political dialogue.
With regard to anti-piracy activities off the coast
of Somalia, Japan is engaged in various ways,
including escort and surveillance activities by Japanese
vessels and patrol aircraft and capacity-building
support extended in cooperation with the International
Maritime Organization to coastal countries for
maritime security. Despite the efforts of like-minded
countries to date, acts of piracy are still on the rise, and
that is a matter of grave concern for all of us.
We appreciate the comprehensive report of
Mr. Lang, Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on
Legal Issues related to Piracy off the Coast of Somalia
(S/2011/30, annex), which includes various proposals.

3

S/PV.6494 (Resumption 1)

Japan shares the view that building capacities,
especially the correctional capacities, of the coastal
nations, as well as of the region as a whole, is an
urgent task in the effort to effectively bring pirates to
justice. Japan had previously disbursed $500,000 to the
Trust Fund to Support Initiatives of States Countering
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, and has recently
authorized an additional $1 million for that purpose.
We will continue to support regional efforts to that end.
Lastly, Japan would like to note that, while we remain
fully committed to supporting the TFG, we will
maintain our assistance to Somaliland and Puntland as
well, with a view to achieving progress on Somali
issues as a whole.
I would like to conclude my remarks today by
reiterating Japan’s continuing commitment to peace
and security in Africa and our intention to work closely
with the Council on these issues.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kenya.
Mr. Kamau (Kenya): I would like to thank the
delegation of China for convening this very important
debate on Somalia. I also recognize the presence here
of the Prime Minister of Somalia. Kenya also wishes to
thank the Secretary-General and the African Union
(AU) representative for Somalia for their briefings.
At the outset, my delegation wishes to extend its
condolences to the families of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) peacekeepers who lost
their lives while defending the lives of ordinary
Somalis. We also wish to pay tribute to the
Governments of Burundi and Uganda for their valuable
contributions to peacekeeping efforts in Somalia.
Somalia is a perplexing conflict — on the one
hand so dangerous and devastating in its implications
and, on the other, seemingly neglected and undeserving
of a concerted international response commensurate
with the magnitude of the problem. Many in the region,
however, and especially Kenya, simply cannot afford
this level of ambiguity. Somalia is Kenya’s neighbour.
We share a long and porous border, and over 1 million
Somalis live in Kenya, half of whom are in refugee
camps. We have no other option but to continuously
strive for solutions to the conflict, which has for so
long ravaged our neighbour and placed a very heavy
burden on our society and our social and economic
development.

4

Continued fighting in Somalia and the lack of an
effective central Government has resulted in rapid
growth in the number and size of Somalia’s diaspora,
from which Al-Shabaab — among others, I am sure —
is determined to recruit for extremist activities
overseas. In addition, thousands of refugees have fled
from Somalia to neighbouring countries, thereby
worsening the humanitarian situation in those countries
and consuming scarce resources meant for other
sectors of the economy.
The Daadab refugee camp in Kenya, now
notoriously the largest in the world, was built to
accommodate only 90,000 refugees. It now hosts
almost 600,000. The refugee influx has caused
enormous challenges, including competition among
refugees and local communities for scarce resources,
and has resulted in environmental degradation.
Regrettably, some of those entering our countries under
the guise of refugees are also hardcore criminals and
extremists who are ready to cause trouble in the entire
region, and even further afield. Their presence in the
Horn of Africa is a major cause of worry. No efforts
should be spared in dealing with those terrorists.
International
partnerships
should
include
agreements on the need to change AMISOM’s mandate
from peacekeeping to peace enforcement, to ensure
that AMISOM not only secures Mogadishu but also
reclaims areas under the control of Al-Shabaab. In
addition, United Nations peacekeeping troops should
be deployed in the rest of Somalia in order to secure it.
The issue of funding in support of AU
peacekeeping operations has been a concern of the
Council for a long time. In the specific case of the AU
Mission in Somalia, Kenya supports the call made by
the AU summit to the Council to provide greater
support to AMISOM and to fully assume its
responsibilities towards Somalia, including through
increased funding from United Nations assessed
contributions.
Furthermore,
we
should
support
the
implementation of the Djibouti Peace Agreement,
which remains the basis through which reconciliatory
efforts should be undertaken in Somalia. It is important
to note that the Agreement envisages progress in three
key areas, namely, security, political cooperation and
reconstruction and development. We must support all
of these areas, as they are mutually reinforcing.

11-25878

S/PV.6494 (Resumption 1)

The issue of piracy has also been discussed here
and, as has been rightly pointed out by many, it has
real linkages with the ineffectual governance in
Somalia. The quicker that we provide effective
governance in Somalia, the quicker we will eliminate
the piracy menace. I believe that point was made this
morning by the Prime Minister. The SecretaryGeneral’s Special Adviser, Mr. Jack Lang, also made a
passionate plea to the Council barely two months ago
(see S/PV.6473) to act urgently and decisively on the
question of piracy. We in Kenya consider the issue of
piracy incredibly complex. In many ways, it has put in
place a quasi-blockade on our eastern coast.
In conclusion, let me say that the situation in
Somalia will continue to fester until the Council, which
is charged with the mandate of ensuring the
maintenance of international peace and security,
decides to act decisively in favour of adopting a
comprehensive strategy to establish a functioning State
in Somalia. That strategy should include first,
enhanced support to AMISOM as we have described;
second, support to Somali security institutions and
other institutions of governance; third, assistance in
economic and social development; fourth, securing
peace through the creation of job opportunities,
especially among the Somali youth; fifth, investment in
the reconstruction of infrastructure; sixth, increased
access to basic services for all people, including
education and health; and seventh, but not the least, the
possibility of encouraging Somalia’s further integration
into the East African Community. Anything short of
that will not secure sustainable security and
development for Somalia and will not eliminate the
threat to the region and countries further afield.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my appreciation to the
presidency of the Security Council for convening this
open debate on the situation in Somalia at this
important juncture in the efforts of the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG), the region and the
international community to restore peace and stability
in brotherly Somalia. Allow me also to welcome the
high-level participation in this meeting on the part of
the TFG, as represented by Prime Minister Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed.

11-25878

I should like to express my delegation’s sincere
condolences to, as well as our support for, the forces of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
The situation in Somalia has been the focus of
growing attention from the international community.
This is due to an awareness that the threats stemming
from this situation do not stop at Somalia’s borders but
also affect the region and the world as a whole. This
situation has resulted from the absence of peace,
stability and development in Somalia. It has set the
stage for the humanitarian tragedy now experienced by
the Somali people and created a fertile environment for
the growth of terrorism and piracy.
The high-level meeting on Somalia that took
place during the sixty-fifth session of the General
Assembly illustrated the growing attention of the
international community. We look forward to that
continued attention.
During the recent period of the transition, the
TFG has played an effective role, despite great
difficulties. The TFG has made unremitting efforts,
with the support of AMISOM and regional and
international partners, to expand the area under its
control, enhance security, extend State authority,
provide basic services to Somali citizens, enhance
transparency and broaden the scope of the political
reconciliation process on the basis of the Djibouti
Peace Agreement. The agreement reached between the
Transitional Federal Government and the Ahlu Sunna
Wal Jama’a group was a result of those efforts.
While we commend those efforts on all levels by
the TFG, Egypt also emphasizes that it is important that
they continue to be made in the coming months in
order to accomplish the outstanding transitional tasks,
in particular the drafting of the constitution. That will
require the Security Council and the international
community to enhance their support and formulate a
comprehensive strategy to support the TFG’s efforts to
deal with the situation in Somalia. This strategy should
be based on respect for Somalia’s unity and territorial
integrity and must build on what has already been
achieved during the transition period.
In that regard, Egypt stresses the importance that
any decision regarding post-transitional arrangements
should reflect the consensus of the Somali parties
themselves and that this consensus should stem from a
broad-based dialogue among the Somali parties in a
way that contributes to enhancing the reconciliation

5

S/PV.6494 (Resumption 1)

process as well as the efforts to achieve peace and
stability in Somalia. Egypt calls upon the Somali
parties to respond to the efforts of Special
Representative of the Secretary-Genera Augustine
Mahiga in that regard.
Acts of piracy and armed robbery off the coast of
Somalia have contributed to attracting much more
attention from the international community to the
situation in Somalia than the situation had garnered
previously. However, international efforts so far have
dealt with only part of the problem, as the focus has
been on combating acts of piracy at sea instead of on
directing greater attention to the fundamental
underlying causes on the mainland. Egypt has warned
against such a partial approach and has always
emphasized — in particular through our participation
in the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia and its Trust Fund Board, as well as through
our chairmanship of Working Group 4 — the
importance of the international community adopting a
comprehensive approach that takes into account the
root causes of the problem and addresses its political,
security, economic and humanitarian dimensions, in
particular the two decades of the absence of State
authority, peace, stability and development. To achieve
that goal, Egypt underlines the importance of taking a
number of actions, including the following.
First, the TFG should enhance its efforts to
expand the scope of the reconciliation process,
building on the steps achieved in this area so far, and
continue to maintain its cohesion, promote
transparency in its work and enhance its credibility by
accomplishing the outstanding transitional tasks, in
particular the drafting of the constitution.
Secondly, the international community must
redouble its support to the TFG, led by President
Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, in order to support the
TFG’s efforts to build the capacity of its institutions, in
particular in the security sector. In that context, all
parties must fulfil the commitments they made during
the Brussels Conference in April 2009 in support of the
Somali security sector and the African Union Mission
in Somalia.
Thirdly, the international community should
continue to provide support to AMISOM in order to
enable it to reach its authorized strength of 12,000
troops, in accordance with resolution 1964 (2010), and
address the gaps in the financial and logistical support

6

extended to the Mission. Furthermore, the Security
Council should continue to consider the deployment of
a United Nations peacekeeping mission in Somalia.
Strengthening the capacity of Somali security
institutions together with continued support to
AMISOM will contribute to creating conditions
conducive to the deployment of such a mission.
Fourthly, efforts to combat acts of piracy at sea
should be part of a comprehensive strategy that
benefits from the progress on the security and political
tracks in Somalia. Such a strategy should work to
promote an environment suitable for development and
create alternative employment opportunities for Somali
youth. In that regard, it may be appropriate to consider
holding a donors’ conference designed to launch a
process for development in areas where the security
situation is improving, especially in the light of the fact
that the financial support during the transitional period
was not significant.
Egypt will continue to pay great attention to the
situation in Somalia, as it represents an important part
of the Arab, African and Islamic arenas. We will
maintain that attention and continue to support capacity
building for Somali institutions through educational
missions
from
Al-Azhar
Al-Sharif,
training
programmes for Somali security and coast guard forces
and training courses for Somali cadres, as well as
humanitarian and medical aid.
Finally, Egypt hopes that our discussion today
will contribute to the formulation of a comprehensive
vision on how to help Somalia achieve peace, stability
and development.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to representative of Uganda.
Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, and the delegation
of China on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I thank you for
organizing this important and timely debate on the
need for a comprehensive strategy for the realization of
peace and security in Somalia. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his statement and his
commitment to Somalia.
We welcome the participation in today’s debate
by Prime Minister Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed,
Mr. Boubacar Diarra, Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for

11-25878

S/PV.6494 (Resumption 1)

Somalia,
and
Ambassador
Mahiga,
Representative of the Secretary-General.

Special

Uganda commends the efforts made by
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) and the
Somali people towards restoring peace, security and
stability in the country, in spite of the challenges. We
are convinced that durable peace and stability in
Somalia is attainable. What is needed now, more than
ever before, is a comprehensive approach that
addresses the political, security, rule of law and
socio-economic dimensions. That approach should take
into account the fact that the primary responsibility for
durable peace and stability in Somalia remains with its
Government and people. Support by the international
community in that regard is key.
We encourage the TFG to intensify its efforts in
reaching out to those groups willing to cooperate in a
spirit of reconciliation and inclusiveness within the
framework of the Djibouti Agreement. It is also
essential to intensify efforts to complete the
outstanding transitional tasks and ensure that the
constitution-making process is completed in a
consultative and timely manner.
Uganda is encouraged by the initiatives aimed at
building the capacity of the Transitional Federal
Institutions, especially in the security sector. However,
more needs to be done to build on the gradual but
steady progress made by the Somali Security Forces,
with the support of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), in consolidating security and
stability in Mogadishu and beyond. That will facilitate
the creation of the necessary conditions for the
political process to take place.
On the problem of piracy, we reiterate the need
for a holistic approach that includes addressing its root
causes.

We call upon the international community to
redouble its commitment and support for Somalia,
including at the next meeting of the International
Contact Group on Somalia, scheduled for later this
month in Kampala. We welcome the announcement by
the United Kingdom of an additional contribution to
the Trust Fund for Somalia without caveats, as well as
that of Japan to provide training and facilities for the
Somali police.
Finally, we commend Special Representative
Ambassador Augustine Mahiga and African Union
Special Representative Baboucar Diarra and their
teams for their work under challenging circumstances.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to Mr. Pedro Serrano, Acting Head of the
Delegation of the European Union.
Mr. Serrano: Let me begin by thanking you,
Mr. President, for having invited the European Union
to participate in this important debate. Let me also
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia, Ambassador Diarra, for their
important messages. I also welcome the presence of the
Prime Minister of Somalia, Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed. On this occasion, I would like to restate that
the European Union remains committed to providing
support to Somalia and to all those who are making
efforts to bring peace and security to the country.
The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
Montenegro; the countries of the Stabilisation and
Association Process and potential candidates, Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Serbia; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia align themselves
with this declaration.

Resolute action must be taken against armed
groups, especially Al-Shabaab, that commit attacks,
including terrorist attacks against the TFG, AMISOM,
civilians and humanitarian workers. Action must also
be taken against spoilers within and outside Somalia
who continue to undermine the peace process.

The European Union remains deeply concerned
by the situation of violence and unrest in Somalia and
by its dramatic impact on the lives of the civilian
population, especially women and children, who have
been the primary victims. The European Union has in
particular also repeatedly expressed its grave concern
over the recruitment and use of children in the conflict.

Furthermore,
Somalia
requires
sustained
financial, material and technical support for the
delivery of basic services and reconstruction and for
setting up basic economic infrastructure in order to
improve the livelihood of its population.

In addition to the already dire security situation,
the recent short rainy season resulted in rising food
insecurity in central and southern regions, increasing
the number of people needing humanitarian assistance
by 20 per cent in the past six months to a total of

11-25878

7

S/PV.6494 (Resumption 1)

2.4 million. Following her recent visit to Somalia,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
Valerie Amos said that Somalia had become one of the
world’s worst humanitarian crises, and that the
situation could easily worsen if immediate action were
not taken.
The European Union will continue to provide
humanitarian assistance to the most vulnerable
populations, in accordance with the humanitarian
principles of independence, neutrality, impartiality and
humanity, while also taking into account the broader
regional dimension and the substantial number of
Somali refugees in neighbouring countries. However,
the European Union is deeply concerned over the lack
of access to and respect for the integrity and
independence of the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, and calls on all actors to ensure free and
unhindered access.
In Mogadishu and its surrounding areas, violent
clashes between Al-Shabaab and forces loyal to the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) have
continued to occur on an almost daily basis. That
illustrates the urgent need to link security with a
political strategy, built on inclusive outreach. Security
cannot be guaranteed by military means alone.
Tensions in the contested regions between
Puntland and Somaliland have recently increased. The
European Union calls on all parties to refrain from
violence and to turn to dialogue to resolve their
differences.
We are also concerned by the continuing political
instability, following the recent unilateral decision of
the Somali Parliament to extend its mandate for an
additional three years. In order to improve the
legitimacy, representativeness and credibility of any
possible new institutional arrangements after August
2011, the Transitional Federal Institutions must be
reformed. The constitutional process must be
broadened and not limited to those Institutions.
In conformity with relevant Security Council
resolutions, the European Union has developed a
multipronged strategy for Somalia, in support of and in
partnership with the Transitional Federal Government,
the African Union, the United Nations, the
Intergovernmental
Authority
on
Development,
countries in the region and other international partners.
That support extends to the Djibouti political process,
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), the

8

development of the rule of law and the security
capacity of the Transitional Federal Government, and
the fight against piracy.
For the sake of brevity, I will not go into details
on all aspects of the European Union’s engagement in
Somalia, but would refer participants to the written
version of my statement. However, it is important to
mention that we greatly appreciate the efforts of the
AMISOM troop-contributing countries, Uganda and
Burundi. The courage and commitment of their troops
deserve admiration. I am also glad to inform the
Council that the first intake of 1,000 soldiers, trained in
the framework of the European Union training mission,
has been deployed in Mogadishu to reintegrate under
AMISOM responsibility.
The European Union continues to worry about the
level of violence of pirate attacks, and remains in the
forefront in the fight against piracy through its
Operation
Atalanta.
The
European
Union
acknowledges the urgent need to respond through a
multipronged approach that tackles the root causes. We
need to support countries in the region in building
regional maritime capacities. It is also urgent to take
action in the fight against impunity for piracy crimes
and to support the development and enhancement of
legal, judicial and penitentiary measures in the
countries of the region. The Kampala process, bringing
together the TFG, Puntland and Somaliland, should be
further developed.
There is no purely military solution to the conflict
in Somalia. The strengthening of AMISOM, in
particular, must go hand in hand with an upgraded and
comprehensive political strategy, based on widening
the TFG support base. Regrettably, the Transitional
Federal Institutions have been unable to reach out to
others, and, as a consequence, subregional authorities,
such as those in Puntland and Galmudug, are
expressing their frustration. That must be addressed.
We support efforts to shorten the extension of the
transitional period, but at the same time it is necessary
to ensure that any extension is linked to reforms.
Indeed, in order to conclude the transitional period and
to finalize the constitution, we believe that the TFG
should develop more effective governance and
consensus-building during the run-up to August 2011
and beyond.
For that purpose, it is urgent that the Transitional
Federal Institutions advance a reform agenda to enable

11-25878

S/PV.6494 (Resumption 1)

the delivery of services to the Somali people and to
build legitimacy and credibility. A Somali-driven
reform of the Federal Institutions, as well as a national
security strategy setting the parameters for the
stabilization of Mogadishu and conflict-torn parts of
southern and central Somalia, are essential. We note
the commitment of Prime Minister Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed, as reiterated today, and we count
on the TFG’s constructive approach in increasing the
legitimacy of institutions in Somalia.
The challenges of Somalia need to be dealt with
through a comprehensive approach, covering political
reconciliation, security and development, as well as
human rights. In that regard, the participation of
Somali women in the decision-making process and in
the political sphere, which has decreased in the past
years, should be encouraged as a way to promote peace
and reconciliation.
Bearing in mind the impact of the Somali
situation on other countries of the region and beyond, it
is therefore of key importance that the international
community remains actively engaged in fully
supporting the efforts of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Somalia, Ambassador
Mahiga.
It is essential to put in place an influential
approach, allowing for dialogue, understanding and
moving the Somali peace process forward. The next
meeting of the International Contact Group on Somalia
will be helpful in that regard.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the firm
commitment of the European Union to continue to
work for peace and stability in Somalia.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Denmark.
Mr. Staur (Denmark): Let me join others in
thanking you, Mr. President, for this timely debate. At
the outset, let me also align myself and my
Government with the statement just made by the
representative of the European Union.
Like others, Denmark is very concerned about the
worsening situation in Somalia. The country has been
without a central Government for two decades.
Mogadishu is the scene of continued battles between
the Transitional Federal Government (TFG), supported
by the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
and Al-Shabaab. Most of southern and central Somalia

11-25878

is controlled by Al-Shabaab, which seriously limits the
space for addressing what is probably the greatest
humanitarian crisis in the world today. The
deteriorating humanitarian situation is a particular
cause for concern. The conflict has disastrous
consequences for the population, and the potential to
further destabilize the situation in the Horn of Africa.
Negative implications could be felt also in Europe.
At the end of the day, a lasting solution to the
crisis in Somalia must be political. It is imperative that
the international community come together under the
leadership of the United Nations, both through the
Security Council and through the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Augustine Mahiga.
Denmark
strongly
supports
the
Special
Representative’s efforts. We urge, first and foremost,
that the United Nations assist the TFG as a matter of
priority in finalizing its political strategy, which is
needed to frame military efforts, as well as to engage
Somali groups, including the private sector, religious
leaders, Somali civil society, women and the diaspora.
Secondly, we urge the United Nations to push ahead
with stronger integration in order to ensure better
coordination across the many and complex United
Nations efforts in Somalia. We are aware that the task
is difficult and the environment risky. Yet there may be
possibilities for strengthening the presence of the
United Nations in more stable areas, such as Hargeisa
or Garowe.
International efforts must be underpinned by a
process, led by Africans themselves, in the African
Union (AU), the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and other relevant forums. A
comprehensive solution must include Somalia’s
neighbours and the other countries in the wider Horn of
Africa.
Through AMISOM, the AU is doing a
commendable job in securing the TFG in Mogadishu,
but a military track cannot stand alone. A broad
political solution that embraces a new constitution for
Somalia is also needed. Like others, we have been
concerned about the lack of progress made on the
political track by the TFG. The Parliament’s recent
unilateral prolongation of its mandate was not helpful
to bolstering its credibility. A further prolongation
beyond the present year is not acceptable. In order to
improve the legitimacy of any new institutional

9

S/PV.6494 (Resumption 1)

arrangement after 2011, the Transitional Federal
Institutions must be reformed and the constitutional
process must be broadened.
We deplore the loss of opportunities to exploit
divisions within Al-Shabaab and other armed groups.
We urge the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral to work with the TFG to restore its credibility
and reach out to the groups outside the Djibouti
process, including in particular the regions, the private
sector,
the
diaspora
and
non-governmental
organizations.
Denmark, as a considerable seafaring nation with
important interests in safe and open seas, considers the
fight against piracy to be a high priority. Piracy off the
coast of Somalia has reached an alarming scale and
poses a threat to world trade and economic recovery.
Not least, the East African economies are at risk, with
piracy threatening important trade routes in the region.
Denmark has been a very active partner in the fight
against piracy since the maritime military operations
kicked off in 2008. At the moment, we are contributing
a vessel to NATO’s Operation Ocean Shield. In spite of
the valuable contribution of the naval forces to the
fight against piracy delivered, it is clear that military
efforts cannot stand alone. A lasting solution to the
piracy problem can be found only — only — on land.
The legal issues pertaining to piracy are thorny.
Denmark works actively to strengthen international
legal efforts to combat piracy off the coast of Somalia,
in particular through the Danish chairmanship of
Working Group 2 of the international Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. Ensuring that pirates
are prosecuted is a cornerstone of the international
fight against piracy. We are therefore pleased with the
latest figures, which show that 820 pirates are in fact
being prosecuted in 16 States. At the same time, it is
important to continue exploring the legal aspects of
post-trial transfers of sentenced Somali individuals
back to Somalia for incarceration. The establishment of
prison facilities on the ground in Somalia is a key
factor in that regard.
Finally, I take this opportunity to inform the
Council that my Government has recently revised its
Somalia policy. The new policy embraces a whole-ofGovernment approach across the areas of defence,
diplomacy and development, and provides a Danish
envelope for humanitarian and development assistance
amounting to more than $70 million over the next four

10

years. On top of that are funds set aside for
stabilization purposes, in addition to our naval
contribution to the international fight against piracy off
the coast of Somalia.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I call on the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to sincerely and warmly congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I do so especially
because China is a great friend of our mother
continent, Africa, and in particular of my country, the
Sudan, in the light of the historic and very sound
relations between our two peoples and countries.
It therefore comes as no great surprise to us that
during your presidency we will enjoy such constructive
and positive initiatives as that which the Council is
engaged in today regarding the situation in Somalia.
China has a long-standing tradition of strengthening
and maintaining international peace and security and
participates generously in support of peacekeeping
operations throughout the world.
I would also like to welcome Mr. Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed, Prime Minister of the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia, and
thank him for his detailed briefing to the Council
today. The very praiseworthy efforts recently
undertaken by his Government were reflected in that
briefing.
It is high time for the international community to
take greater interest in Somalia and to address the
various developments in the situation there by adopting
a different approach from that of the United Nations
over the past two decades. It is essential to adopt a new
strategy that will enable us to achieve lasting peace and
security in that brotherly Arab-African country.
I take this opportunity to acknowledge the
commendable efforts of the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and, in
particular, the African Union Mission in Somalia. I also
wish to acknowledge recent efforts aimed at
strengthening the implementation of the road map
adopted by the Prime Minister, following the initiative
of the international Contact Group on Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia.
It is very important to affirm here that the Sudan,
as an influential and active member of the international

11-25878

S/PV.6494 (Resumption 1)

Contact Group on Somali Piracy, played an essential
role in the adoption of the decisions taken by the
Contact Group during its meeting in Rome in June
2009. In that context, it is important to identify a
definite vision and a precise timeline for carrying out
the outstanding tasks during the transitional period. We
fully agree with the guiding principles outlined in the
document circulated by the presidency (S/2011/114)
regarding the difficulty of completing all remaining
tasks during the transition period, which will come to
an end in only five months.
We share the general concern regarding increased
acts of piracy off the coast of Somalia. We support the
statements of the Prime Minister of Somalia, in
particular his comment that the issue of piracy will be
resolved not off the coast of Somalia but by
strengthening State authority on land and by promoting
the rule of law throughout Somalia. The phenomenon
of piracy will be effectively resolved only through a
lasting and comprehensive political solution to the
problem of Somalia.
According to the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2010/556), the intensive international efforts
undertaken to eliminate piracy have been unsuccessful.
On the contrary, the pirates’ activities have spread,
reaching the very edge of the Indian Ocean. Suffice it
to recall here that more than 20 vessels are currently
being held by the pirates. This situation calls for the
international community, and the Security Council in
particular, to take a new approach to tackling this
phenomenon in line with the Chinese initiative we are
discussing today.
The historic ancestral links between Somalia and
the Sudan impel us to spare no effort in seeking to
restore peace and stability in Somalia. Solid channels
of communication have long existed between our two
countries. Since the beginning of the civil war in
Somalia, the Sudan has been at the forefront of
countries acting effectively to restore peace and
stability throughout that country. We will limit
ourselves to citing only a few examples.
In 2006, the Sudan hosted three rounds of
negotiations between Somali factions. Furthermore,
efforts have continued and been stepped up in the
framework of the Arab Contact Group on Somalia in
order to bring together the various brotherly Somali
factions. The Sudan also played a leading role in the
Djibouti process in 2008, which resulted in the signing

11-25878

of the power-sharing agreement. The Sudan’s efforts to
strengthen stability in Somalia continued in 2009 with
a number of ministerial and presidential visits from the
Transitional Federal Government to Khartoum to
strengthen cooperation between the two States and to
support peace and stability throughout Somalia.
Finally, we believe that the Chinese initiative to
seek a comprehensive approach is a good and positive
one that should be adopted and swiftly implemented.
We see our exchanges today as a platform for
launching this initiative, which addresses the real
underlying causes of the problematic situation in
Somalia.
We reaffirm that, given our geographic and
regional position and cultural, social and civilizational
links with the brotherly country of Somalia, the Sudan
is ready to provide all possible assistance to the United
Nations and its various bodies, including the Security
Council, in order to achieve security and stability in
brotherly Somalia.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sweden.
Mr. Grunditz (Sweden): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this open debate on the critical situation in
Somalia. Sweden aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union and would like to put forward the
following supplementary observations.
In this final phase of the transitional period, it is
high time that the Transitional Federal Institutions
(TFIs) demonstrate unity, determination and the
capability to act. A realistic, implementable and
prioritized plan of action is required. The international
community should be ready to support the early
implementation of such a plan with clear, identified
benchmarks. Adequate financial mechanisms, with
clear accountability and transparency criteria, should
be readily available if such a plan is to be timely and
effective.
The development of a constitution for Somalia
has proven to be a contentious and divisive exercise.
Genuine popular consultations are necessary to allow a
broad segment of Somali constituencies to voice their
views and expectations. The delay in this process is
regrettable and a missed opportunity for reconciliation
and peace. The TFIs should therefore accelerate the
consultative process.

11

S/PV.6494 (Resumption 1)

The mechanisms provided for by the Djibouti
Agreement should be used more effectively, and we
support the efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Mahiga, in this regard. The
high-level committee to be chaired by the United
Nations could be better used for reaching out to
regional administrations and other stakeholders. A
dialogue on priorities for the political process,
including on constitution-related matters, is needed
immediately and should preferably take place inside
Somalia.
We welcome the valuable contribution of the
Joint Security Committee on security and rule of law
matters. We want to stress that effective security
structures of the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) cannot be established without a national security
strategy. A defectors’ programme is also required.
The role of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) is indispensable. We express our sincere
condolences to the families of the soldiers from
Burundi and Uganda who have lost their lives in battle
in Somalia. We welcome the fact that the United
Nations Support Office for AMISOM has established a
presence in Mogadishu to make its support to
AMISOM as effective as possible. Sweden is pleased
to note that AMISOM is taking measures to improve
the enforcement of international humanitarian law,
including by the troops of the TFG.
Sweden’s contribution to AMISOM includes
support for quick impact projects that directly benefit
the civilian population and their livelihoods in
Mogadishu. We hope to see the TFG taking initiatives
for such activities and other ways of winning peace
dividends in areas under their control.
The piracy problem needs a multipronged
response. It requires joint initiatives and cooperation
among the entities in Somalia, including Somaliland.
The opportunities that the Kampala process presents
should be further captured and additional areas for
cooperation identified. Some of the areas and activities
in this process could prevent the recruitment of persons
for piracy activities. A comprehensive approach to
addressing the piracy problem through activities on
land needs to be well informed of the livelihood
patterns, income opportunities and dynamics on the
ground.
We welcome the fact that United Nations Political
Office in Somalia is establishing presences in

12

Mogadishu, Puntland and Somaliland. An integrated
strategic framework for the combined role of the
United Nations throughout Somalia, including in
Somaliland, should be put in place and facilitate the
harmonization of the overall international response. All
United Nations activities concerning Somalia, inside or
outside the country, need to be well coordinated in
order to avoid duplication and ensure an effective and
efficient use of resources. We also believe that the
work of the international Contact Group, under the
leadership of Special Representative Mahiga, should be
made more productive.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): At the outset, I
wish to congratulate China on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March. I am confident that, with China’s wise and able
leadership, the Council will successfully discharge its
duties and responsibilities. I wish to thank the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Ban Ki-moon, for
his presentation on Somalia. I also wish to thank Prime
Minister Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed of the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia and
Ambassador Boubacar Diarra, Special Representative
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for Somalia, for providing us with a ground-level view
of the situation in Somalia. Lastly, I wish to thank
Mr. Henry Bellingham, Minister for Africa of the
United Kingdom, for sharing his insights and
perspective on Somalia this morning.
The delegation of the Philippines highly
appreciates
China’s
concept
note,
entitled
“Comprehensive strategy for the realization of peace
and security in Somalia” (S/2011/114, annex), which
helps set the tone of our open debate today.
The situation in Somalia has momentarily taken a
back seat in relation to the pressing developments in
the Middle East. But the deteriorating situation in that
huge and strategic country in the Horn of Africa poses
serious security challenges that, if not addressed
quickly and consistently, could further develop into a
much greater and long-term threat to international
peace and security. The damage and disruption caused
by Somali pirates to international shipping, trade and
tourism and the danger posed by pirates to the safety
and well-being of merchant mariners have far-reaching
negative impacts and potentially catastrophic effects.

11-25878

S/PV.6494 (Resumption 1)

The rampant piracy off the coast of Somalia and
beyond is indeed a major concern for the international
community and the Philippines. The Philippines is the
origin of one third of the world’s seafarer population
and is among the countries most adversely affected and
seriously alarmed by incidences of piracy off the coast
of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden.
We are now feeling the negative effects of
relentless pirate attacks on cargo ships and even
smaller marine vessels navigating Somali waters and
the wider Indian Ocean. Buoyed by their initial
successes and impunity from prosecution, the Somali
pirates are getting more and more sophisticated and
aggressive in seizing control of unprotected ships. We
see not only more crew members being taken hostage,
but also an escalation of atrocities. Early this year,
Somali pirates shot dead a Filipino seaman aboard a
German-owned ship, the MV Beluga Nomination, off
Seychelles.
As I speak, at least 130 Filipino seafarers from
11 vessels are still being held captive by Somali
pirates. It is a tribute to their courage and tenacity that
they have so far endured the ordeal. The Government
of the Philippines is doing everything within its power
to facilitate their early and safe release so that they can
return to their families and loved ones and resume their
normal lives.
The
Philippines
supports
more
robust
international action against piracy. Pirates must be
brought to justice to the extent possible. In this regard,
the Philippines commends the work of Mr. Jack Lang,
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Legal
Issues related to Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, in
developing legal approaches aimed at the prosecution
and imprisonment of captured pirates. In addition, the
international community must push bolder and more
effective anti-piracy measures. There must a concerted
effort among the stakeholders — such as Governments,
shipping companies, manning agencies and seafarers’
associations — to work closely together to comply
with best management practices to deter piracy attacks.
The international naval presence in the Gulf of
Aden and the Indian Ocean, in particular Operation
Atalanta, has done a lot to protect and ensure the safe
passage of merchant vessels in those high-risk waters.
The deployment of navy assets, however, in such a
wide expanse of territory poses logistical and

11-25878

coordination challenges and strains the limited
resources needed for the operation’s sustainability.
It is evident in our debate today that there is a
firm commitment to tackling the urgent problem of
piracy off the coast of Somalia. The long-term solution
to piracy, however, lies on land and not at sea. The
ongoing peace process in Somalia deserves the strong
and vigorous support of the international community.
The peace and security and development needs of that
country should be the paramount goal. Economic and
career opportunities must be created in order to provide
an alternative path for restless Somali youth who are
vulnerable to the lure of piracy.
The Philippines stands ready to work with the
United Nations and other partners to assist in the
efforts to help Somalia attain peace and stability and
fight the menace of piracy. The Somali people urgently
need our continued understanding and help. We should
not disappoint them.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain.
Mr. De Laiglesia (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to start by thanking China, as President of
the Security Council for this month, for having
organized this open debate on a comprehensive
strategy for achieving peace and security in Somalia
and for the concept note (S/2011/114, annex) prepared
to guide our debate. I also wish to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his presentation and welcome the
statements by the Prime Minister of the Transitional
Federal Government of Somalia and the Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia. I would also like to join
others in paying tribute to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Mahiga, for
his work.
Spain fully aligns itself with the European Union
statement made this afternoon and would like to share,
in our national capacity, the following thoughts.
In our opinion, this debate is appropriately
focused on responding to the complex challenges
currently facing Somalia. Spain is strongly committed
to Somalia. We are contributing €6 million to the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). In
2010, we were the first humanitarian donor in the
country, and during the meeting of the International
Contact Group on Somalia held in Madrid last

13

S/PV.6494 (Resumption 1)

September we committed €3 million in direct
budgetary support to the Transitional Federal
Government, 2 million of which have already been
disbursed.
In this context, and in view of the end of the
transitional period in August, we believe it to be a
matter of urgency that the authorities of the
Transitional Federal Government make progress in the
drafting of a new constitution that obtains broad
consensus. They must promote an inclusive political
dialogue that makes it possible to address the root
causes of conflict. They need to focus on security
sector reform with the support of the international
community, and they must work actively to improve
the living conditions of the population.
Spain shares the international community’s
concern about the escalation of piracy in the Indian
Ocean waters. Spain’s commitment to the fight against
piracy is unequivocal. My country is participating with
two vessels — a frigate and a patrol boat — and two
aircraft — a helicopter and a maritime patrol aircraft —
in the European Union’s Operation Atalanta, which is
currently under Spanish command. It supports the
Ocean Shield Operation of the Atlantic Alliance and
has offered to continue collaborating in escorting ships
of the World Food Programme heading for Somalia.
Spain also leads the European Union Somalia Training
Mission, which provides training to Somali security
forces in Uganda, in which 38 troops are stationed.
However, the commendable work of the naval
forces in the prevention and prosecution of acts of
piracy contrasts with a degree of impunity enjoyed by
those arrested for acts of piracy that seriously
undermines the effectiveness of the international
efforts. Although the causes of piracy are numerous
and complex — and we all agree that they should be
addressed in a holistic manner — we deem it essential
and urgent to resolve this paradox by strengthening the
legal, jurisdictional and correctional spheres as
measures necessary to cut down on impunity.
The report by Mr. Lang, the Special Adviser to
the Secretary—General on Legal Issues related to
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia (S/2011/30, annex),
provides us with valuable proposals that deserve to be
revisited. We agree with the assessment that it is
essential to develop and strengthen the institutional
capacities of the countries of the region in the legal,
jurisdictional and correctional spheres if we wish to

14

reverse the trend that favours the spread and
continuation of acts of piracy. Legal initiatives should
be aimed against not only the actual perpetrators, but
also those who plan, lead and make a profit from those
activities. This will require improving the collection
and production of evidence, as well as the further
involvement of all the countries taking part in this
endeavour.
The aforementioned measures — in particular,
those of a jurisdictional nature — would be better
implemented through the adoption of a new Security
Council
resolution
as
soon
as
possible.
Notwithstanding the fact that such a resolution could
address a wide range of the many necessary elements
of an approach to piracy, in Spain’s opinion it should
focus on the legal aspects and contain at least the
following three main elements: an encouragement of
the strengthened collection and production of evidence;
a guarantee of treatment in accordance with
international humanitarian law for those detained,
prosecuted and found guilty for crimes of piracy; and a
decision to urgently establish Somali courts to hear
piracy cases in Somaliland, Puntland and in any of the
neighbouring countries. Such courts could be also open
to staff from third countries.
With regard to the drafting and adoption of such a
resolution, the Security Council can count on the full
support and cooperation of Spain, since we are
convinced that it would contribute to addressing the
current significant legal loopholes. That is an essential
element in the international effort coordinated by the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia and
requires maximum effectiveness with respect to
prevention and deterrence.
Despite the complexity and ongoing escalation of
piracy, Spain is convinced that the situation can still be
reversed. We should act above all with resolve and
without delay to strengthen our counter-piracy tools,
since its continuation presents a difficult obstacle to
overcome as we build a Somalia with solid and capable
institutions that can work for the security and
development of the Somali people. We all hope that
such a scenario will be a reality in the near future.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month, and I

11-25878

S/PV.6494 (Resumption 1)

welcome your choice of Somalia as the subject of the
thematic debate during your presidency. Through you, I
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
participation in the meeting and to welcome His
Excellency Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed, Prime
Minister of the Transitional Federal Government of
Somalia, and to wish him, on behalf of the Government
of the State of Qatar, success in achieving his
ambitious programme to serve his country.
Over the past few years, and since the national
reconciliation conference in Djibouti, Somalia has
witnessed a range of positive developments at the
domestic, regional and international levels. However,
the looming threats in that country call for the
continued support of the international community.
We condemn all forms of violence and all acts
that threaten stability and the security of Somali
citizens, the internationally recognized Government
and the international forces, and we regret any
casualties that they have suffered. We also take this
opportunity to express our appreciation to the African
Union and the countries contributing troops to the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). Since
security remains the most critical challenge faced by
the Transitional Federal Institutions, we must increase
the package of support provided to AMISOM.
The problem of piracy off the Somali coast has
reached an unprecedented level. Military action to
deter pirates and protect merchant ships in the Indian
Ocean is indispensable. However, it is also necessary
to put an end to the impunity enjoyed by the pirates.
We have stressed repeatedly that we should not
deal with Somalia only as a security problem, since
any approach aimed at addressing the lack of security
and stability will not be successful unless it addresses
its various dimensions and is implemented within the
framework of cooperation and close coordination
among the United Nations, the African Union, the
League of Arab States and other subregional
organizations on the basis of Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter.
For many years, Somalia was considered to be a
forgotten country. It will be very important for efforts
to help the country to be coordinated through
cooperation among the Security Council, the General
Assembly and the specialized agencies in accordance
with their mandates. The international community has

11-25878

a responsibility to do its utmost to end this crisis,
which is one of the most difficult in the world.
The full version of my statement has been
circulated to members of the Council.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I give the
floor to the representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mr. Al-Jarman (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting to
discuss the situation in Somalia. I wish also to
welcome His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed, Prime Minister of Somalia.
My country has closely followed the drawn-out
suffering of the people of Somalia over the past two
decades, including internal political divisions,
insecurity, ongoing conflicts and violent unrest
throughout the country, and the displacement of more
than 2 million Somalis to date. While we are deeply
concerned about the persistence of this unfortunate
situation in Somalia and the threat it continues to pose
at the regional and international levels, we also
emphasize our strong support for all endeavours and
joint efforts of the United Nations and the African
Union to enable the Transitional Federal Government
to pursue its plan in the areas of reconciliation and the
fight against extremism, within the framework of the
Djibouti peace process.
We call on the Somali parties, and their leaders in
particular, to bear the primary responsibility for the
restoration of peace and stability in their country. In
this context, we emphasize the need to develop a
genuine and comprehensive international strategy and
to establish a clear political and development road map
capable of helping the Somali people to overcome their
predicament and to restore peace, security and stability
throughout the territory and territorial waters of their
country.
The United Arab Emirates pledges to maintain its
full commitment to the United Nations resolutions,
especially those imposing an arms embargo on
Somalia, and to the ongoing provision of all forms of
assistance to the Somali people in order to enable it to
overcome the urgent humanitarian crisis. We also call
for strengthened international support for Somalia,
especially in the following main areas.
First is support for the political process and for
addressing the security situation in the country, which
requires the promotion of efforts to establish political

15

S/PV.6494 (Resumption 1)

dialogue among all Somali parties and entities,
including within the Transitional Federal Institutions,
as well as among groups remaining outside the
framework of the Djibouti peace process, in order to
encourage them to join the process and secure the
cessation of all acts of violence in the country,
including acts of extremism and other acts targeting the
humanitarian workers there.
Second is the need to address the tragic
humanitarian situation in Somalia, which requires the
international
community
to
strengthen
its
humanitarian, financial and economic support in order
to enable the Transitional Federal Government to
overcome the consequences of the drought affecting
the country and to implement programmes for the
reform, rehabilitation and recovery of the Somali
economy, aimed at rebuilding the country and creating
legitimate alternative sources of income as a substitute
for mutual killing and piracy, which currently attracts
hundreds of young Somalis. In that connection, we
refer to the humanitarian assistance, comprised of
149 tons of food, provided recently by the United Arab
Emirates to Somalia. We hope that all States will
undertake similar humanitarian initiatives to alleviate
the current plight of the people of Somalia.
Third is to address the growing phenomenon of
piracy and armed robbery off the Somali coast, the
Gulf of Aden and the Indian Ocean. The threats posed
by piracy to international navigation and trade,
including the movement of humanitarian assistance to
the African continent, have exceeded international
efforts made to date to eradicate it. In addition,
according to reports from the International Maritime
Organization, piracy has resulted in huge annual
financial losses, approaching $12 billion.
Therefore, as an affected country and active
supporter of the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast
of Somalia and its four working groups, the United
Arab Emirates calls upon the international community
to develop a holistic long-term strategy to combat and
completely eliminate this phenomenon. Such a strategy
should also make it possible to bring to justice those
who are responsible, involved in or facilitating acts of
piracy, so as to ensure that we can fully prevent and put
an end to these acts.
In that context, we support the options and
recommendations contained in the recent report of the
Secretary-General’s Special Adviser on this issue

16

(S/2011/30, annex). We also emphasize that anti-piracy
efforts must be an integral part of the overall strategy
of the Djibouti Peace Agreement.
In conclusion my country, which in the past has
hosted a number of forums on combating piracy at sea,
hopes that the high-level conference scheduled to be
held in Dubai from 17 to 19 April under the theme
“Global threat, regional responses: forging a common
approach to maritime piracy”, will contribute to
supporting and strengthening current international
efforts aimed at combating this phenomenon.
Finally, we reiterate our position calling for full
respect for the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Somalia as part of any
international or regional efforts undertaken for
restoring the security and stability of that country and
relaunching its development.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Wetland (Norway): As a founding member
of the International Contact Group and Chair of the
Group of Friends of Somalia here in New York,
Norway is deeply engaged in the peace process in
Somalia. Norway will continue to assist in areas such
as peace, reconciliation and training police capacity.
We will cooperate both with the Transitional Federal
Government and with those regional administrations
that are functioning. We have also recently decided to
provide approximately $30 million in humanitarian
assistance to Somalia in 2011.
As the fighting has intensified, a severe drought
has also exacerbated the already grave humanitarian
crisis in large parts of the country. There is an urgent
need to improve access for the provision of
humanitarian assistance to all parts of Somalia.
It is alarming that the Transitional Federal
Institutions (TFIs) are lagging far behind in their
efforts to deliver on what is expected of them before
the expiry of their mandate, in August. We deplore the
untimely decision by the Transitional Federal
Parliament to unilaterally extend its mandate for
another three years.
Action is urgently needed to lay the ground for a
broader political platform and a more inclusive
political process, including with the regional
administrations, in order to build a basis for a more
peaceful post-transition process. The TFIs cannot

11-25878

S/PV.6494 (Resumption 1)

afford another internal power struggle; rather, they
must focus their efforts on addressing the pressing
challenges for Somalia and its people.
The international community must act together in
assisting and supporting Somalia with the means
available to overcome the present hardships and
achieve the peace, security and stability that the Somali
people so desperately need. We welcome the recent
joint regional strategy adopted by the African Union
Mission in Somalia, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and the United Nations Political
Office in Somalia to better coordinate their efforts. In
that respect, let me pay tribute to the brave
peacekeepers from Uganda and Burundi.
The absence of an effective international presence
in Mogadishu and southern Somalia is an impediment
to having a better picture of the political and
humanitarian situation on the ground. We call for an
increased international presence in the course of 2011.
Piracy is dramatically threatening humanitarian
and commercial activities. The threat is felt both by
local communities in Somalia and the hundreds of
hostages on land and on hijacked ships. We all agree
that a lasting solution to the problem of piracy can only
be found on land and through the restoration of
effective Somali State institutions. But in the meantime
we need to contain the problem. It is vital that the
pirates and their leaders and investors are brought to
justice. To do so, we need a more coordinated effort in
collecting, analysing and sharing intelligence on the
financial flows related to piracy.
It is important to cooperate with the relevant
Somali national and regional authorities and with other
countries in the region. We have taken due note of the
report (S/2011/30, annex) of Mr. Jack Lang, Special
Adviser of the Secretary General. The report contains
certain proposals that we hope will be implemented.
In 2011 Norway will allocate approximately
$5 million for counter-piracy measures, including
measures to strengthen the justice sector. That will also
include a new contribution to the trust fund established
by the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia. We encourage other countries to do the same.
Finally, I want to salute my former colleague
Augustine Mahiga and to congratulate him on the
important and decisive work he is doing for the people
of Somalia.

11-25878

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Kittichaisaree (Thailand): My delegation
commends the delegation of China for convening this
timely and important open debate on a comprehensive
strategy for the realization of peace and security in
Somalia. I would like to focus my statement on the
issue of piracy off the coast of Somalia.
Thailand has serious concerns about the problem
of Somali piracy, which has increased in scope, scale
and frequency. Thai fishing and commercial vessels are
at times hijacked by Somali pirates. Thailand believes
that Somali piracy is a symptom of various underlying
factors. In order to effectively address the problem,
such factors and root causes must be concurrently and
holistically addressed through short-, medium- and
long-term solutions.
Thailand believes that a long-term and longlasting solution to the Somali piracy problem can only
be achieved through the restoration of peace and
security in Somalia. The rule of law must be in place
and upheld. Economic development must be promoted
to offer employment opportunities as viable
alternatives to piracy. Sustained international and
regional aid and assistance for Somalia to help develop
its economy and eradicate poverty are crucial; as is
capacity building for Somalia, for it to achieve political
and economic stability and security.
A medium-term solution may be achieved in the
form of the Somalization of responses to piracy,
proposed by Mr. Jack Lang, Special Adviser of the
Secretary-General on Legal Issues Related to Piracy
off the Coast of Somalia, in his report (S/2011/30,
annex). The international community should seriously
consider his 25 proposals, including the possibility of
setting up special courts, with two special prisons for
suspected pirates in Puntland and Somaliland. The
approximate cost of $25 million for establishing them,
as he proposes, should be shared by the United
Nations, the African Union, the European Union and
other organizations and stakeholders.
The cost of piracy to its perpetrators must be
raised to a point where piracy is no longer a relatively
low-risk, high-profit enterprise. To achieve that, the
problem of impunity must be addressed, and there is a
short-term solution: deterrence of the perpetration of
acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea through the
repression and prosecution of pirates and those

17

S/PV.6494 (Resumption 1)

involved in piracy, including national and transnational
organized groups. Universal jurisdiction over piracy
and criminalization of acts proscribed by various
conventions and protocols should be useful tools for
achieving this objective. Another deterrent measure
that is already in place and that Thailand supports
appears in several Security Council resolutions:
imposing certain arms sanctions, travel bans and assets
freezes of those individuals and entities engaged in
perpetuating the instability in Somalia, including those
who may be supporting or engaged in acts of piracy.
For Thailand’s part, between 8 September 2010
and 14 January 2011, the Royal Thai Navy (RTN)
dispatched its Counter-Piracy Task Group, comprising
371 Royal Thai Navy personnel with two naval vessels
together with two airlift helicopters and two RTN
Special Operation Units, to participate in the
Combined Maritime Forces patrolling in the
Internationally Recommended Transit Corridor in the
Gulf of Aden and off the coast of Somalia. On
28 February this year our experts participated in the
meeting of the Working Group 3 of the Contact Group
on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, chaired by the
United States, to discuss strengthening shipping selfawareness and protection and other capabilities in
order to coordinate international efforts to combat
piracy in the Gulf of Aden and off the coast of
Somalia. I myself will be one of the panelists at the
meeting organized by the Permanent Observer Mission
of the Asian-African Legal Consultative Organization
on 16 March to address the topic of “Piracy: Legal and
Policy Issues” here at United Nations Headquarters.
Thailand hopes that our concrete contributions
have helped alleviate the problem of piracy off the
coast of Somalia. We look forward to further dialogue
and cooperation to develop a coordinated international
strategy for combating piracy in all its dimensions,
including the attainment of the long-lasting peace,
stability and prosperity of the nation and people of
Somalia.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Republic of
Tanzania.
Mr. Sefue (United Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, my delegation thanks you for the
initiative to convene this open debate on the situation
in Somalia, a situation that is of great concern to us

18

because Tanzania is one of the Member States most
affected by insecurity and instability in Somalia.
We
commend
international
efforts
and
cooperation in deploying assets to combat piracy off
the Horn of Africa. We now ask that those welcome
efforts at sea be balanced by equal efforts to address, in
a comprehensive manner, the socio-economic and
security push-factors on land in Somalia. Increased
international presence at sea alone will not solve the
problem; it will only push the pirates further east and
southwards.
Tanzania will continue to do all it can to ensure
the safety of our waters. But our capacity to do so in
the face of increasing acts of piracy is limited. We
thank those bilateral partners who have provided some
help to build our capacity to act more effectively, but
there is no doubt that we need more support in building
our surveillance, monitoring and deterrence capacities
at sea. We ask for that kind of support from members
of this Council, as well as all others who can help.
Tanzania likewise stands ready to do its part,
within its own capabilities, in prosecuting accused
pirates. We look forward to working with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to assess our
capabilities and the support we need in that regard.
The Transitional Federal Government in Somalia
has the primary responsibility to provide leadership for
an all-inclusive political process for a post-conflict
Somalia, as well as to build national institutions and
capacity that can deliver for the Somali people. We
welcome the commitments in that regard by the Prime
Minister, His Excellency Mohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed, in this Chamber this morning. We
encourage them and ask that they remain united,
determined and focused in driving this process
forward.
The implementation of the transitional tasks must
be stepped up. Tanzania does not support the decision
of the Somali Parliament to unilaterally extend itself
for another three years. Likewise, all the other parties
to the peace and reconciliation process have to be
forthcoming and contribute to a speedy and successful
outcome. The international community, and certainly
this Security Council, must stand ready to impose
sanctions on spoilers.
Tanzania is concerned about the deteriorating
security and humanitarian situation in Somalia, and we

11-25878

S/PV.6494 (Resumption 1)

urge increased support for humanitarian assistance. We
commend Uganda and Burundi for providing the bulk
of the troops for the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM). We ask the Security Council to support
AMISOM fully. Africa is showing leadership in this
issue.
It is important for the Council to support, endorse
and authorize the specific requests by the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union. They include
expanding and increasing support to AMISOM,
imposing a naval blockade and no-fly zone over
Somalia, imposing sanctions against those impeding
the peace and reconciliation process, adopting a
holistic, comprehensive approach that will address all
underlying issues that drive the piracy menace, and a
commitment to re-hat AMISOM as a United Nations
peacekeeping operation.
Somalia poses a serious threat to peace and
security in the region and beyond. Somalia is not an
African problem; it is a global problem and is within
the full purview and mandate of this Security Council.
Tanzania applauds the efforts being undertaken, in very
difficult circumstances, by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, His Excellency Ambassador
Augustine Mahiga. He needs and deserves the genuine
support and cooperation of all parties in Somalia and of
all of us in the international community.
Finally, Tanzania pays tribute to all men and
women serving under AMISOM and to those providing
humanitarian assistance, especially those who lost their
lives in the cause of peace and humanitarian assistance
in Somalia. Our sympathies and condolences go to
their Governments, their families and loved ones.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): Mr. President, on behalf
of the delegation of Ukraine I wish to thank you for
holding this important meeting and for inviting
Ukraine to participate. I would also like to wish the
Chinese delegation every success in fulfilling the
highly responsible duties of the Security Council
presidency.
Aligning ourselves with the statement of the
European Union, my delegation would like to share
some views in its national capacity.
Undoubtedly, Somalia’s insecure and volatile
situation deserves our utmost attention, as it is

11-25878

impacting not only that country’s own people but the
entire region of the Horn of Africa — and, one could
say, the whole world. Although the very process of
bringing peace, stability and prosperity to the country
remains in the hands of the Somalis, the international
community can and, moreover, is obliged to assist
Somalia in completing that difficult task.
Given that the humanitarian crisis in the country
is worsening, the number of violent clashes and losses
of human life are growing and the Transitional
Institutions are so far unable to build constructive
dialogue with other stakeholders of the Somalia
political reconciliation process, the world community
is now being urged to come up with a new, more
holistic and comprehensive approach on Somalia. In
that connection, we welcome the recent adoption by
the United Nations Political Office for Somalia, the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
of the Joint Regional Strategy on Somalia, outlining a
common approach to the political, security,
humanitarian, institutional and financial challenges that
confront the peace process in the country.
In spite of the recent unilateral decision by the
Somali Parliament to extend its mandate for three
years, Ukraine is still hopeful that the Transitional
Federal Government will justify the trust placed in it as
a credible transitional authority in Somalia. However,
Ukraine would favour shortening the transitional
period and combining that with the reform of
transitional institutions and the continuation of the
constitutional process in the country. Thus we reiterate
to Ambassador Mahiga, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Somalia, our full support in
the fulfilment of his mandate.
Military efforts aimed at providing security in
Somalia are also of vital importance. Hence more
progress needs to be made in deploying the additional
AMISOM troops, as has been authorized by the
Security Council. Ukraine pays tribute to the African
Union soldiers in Somalia, as the gains made by
AMISOM are coming at a high cost.
One more increasingly disturbing factor in the
context of the situation in Somalia is the maritime
piracy that is taking place off its coast and in the
Arabian Sea area. Ukraine is in favour of reinforcing
the international naval presence in the western part of
the Indian Ocean and in the Arabian Sea. In this regard,

19

S/PV.6494 (Resumption 1)

we commend the efforts of the European Union Naval
Force Atalanta and of the other maritime forces
operating in the area off the Somali coast.

our sincere commitment to cooperating in the
repression of Somalia piracy to the fullest possible
extent.

Unfortunately, despite the tremendous amount of
work carried out by anti-piracy actors, this scourge is
far from being ended. The pirates’ tactics have evolved,
and the overall number of their attacks has grown.
Most regrettably, the level of violence used by pirates
towards the crews of the vessels they attack has
increased dramatically. The average length of time
during which hostages are held by pirates has doubled
since 2009 and is now 190 days. In that context,
Ukraine calls upon all the actors involved, including
flag States and industry, to engage more actively in the
process of resolving the problems of seafarers and their
family members that derive from their being constantly
exposed to the threat of piracy. Although the
implementation of the industry-developed best
management practices has improved the security of
crews and significantly contributed to a reduction in
the number of successful hijackings, a long-term
solution to the problem that addresses its root causes is
still urgently needed.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tajikistan.

Nevertheless, a sustainable solution to the
problem of Somali piracy is to be found on the ground,
not at sea, as all of us unanimously agree. In the
process of repressing pirates at sea, the international
community should more keenly explore ways of
building a regional naval and judicial capacity so as to
enable Somalia to police its own waters and bring
pirates to justice. We find reasonable the ideas put
forward by Mr. Jack Lang, the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on Legal Issues related to Piracy off
the Coast of Somalia, in his recent report (S/2011/30,
annex), including the proposal to establish a system of
Somalia courts comprising a specialized court in
Puntland, a specialized court in Somaliland and a
specialized extraterritorial Somali court outside the
country. Notably, Mr. Lang foresees the creation of the
necessary imprisonment facilities in Somalia, as the
lack of imprisonment arrangements has been referred
to as a major constraint on piracy prosecutions.
In our view, it is high time that the Security
Council took measures aimed at fighting Somali
pirates’ impunity, on the basis of the work that has
been done to that end by the Secretary-General and his
Special Adviser, as well as by the Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. By doing so, we, as
States Members of the United Nations, would prove

20

Mr. Noziri (Tajikistan): I have the honour to
make this statement on behalf of the Organization of
the Islamic Conference (OIC) group.
At the outset, we would like to thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and the Special
Representative for Somalia of the Commission of the
African Union, Mr. Boubacar Diarra, for their
important briefings. We welcome the presence of the
Prime Minister of the Transitional Federal Government
of Somalia, Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed. We
would like also to express our deep appreciation to the
Chinese presidency of the Security Council for the
convening of this timely meeting and for giving the
OIC group the opportunity to address it.
Since the beginning of the conflict in Somalia
nearly two decades ago, the OIC has always given top
priority to the situation in that country, which is a
founding State Member of the Organization. The crisis
in Somalia has permanently featured on the agenda of
all OIC summits and conferences of Ministers for
Foreign Affairs, including their annual coordination
meetings in New York.
The OIC has remained in close contact and
worked in unison with the United Nations to find the
necessary ways and means of restoring peace and
security in Somalia. In the same vein, we wish
specifically to pay high tribute to Mr. Augustine
Mahiga, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Somalia, for his commendable role and
outstanding performance directed at ensuring a
tangible outcome to the efforts of all concerned to
restore peace, security and stability in Somalia.
Despite the renewed strong engagement by the
OIC and, indeed, the larger international community,
which produced the Djibouti Peace Agreement,
currently under implementation, lasting peace has,
sadly, continued to elude Somalia. A number of
international conferences in which the OIC actively
participated have been convened to demonstrate
solidarity and support for the Transitional Federal
Government, led by President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh
Ahmed, but Somalia is still at a crossroads, and the

11-25878

S/PV.6494 (Resumption 1)

security situation remains fragile. Considering the huge
investment made so far in the Somalia project, it is
therefore incumbent on all of us, as stakeholders, to
continue to work together with the Government in
order to protect and preserve our collective investment,
in the interest of regional and international peace and
security.
As a practical commitment to Somalia, the OIC
also hosted the sixteenth session of the International
Contact Group on Somalia in Jeddah. Unfortunately,
the violence and terrorist attacks by extremist militant
groups seeking to overthrow the internationally
recognized Transitional Federal Government have not
abated, thereby compounding the already dire
humanitarian situation in Somalia.
It is our hope that with the appointment of the
new Prime Minister and his government, the
Transitional Federal Government will remain focused
on pursuing national reconciliation and will avoid any
distraction in order to complete, through an inclusive
process, the outstanding key tasks under the transition.
The international community must encourage the
Government to promote dialogue and reconciliation
with the groups that renounce violence and join the
peace process. However, we must also demonstrate a
strong resolve to confront as well as defeat the spoilers
and enemies of peace and progress. I urge participants
in this meeting to send a strong and clear message to
them that terrorist activities and violence will not pay
and will never be rewarded.
As we all know, security and development are
mutually reinforcing. The Somalis need to be given
hope through rehabilitation, reconstruction and
economic development in order to make their lives
more meaningful and worth living. To achieve this
goal, the current Somali Government requires massive
international support to build a viable economic base
and institutions. I should like here to reiterate our
unflinching solidarity with the good people of Somalia
and to reassure them that the OIC will never abandon
supporting their country. In this regard, I have the
pleasure to announce that the OIC has opened a
humanitarian affairs office in Somalia and signed an
agreement with the World Food Programme and many
international partners for the implementation of a
comprehensive food security programme covering the
south and centre of Somalia and the areas most

11-25878

affected. In its first stage, the programme will benefit
around 400,000 citizens.
Finally, as we strive to retain the confidence of
the Somalis, the international community must be seen
to deliver on its promises, as stabilizing Somalia is an
invaluable investment in global peace with respect to
which we cannot afford to waver or compromise. In
this important peacebuilding project, enormous
responsibilities also lie on the shoulders of the Somalis
themselves, and we must all strive individually and
collectively to meet our part of the bargain
satisfactorily. Let this meeting produce the desired
fruitful outcome that will lay the ground for permanent
peace in Somalia.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Eritrea.
Mr. Desta (Eritrea): It seems that I am nearly the
last speaker, and the statement I have prepared is very
brief. Let me take this opportunity to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of March. I would also
like to thank you for organizing this open debate on the
situation in Somalia, an issue to which my delegation
attaches
great
importance,
given
its
grave
consequences for the Somali people, the subregion and
far beyond.
Several pressing issues are involved in the
situation in Somalia, and that is why a comprehensive
strategy is critical to overall peace and stability in that
country. However, in order to respect the time allotted
to each speaker, I wish to limit my statement to the
political track of the situation in Somalia.
As my delegation sees it, a growing consensus is
emerging on how best to approach the crisis in
Somalia. Taking cognizance of the realities on the
ground, and having made realistic assessments of the
situation in Somalia, many Member of the United
Nations, including members of the Security Council,
are now calling for a Somali-led and owned inclusive
political process to bring peace and stability to
Somalia. My delegation realizes that such a positive
approach is meeting with some resistance, which is
only to be expected, from parties that want to cling to
policies and arrangements that have clearly failed to
lead to any tangible improvement. We also cannot but
notice that concerted efforts are being made to
maintain the status quo, even while the military

21

S/PV.6494 (Resumption 1)

involvement of external actors continues unabated in
Somalia.
The emerging consensus on the imperative of an
inclusive Somali-led political process has been long in
coming and is the outcome of frank assessments of past
and current realities. Eritrea readily acknowledges that,
even with a new approach, there will be no easy and
quick solution to the Somali crisis. But everything else
has not worked, and we owe it to the Somali people to
provide them with the space and opportunity to resolve
their own problems and to protect the process from
negative and destructive interference.
Eritrea welcomes the emerging consensus on the
need for an inclusive Somali political process and
stands ready to make its own modest constructive
contribution. In this regard, let me stress that we are
prepared to actively cooperate with the good offices of
the Secretary-General and all Member States in the
search for peace and stability in Somalia.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Park In-Kook (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to express my appreciation to you,
Sir, for allowing me to participate as the last speaker in
this meaningful open debate.
Today marks an important Council meeting on
this topic, following the fruitful meeting in January
(see S/PV.6467), at which the Council agreed on a
press statement that voiced support for the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
(SC/10154). My delegation is of the view that there is a
true necessity to holistically address the underlying
causes of conflict in Somalia that go beyond piracy. We
note that peace and security in Somalia are intrinsically
interlinked with the country’s unstable political
situation, lack of development and ongoing
humanitarian crisis. Finding ways to address the
interdependence among those issues should be
faithfully pursued in a comprehensive and synergistic
manner by the Council in order to help the people of
Somalia, while simultaneously bolstering peace and
security in East Africa.
Regarding the political situation in Somalia, the
Republic of Korea recognizes the great need for the
Council to continue to help the Somali people work
towards the realization of post-transitional governance.
Communication with all key stakeholders must be

22

continued with a view towards August, when the
Transitional Federal Charter expires. In this regard, the
role of regional organizations continues to be
important. Indeed, the Council should continue to work
alongside the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development as the transitional process
winds down.
In a similar vein, the international community
should scale up its training and equipping of the
Somali security forces. Wholeheartedly supporting the
security institutions of the Transitional Federal
Government is crucial to the fight against terrorism,
especially as fighting has intensified in Mogadishu in
the past few weeks and the overall significance of the
unification between Al-Shabaab and Hizbul Islam
remains unclear.
My Government continues to be deeply
concerned over the continued activities of pirates and
armed robbers who attack commercial and
humanitarian vessels alike and engage in hostagetaking in the waters off Somalia. Acts of piracy and
armed robbery against ships off the coast of Somalia
continue to be of grave concern not only to the
countries of the region but also to countries of other
regions, including Korea. In January, a Republic of
Korea navy rescue operation, responding under the
mandate of resolution 1851 (2008), successfully
engaged pirates in the Gulf of Aden and rescued
21 sailors onboard a Korean commercial vessel.
The Republic of Korea believes that piracy is a
serious transnational crime that poses a threat to
regional peace and stability. Pirates and armed robbers
off the coast of Somalia not only threaten the safety of
commercial maritime routes and international
navigation, but also jeopardize the prospects of
bringing relief to hundreds of thousands of Somalis
who already face immense humanitarian problems.
In this connection, the Republic of Korea is
deeply concerned about the humanitarian situation in
Somalia and its cyclical relationship with piracy. My
delegation notes the February report of UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs Valerie
Amos, warning of a deepening crisis in malnutrition as
a result of the crippling drought. With that in mind, the
international community should increase humanitarian
aid across the board. The $4.5 million in delivered aid
by the United Nations in January and the $60 million
in additional allocated aid are a good start, but more

11-25878

S/PV.6494 (Resumption 1)

needs to be done for the people of Somalia as an
already dangerous humanitarian situation continues to
deteriorate further.
Likewise, recent reports of the International
Committee of the Red Cross point to 2010 as the year
with the most registered casualties in Mogadishu,
further compounding the humanitarian situation on the
ground. Quite simply, those who are facing the highest
unemployment and malnutrition rates in the world and
no viable economic options will continue to join piracy
activities and armed groups as a means of survival.
However, sustained development can be achieved
only in a stable security environment. In this
connection, peacekeeping must continue to play an
integral role in buttressing the security environment in
Somalia with a view to promoting sustained
development. My delegation supports the activities of
the African Union Mission in Somalia and calls on the
Council and the greater international community to
continue to facilitate its mission on the ground with
increased resources and political support. Ensuring the
deployment of an additional 4,000 troops at the earliest
possible date should be a prioritized short-term goal.
With a view towards longer term development
and as the Security Council has recognized before,

11-25878

economic and social opportunities can also be obtained
through disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes, and can be useful tools to bridge the gap
between insecurity and development. Current
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
activities in Somalia should be strengthened to this
end.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to
request that the Security Council continue to remain
proactive and vigilant on the complex and interrelated
issues in Somalia. The Republic of Korea fully
supports the efforts of the Security Council and the
international community to continue to implement all
relevant resolutions. It is our great hope that peace and
security will be attained in Somalia and that a better
life, fostered by true economic and political
development and a marked improvement in the
humanitarian situation, will be achieved for the Somali
people.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

23
