S/PV.8532

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8532nd meeting

Wednesday, 22 May 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Marsudi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Indonesia)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mangue
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Mogashoa
Mr. Allen
Mr. Greenblatt

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-14870 (E)
*1914870*

S/PV.8532

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Israel to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, and Mr. Pierre Krähenbühl,
Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East.
Mr. Mladenov and Mr. Krähenbühl are joining the
meeting via video-teleconference from Jerusalem and
Gaza City, respectively.
I propose that the Council invite the observer of
the Observer State of Palestine to the United Nations
to participate in this meeting, in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and previous practice in
this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: Just a few short weeks ago we
teetered on the precipice of another devastating conflict,
as we witnessed the most intense fighting between
Israeli forces and Palestinian militants from Hamas
and Islamic Jihad in Gaza since 2014. The United
Nations worked intensively with Egypt and all sides
to calm the situation, but Israeli and Palestinian lives
were tragically lost. My sincere condolences go out to
the families and friends of all those who were killed,
and I wish a speedy recovery to the injured. While the
situation has now stabilized, it remains very tense. One
thing is clear: these dangerous cycles of escalation and
de-escalation are not sustainable in future.
2/28

22/05/2019

Thousands of Palestinians participated on 3 May
in the weekly demonstrations at the Gaza perimeter
fence. Incendiary balloons were launched, and stones
and pipe bombs were thrown at Israeli soldiers, who
responded with live fire, rubber bullets and tear gas,
killing two Palestinians and injuring 49. Later that day,
a sniper, reportedly from the Palestinian Islamic Jihad,
fired across the fence, injuring two Israeli soldiers. In
response to the sniper attack, the Israel Defense Forces
(IDF) launched several tank shells, while the air force
targeted military sites in Gaza, killing two Palestinian
militants and injuring two civilians. That was the
beginning of the most serious escalation since 2014.
Over the course of the following 48 hours, 650
rockets were fired from Gaza. While approximately 240
projectiles were intercepted by the Iron Dome system;
several houses, two kindergartens, a school and a
hospital in Israel were directly hit. Four Israeli civilians
were killed and over 200 were injured, according to the
IDF. During the same period, the Israel Defense Forces
reported that it had hit over 300 Palestinian militant
targets in Gaza, including a senior Hamas official, who
was targeted and killed by an air strike. According to
sources in Gaza, 25 Palestinians were killed and over
150 were injured.
After intense efforts by the United Nations and
Egypt, a cessation of hostilities was established as of
early morning on 6 May, ending the escalation. I take
this opportunity to once again urge all sides to use this
period to reduce tensions, solidify the fragile calm and
commit to implementing the understandings established
in the past few months.
Sniper fire from Gaza has been a constant threat
that, on at least four occasions over the past year,
has pushed both sides closer to confrontation. This
latest incident followed a pattern that has been well
established — the closer we get to consolidating an
understanding that would relieve the pressure on people
in Gaza and reduce the risk of rocket fire towards Israel,
an incident like the last one occurs and undermines our
careful and painstaking efforts.
Despite that, the United Nations and Egyptian teams
will continue to work intensely with all sides to use this
window of opportunity to provide assistance to the
people of Gaza and further reduce the risk of conflict.
Sustained calm is also critical to supporting Egyptianled efforts to advance intra-Palestinian reconciliation,
19-14870

22/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

which should enable the return of a unified, legitimate
Palestinian Government to the Gaza Strip.
I take this opportunity to welcome Israel’s decision
to lift the ban on accessing the Gazan fishing zone
and expand it to 15 negotiationsautical miles in some
places, reopen the Erez and Kerem Shalom crossings
as normal on 12 May and other steps taken in the past
few days. I also welcome the renewed commitment by
the Palestinian Government in Ramallah to engage
constructively on addressing the situation in Gaza.
I also want to reiterate the call by the SecretaryGeneral, who condemned in the strongest terms the
launching of rockets from Gaza into Israel, particularly
the targeting of civilian population centres, and also
call on Israel to exercise maximum restraint and refrain
from using lethal force against protesters, except as a
last resort.
Turning briefly to the humanitarian situation,
Deputy Special Coordinator Jamie McGoldrick has
warned that health providers in Gaza are struggling to
treat the high numbers of injuries sustained during the
weekly demonstrations. Many of the wounded require
complex surgeries not currently available there. Yet
access to treatment outside of Gaza continues to be
challenging, as the lack of consistency in the approval
process is having very serious and negative implications
on people.
Meanwhile,
the
international
community
has continued its efforts to address the dreadful
situation in Gaza. The Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of International Assistance to
Palestinians met in Brussels on 30 April and reiterated
its support for the implementation of a package of
urgent humanitarian and economic interventions in
Gaza through the United Nations. Between October
2018 and April 2019, approximately $112 million was
mobilized, enabling a significant increase in electricity
supply through the Gaza power plant, the creation of
thousands of temporary jobs in Gaza and the delivery
of essential medical supplies and other support for the
struggling health sector. Fuel deliveries for the power
plant have been extended. As I speak, we are moving
forward on other more sustainable efforts for the energy
sector, with a focus on renewable energy. On 13 May,
I visited the second-largest hospital in Gaza, where a
landmark World Health Organization-developed solar
power plant project will cover a substantial part of the
energy needs of the hospital.

S/PV. 8532

I appreciate the financial support provided by
Japan and many others for those critical projects. I urge
other donors to further increase their support for our
joint efforts to improve the situation on the ground. The
most significant contribution to date remains that of
the State of Qatar. On behalf of the Secretary-General,
I would like to express our sincere appreciation for
the assistance provided by Qatar, without which the
situation in Gaza would have been untenable. On
6 May, His Highness the Emir of Qatar announced
an assistance package for the Palestinian people of
approximately $480 million — $180 million for Gaza,
$250 million as loans for the Palestinian Government
and $50 million as grants for projects in the West Bank.
In relation to Gaza, some of that funding will allow
the United Nations to provide fuel for electricity until
the end of the year, expand temporary employment
programmes and focus on permanent job creation.
While Gaza continues to command significant
attention, the situation in the occupied West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, is of growing concern
to all of us. The prolonged absence of a political
horizon to resolve the broader conflict has coincided
with a steady deterioration of the living conditions of
Palestinians. That, coupled with violence, settlement
expansion, demolitions of Palestinian property and
the persistent threat of further economic decline, is
creating an explosive mix that could have serious
security implications.
Two hundred and forty Palestinians were injured
by Israeli forces during the reporting period, including
nine children, during demonstrations, clashes,
security operations and other incidents in the West
Bank. According to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), four Palestinians
were injured or had their property damaged by settlers,
while one Palestinian attack against Israeli civilians in
the West Bank was recorded, resulting in one injury
and damage to a vehicle. I unequivocally condemn all
attacks on Palestinian and Israeli civilians and call on
all sides to refrain from violence. All perpetrators must
be accountable for their crimes.
Allow me to reiterate that settlements are illegal
under international law and remain a substantial
obstacle to peace. In that context, Israeli authorities
demolished or seized 40 structures during the reporting
period, displacing 31 people, overwhelmingly on the
grounds of a lack of Israeli-issued building permits,
which are nearly impossible for Palestinians to obtain.

19-148703/28

S/PV.8532

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

On 29 April, 31 structures were demolished in East
Jerusalem, the highest single-day total monitored by
OCHA since 2009. On 3 May, a joint statement by the
Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
called for
“an immediate halt to the Israeli authorities’
destruction of Palestinian-owned property in
East Jerusalem”.
On the following day four structures were
demolished in Silwan, displacing 11 Palestinians.
According to OCHA, five people were seriously
injured when Israeli forces reportedly beat and used
stun grenades and sponge-covered bullets to push
residents away as they tried to retrieve belongings prior
to the demolitions. Moreover, in a worrisome move,
Israel’s High Court of Justice upheld a new Israeli
military order that accelerates the demolition process
for new structures built without permits in Area C of
the West Bank.
Regrettably, the reporting period saw no resolution
to the Palestinian Authority (PA) financial crisis.
For the third consecutive month, the Palestinian
Government has refused to receive Israel’s transfer of
any tax revenues less than the full amount owed to it. I
am concerned that, despite the PA’s announced austerity
measures and the support package committed by Qatar,
the latter’s survival remains at risk.
I briefed the Council in March (see S/PV.8489)
and said that the crisis would have a substantial
impact on the Palestinian economy, with reduced
purchasing power and weakened growth. The first
signs of that negative trend are already beginning to
show. A long-term resolution of the financial crisis is
urgently needed. Its continuation threatens to further
destabilize an already volatile situation. Both parties
should implement their bilateral agreements and avoid
taking unilateral actions that undermine the stability
of the Palestinian Authority. Against that backdrop,
a team from the Office of the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process recently visited
the Al-Fawwar Palestinian refugee camp, where the
residents endure harsh living conditions and UNRWA’s
ability to deliver essential services is hampered
by its own financial crisis. Commissioner-General
Krähenbühl, who will also be briefing the Council
4/28

22/05/2019

today, will speak more on the severity of the current
challenges facing Palestine refugees.
On a positive note, with the advent of the Muslim
holy month of Ramadan, hundreds of thousands of
Muslims from the occupied West Bank were able
to pray at Al-Aqsa Mosque during the holy month. I
would also like to take this opportunity to welcome the
relative calm at the holy site and urge continued respect
for the status quo and relevant agreements.
Turning very briefly to the region, the situation on
the Golan is calm. However, the potential for heightened
tension between the parties to the 1974 Disengagement
of Forces Agreement persists. On 1 May, the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF)
saw that some Israel soldiers, who had been laying
razor concertina wire in the area between the Israeli
technical fence and an UNDOF position, had crossed
the ceasefire line. During that activity, Syrian Arab
Armed Forces soldiers deployed close to that location
to monitor their activity. UNDOF liaised with both
sides and was able to de-escalate the situation.
In Lebanon, the Cabinet started reviewing the
draft 2019 State budget on 30 April, as protests over
reported austerity measures continued. At stake in the
ongoing budget discussions is meeting commitments
from the 2018 CEDRE conference on economic
development and reform, which include the need to
reduce Lebanon’s deficit.
In conclusion, I would like to return to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. The recent escalation in Gaza has
once again demonstrated the urgency of solidifying and
expanding the existing understandings on the ground.
We must ask ourselves, how many more years will
Palestinians in Gaza be forced to live on a pittance
from the international community, under the control
of Hamas, and suffer from Israeli closures? How many
more years will Israelis be forced to run for shelters as
rockets launched by Palestinian militants in Gaza rain
down indiscriminately from above?
The United Nations and its partners have, yet again,
tried to mitigate the impact of the crisis in Gaza, but
those efforts will ultimately fail unless there is progress
on resolving the Palestinian divide, lifting the closures
and charting a course towards the two-State solution,
based on long-standing international parameters,
including the relevant United Nations resolutions
and previous agreements. There are no short-cuts to
sustainable peace.
19-14870

22/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I also take note of the invitation by the United
States and the Kingdom of Bahrain to convene
Government, civil society and business leaders to
discuss the potential for economic investments and
initiatives that would be made possible by a future
Palestinian-Israeli peace agreement and a solution to
the final-status issues. Humanitarian and economic
support is very important for people, but it is also
critical for creating an environment conducive to viable
negotiations. However, the solution to the conflict
remains fundamentally political.
The President: I thank Mr. Mladenov for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Krähenbühl.
Mr. Krähenbühl: First of all, allow me to thank
you, Madam President, for the invitation to address
the Security Council. It is a particular honour to do so
from Gaza.
I wish to emphasize and express heartfelt
appreciation to the States Members of the United
Nations — both countries hosting Palestine refugees
and donors — for their extraordinary trust in and
support to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
since its operations began, in 1950. Together, we
have significantly advanced several key Sustainable
Development Goals for Palestine refugees, notably in
education, health and beyond, pending a just and lasting
solution to their plight.
Never was the support of Member States more
remarkable than in 2018, when our Agency was
confronted with its most severe funding crisis
ever — a truly existential crisis. Forty-two different
countries and institutions from all corners of the world,
including Indonesia, Madam President, increased
their contributions to UNRWA last year. On our side,
we took a number of difficult internal measures and
reduced expenditures by $92 million. Through those
combined efforts, last year we successfully overcame
an unprecedented deficit of $446 million. We are
particularly indebted to the leadership of SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and the wider United Nations
family, who resolutely stood with UNRWA every step
of the way during those most challenging times.
The European Union became the Agency’s
single-largest contributor in 2018. I also wish to pay
special tribute to Germany, the Kingdom of Saudi

S/PV. 8532

Arabia, the United Kingdom, Sweden, the United
Arab Emirates, Qatar, Kuwait, Japan, Norway and
many others, including permanent and non-permanent
members of the Security Council, for their very
generous contributions last year. Those actions were
vital to keeping open the 715 schools that UNRWA runs
for more than half a million female and male students
in the West Bank, as well as in East Jerusalem, Gaza,
Jordan, Lebanon and Syria.
More than 2 million students have graduated from
UNRWA schools since 1950, where gender parity has
long been achieved and we have included a human
rights, conflict resolution and tolerance programme
that is unique in the region. The generous support of
donors also preserved primary health-care services for
3 million patients through our network of 140 health
centres and, despite severe pressures, also preserved
our emergency services for 1.5 million refugees,
mainly in Gaza, the West Bank and Syria. At a time
when Palestine refugees face a near complete absence
of a political horizon, I am strongly convinced that
preserving UNRWA’s services is a crucial contribution
in terms of human dignity and regional stability.
Speaking from Gaza, I must draw the urgent and
renewed attention of the Council to the increasingly
desperate situation faced by the inhabitants of the
Gaza Strip, of whom at least 1.3 million are Palestine
refugees. My current visit has once again exposed me
to the extreme hardship created by successive armed
confrontations, blockade and violence. UNRWA is
working alongside our United Nations and civil society
partners to address that humanitarian crisis.
I think here of issues such as the lack of freedom of
movement or employment opportunities, as well as the
deep trauma created by the many casualties and persons
injured from repeated wars and from what became
known as the Great March of Return. Thousands of
young people have been wounded, and hundreds killed,
since March 2018, including 14 boys and girls, ages 11
to 16, who were students in UNRWA schools. As I have
done in the past, I reiterate here my call for respect for
international humanitarian law and my condemnation
of the targeting of civilians. That includes rocket firing
from Gaza that has led to civilian loss of life and
injuries in Israel.
Every family in Gaza has been impacted, and
people speak of a level of despair that surpasses
anything previously known to them, in particular

19-148705/28

S/PV.8532

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in terms of what our health teams call an epidemic
deterioration of mental-health conditions. After hearing
many concrete examples during my visit today, it seems
particularly important that UNRWA and other relevant
actors ne enabled to strengthen critically needed
mental-health capacities.
Poverty levels among Palestine refugees continue
to rise, and they rely on UNRWA in particular to meet
essential food needs. For their sake and the stability of
Gaza, we must ensure that our food distributions for
1 million people here in the Gaza Strip do not face any
interruption. As we speak, UNRWA has only enough
money to run its operations until mid-June; then we will
hit negative figures and a funding gap. It is absolutely
crucial to avoid a breakdown of our food pipeline, and
I call on all our partners to actively mobilize in support
of our efforts to secure the needed funding.
It is similarly essential that UNRWA be able to open
the next school year on time in August and September.
We are currently rehabilitating a large number of
schools, but we need the funding to ensure that the
education itself can be provided. Nothing sustains hope
and opportunities more effectively than the education
provided in our classrooms. I am deeply impressed by
the courage shown by our students in overcoming the
adversity they face and pursuing their studies. We need
to match that courage with our ability to mobilize the
necessary financial support. In Gaza alone, 280,000
girls and boys study in our schools. In the light of all the
discussions on leaving no one behind, on safeguarding
refugee education and preserving regional stability, we
need to work together to keep UNRWA schools open
and safe.
UNRWA faces important needs in the West
Bank as well, including in East Jerusalem. Palestine
refugees in the West Bank are confronted with multiple
consequences of the ongoing occupation, such as home
demolitions and evictions, with numbers significantly
on the rise since early 2019, as well as movement
restrictions and settler violence. There are also frequent
military incursions in which live ammunition is fired,
resulting at times in fatalities, but often in injuries
and property damage in densely populated areas like
Palestine refugee camps, where entire communities can
be impacted by the live fire and the use of tear gas. I
must in particular draw the attention of the Council to
the growing pressure UNRWA itself has faced in East
Jerusalem, with threats to interfere with our operations.
The current developments in the West Bank, including
6/28

22/05/2019

East Jerusalem, will further unsettle not only Palestine
refugees, but also their hope and aspirations with
regard to a two-State solution and their rights under
international law.
In addition to strong political backing, in 2019 we
require $1.2 billion for all of our operations throughout
the Near East. That is the exact amount we mobilized
last year. In other words, if every donor should manage
to maintain its level of funding in 2019, we should be
able to cover our budget. I therefore humbly call on all
of our partners to repeat their generous support and
preserve the successful dynamic created in 2018. The
upcoming pledging conference, to be held in New York
on 25 June, will be an important opportunity to that
effect. For its part, UNRWA will continue to manage
its operations with strong financial discipline and a
determination to achieve further efficiencies.
Wars, armed conflicts and violence persist in the
absence of effective political action to resolve them. It
is political inaction — not the action of humanitarian
organizations — that perpetuates conflicts. Nothing
today would be more important than a renewed,
genuine and inclusive effort to resolve the conflict
between Israelis and Palestinians. I say that not because
UNRWA was mandated to deal with the politics
of the region — we were not — but rather because
every single day, we deal with the increasingly severe
humanitarian and human consequences of this enduring
conflict. We do not believe that the future of Palestine
refugees should be framed by another 10, 20, 30 or 40
years of UNRWA. They need and deserve a just and
lasting political solution. Until then, however, we are
determined to live up to the mandate that the General
Assembly bestowed upon us.
When meeting with young students here in Gaza,
I was again reminded that our efforts — with the
Council’s support — are worth it every single day. In
another remarkable example of talent and dedication,
15-year-old UNRWA student Jameela Abu Jom’a was
declared the winner of the 2019 Inspirational Messages
of Peace Contest by the United States National Park
Service and International World Peace Rose Gardens.
The competition celebrates messages of peace written
by young people throughout the world. Yesterday I
congratulated Jameela and told her that we are very
proud that her message of peace will be on display in
the gardens of the Martin Luther King, Jr. National
Historical Park in Atlanta, Georgia, for one year. That
is what members of the Council and of the General
19-14870

22/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Assembly have allowed us to achieve and preserve. For
that, members deserve the highest recognition. From
here in Gaza, I call on them to protect this vital effort
and sustain their collective mobilization, in support of
dignity, stability and robust multilateralism.
The President: I thank Mr. Krähenbühl for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Greenblatt (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Mladenov for his briefing and for his redoubled
efforts to restore safety and security both to the people
of Israel, who came under sustained attack from Gaza,
and to the Palestinian civilians, among whom Hamas
and Palestinian Islamic Jihad members hid as they
launched wave after wave of rockets.
All of those innocent victims deserve better. The
families of the four Israelis who died and the 200
Israelis injured, and the Palestinian civilians killed
and injured by Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad
attacks all deserve better. It is simply unacceptable
that Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad continue to
target Israeli communities, including hospitals and
schools, in a cynical attempt to extract concessions
from Israel. It is simply unacceptable that Hamas and
Palestinian Islamic Jihad continue to use civilians in
Gaza, including children, as human shields. It is simply
unacceptable that Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad
continue to siphon the scarce resources of the people
of Gaza to build their terror arsenal while preventing
donor aid from reaching the people.
There will be no end to the suffering until all of
us together say in public what I believe many here
are thinking — Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad
are to blame for the suffering of the people of Gaza.
Nothing can be meaningfully fixed until they renounce
terror and cease their acts of violence and their vow to
destroy Israel. When will the Security Council say this
out loud? When will we clearly reject this terrorism?
As President Trump has said, the United States will
always stand with Israel and we will always support
its right to self-defence. But we should not stand alone.
We must all speak loudly and clearly and say that these
attacks upon Israel, which are perpetrated by Hamas
and Palestinian Islamic Jihad — whether by rockets,
incendiary balloons or otherwise — must end. I was
just informed moments ago that Israeli firefighters are
working to extinguish six blazes caused by incendiary

S/PV. 8532

balloons. Also, the terrible suffering that those attacks
cause Israelis and Palestinians must end.
Every Government has a responsibility to ensure
the safety and security of its citizens. Since its birth,
the State of Israel has faced threats from enemies
that call for its destruction and the death of the Israeli
people. The State of Israel has no margin for error. The
Palestinians are also entitled to safety and security. A
first step towards that goal is for us sitting here today to
admit that Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad are the
primary barrier to the dreams of the residents of Gaza
who want to live in peace, raise their families and find
meaningful work.
Mr. Mladenov’s efforts on behalf of the United
Nations, together with Egypt, have created a fragile
peace in recent days. Qatar has sent funds, which has
eased some suffering. Keeping that fragile peace intact
will require intense international pressure on Hamas
and Palestinian Islamic Jihad. If that calm holds, I
look forward to working closely with all gathered here,
Mr. Mladenov and others to determine how we can best
help the people of Gaza move past 12 years of suffering
and deprivation into a world in which they can imagine
a real future.
On a separate but closely related topic, nothing
stops us now from undertaking the hard work of
ensuring that the Palestinians who receive services
from the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) have
access to more reliable and sustainable health and
education services. I thank UNRWA CommissionerGeneral Krähenbühl for his briefing today and for his
work over the years. But I am afraid that it is time for
him and everyone here today to face the reality that the
UNRWA model has failed the Palestinian people.
UNRWA’s business model, which is inherently
tied to an endlessly and exponentially community of
beneficiaries, is in permanent crisis mode. That is why
the United States decided that it will no longer commit
to funding this irredeemably flawed operation. The
UNRWA model cannot provide to Palestinians what
they deserve — a life where they can plan for their
future and the future of their children, and one where
they know whether schools and health clinics will
remain open.
We did not come to that conclusion lightly. Since
UNRWA’s founding, the United States has donated
$6 billion to it, vastly more than any other country.

19-148707/28

S/PV.8532

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

And yet, year after year, UNRWA funding fell short.
Year after year, budget shortfalls threatened essential
services to Palestinian mothers and children. Year
after year, UNRWA and other donors turned to the
United States to make up the shortfall. And year after
year, Palestinian in refugee camps were not given the
opportunity to build any future. They were misled and
used as political pawns and commodities, instead of
treated as human beings.
UNRWA is currently running on fumes, surviving
on a surge in foreign donations in 2018 that is unlikely
to be sustained this year, or in future. What happens
when the Agency’s bank account is empty again? We
need to be honest about the situation. UNRWA is a
band-aid, and the Palestinians who use its services
deserve better, much better. We do not have to a wait
until a comprehensive solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict is in place to address that fact.
For too long, we have dismissed the dismal situation
of Palestinians in refugee camps as an unavoidable
by-product of the lack of a negotiated peace between
Israel and the Palestinians. But nothing stops the
international community from choosing to reach out its
hand to Palestinians living in refugee camps today to
address their very real, everyday needs in a sustainable
way while we all continue to work towards a lasting
comprehensive peace.
We need to engage with host Governments to
start a conversation about planning the transition of
UNRWA services to host Governments or to other
international or local non-governmental organizations,
as appropriate. The United States is ready to participate
in that conversation. We tried to begin that conversation
before we cut our aid to UNRWA. No one wanted to
engage in that conversation back then. We remain ready
to begin that conversation now. It is time to start.
We do not advance a comprehensive and enduring
peace by ignoring the reality that UNRWA is unable to
fulfil the mandate given to it by the General Assembly.
We advance a comprehensive and enduring peace
by making it clear that the international community
is fully committed to providing a brighter future for
today’s Palestinians and their children.
Palestinians have been held hostage for too long
to United Nations resolutions, regional politics,
donor fatigue and weak leadership. It has been 70
years — three generations of Palestinians who have
suffered tremendously. A similar number of Jewish
8/28

22/05/2019

refugees expelled from Arab lands shortly after the
creation of the State of Israel also suffered tremendously.
But there is a difference. Those Jewish refugees’ needs
for basic services and their desire to build a brighter
future for their children were not held hostage to
politics. It is time for the needs of Palestinians for basic
services and their desire to build a brighter future for
their children to stop being held hostage to politics. Do
we not have an obligation to the Palestinians to make
that transition?
Next month, in Bahrain, we and many others will
participate in an economic workshop on an alternative
path, with the potential to unlock a prosperous future
for Palestinians. That is the first stage of a process that
we want to begin to showcase what could be — how,
if we can achieve a political solution to the conflict,
we can also transform the lives of the Palestinians. It
would be a mistake for the Palestinians not to join us.
They have nothing to lose and much to gain if they join
us, but it is, of course, their choice.
I cannot help but point out the irony that at the time
of our conference in Bahrain, which can pave the way
to prosperity for Palestinians, UNRWA is hosting a
pledging conference for a broken system. The United
States is committed to talking with others about how best
to address the fearful uncertainty of UNRWA’s service
recipients, who are not sure whether schools or clinics
will be open, and how we might help them actually
build new lives — with or without a peace agreement.
But we are also committed to resolutely standing by
Israel as it address the urgent challenges presented by
Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad — attacks from
Gaza or elsewhere.
I approach this issue with humility. I acknowledge
that I have not brought with me today a solution — either
to the acute crisis of the violent and illegitimate rule of
Hamas over Gaza, or to the prolonged crisis caused by
UNRWA’s inability to fulfil its original mandate, or to
any of the other challenges posed by this extraordinary
conflict. What we do know is that what we have today
is not the answer. We do know that Palestinians and
Israelis both deserve better. We do know that it is time
to move past band-aid solutions and political assertions
into the adult world of hard choices.
The hopes and dreams of Palestinians living in
refugee camps have been suspended for too long.
So have the hopes and dreams of Palestinians living
under the punishing rule of Hamas in Gaza. And so
19-14870

22/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

too have the hopes of Israelis, who have lived under
constant threats for decades and who yearn for peace.
This conflict is sad and tragic and complex, on so many
levels. But we must stop pretending that UNRWA and
United Nations resolutions will somehow solve the
conflict. They simply will not. Let us work together to
find a real cure.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we congratulate you, Madam President, on the
holy month of Ramadan. We welcome the fact that you
are presiding over this important meeting in which we
are discussing the Palestinian question. This question
is an important, central and sensitive one for both the
Arab and Muslim nations. We also thank Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his informative briefing. We reiterate
the full support of the State of Kuwait for his efforts to
ease the tensions in the situation, protect civilians and
push for the resumption of the peace process.
We welcome as well the Commissioner-General
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), who
recalled the serious financial pressure the Agency
is experiencing this year in its efforts to continue
providing schools, health centres and many other
services to Palestinian refugees.
We are meeting today a year after the crime
committed by the Israeli occupation forces against
civilian protesters in Gaza on 14 May 2018, which
led to the deaths of 60 Palestinian martyrs, including
children, as well as more than 2,000 injured. It is also
important to note that Palestinian civilians are still
being attacked. We want to reiterate what was said in the
open meeting on this issue last month (see S/PV.8517).
It is important to seriously follow up on the report of
the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
(A/HRC/40/74) established to investigate violations
committed during protests in the occupied Palestinian
territories in Gaza Strip, with a view to ensuring that the
criminals are brought to justice. Israel, the occupying
Power, is requested to end all acts of aggression against
the Palestinian people and commit to the protection of
civilians and respect for international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, including the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, as well as to lifting
the unjust blockade against Gaza.
It is no secret that if we are to establish a
fair, lasting and comprehensive peace through a

S/PV. 8532

negotiating process culminating in the signing of an
agreement between the two key stakeholders, there are
fundamental terms of reference that must be respected,
including the implementation of confidence-building
measures between the parties that not only show a
genuine political commitment to peace but ensure that
they are committed to implementing the provisions of
the agreement.
The Arab countries have reiterated their principled
position of upholding peace as a strategic choice.
That was announced at the Arab summit in Tunisia
on 31 March, at which the participants expressed
their determination to see a resumption of serious
negotiations on a two-State solution as a requirement
for reaching a just, comprehensive and lasting peace
based on international law, relevant United Nations
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. Today I will
therefore highlight some obstacles that stand in the way
of any agreement or peace initiative.
First, we cannot speak of peace if the Israeli
occupation continues to spread through the confiscation
of land by force. We should point out that the settlements
are still the major obstacle to the achievement of a just
and comprehensive peace. For that reason, on 9 May
Indonesia, South Africa and my country convened an
Arria Formula meeting on the settlements and Israeli
settlers. Such settlement activities, accompanied by
violence perpetrated by the settlers, are on the rise,
and are undermining the possibility of establishing
a viable and contiguous Palestinian State within the
1967 borders. In that regard, we once again condemn
all Israeli settlement activities without legal legitimacy.
We call on the international community to take
responsibility and provide the necessary protection
to the Palestinian people while ending Israel’s acts of
aggression, including the recurring assaults made at the
Al-Aqsa compound under the watchful eye of Israeli
forces. These are all flagrant violations of international
law and the relevant resolutions of international
legitimacy, including resolution 2334 (2016).
Secondly, we cannot speak of peace when one
party continues to take decisions on a unilateral basis,
especially since the Secretary-General has warned on
many occasions that unilateral steps and measures can
only undermine the possibility of achieving peace. In
that regard, we reiterate our condemnation of Israel’s
decisions not to renew the Temporary International
Presence in Hebron and to withhold part of the
Palestinian tax revenues. That does not just threaten

19-148709/28

S/PV.8532

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the financial stability of the Palestinian Authority and
endanger the security of Israelis and Palestinians alike,
as Mr. Mladenov said earlier, it is in defiance of the
Oslo Accords and negates any possibility of ensuring
Israel’s respect for future initiatives in favour of peace.
Thirdly, we cannot speak of peace if it is imposed
on Palestinians by force. At its summit, the Arab
League ensured that it would pledge its full solidarity
with the State of Palestine and would not accept any
political or financial pressure with a view to imposing
unjust solutions to the Palestinian question that are not
in line with the main international terms of reference.
Here we also want to recall UNRWA’s financial
difficulties just mentioned by Mr. Krähenbühl, whom
we commend for his efforts and those of UNRWA in
delivering services to the Palestinian refugees. Without
them, the quality of life and future of millions of
refugee children would worsen immediately and bring
more instability to the region. We therefore reject
attempts by Israeli campaigns to end or minimize the
role and mandate of UNRWA and stress the importance
of providing the necessary financial support for the
Agency’s programmes and activities. We are pleased to
be able to say that the State of Kuwait is one of UNRWA’s
major partners, and that our voluntary contributions
over the past four years have totalled $113 million. We
reiterate our commitment to supporting UNRWA to
ensure that it can continue to provide its services in the
five areas where it operates — the Gaza Strip, the West
Bank, Syria, Lebanon and Jordan.
Fourthly, we cannot speak of peace if that peace
is not based on international law and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, because it would imply
acceptance of the legality of Israel’s actions violating
law, international agreements and customary law. The
current situation and the realities on the ground are
the result of illegal policies and decisions of Israel,
the occupying power, and they are null and void under
international law. In that regard, we note that any
attempts to protect those violations and crimes rather
than holding the State committing them accountable
would undermine the rules and values on which the
United Nations was established and which the Security
Council has also been defending and demanding their
implementation for decades.
Finally, we cannot speak of peace that is not based
on international law. In that regard, we want to point
to the first Arab-European summit, held recently in
10/28

22/05/2019

Sharm El-Sheikh, at which Arab and European leaders
insisted on their common positions with respect to
the Middle East peace process, including the status
of Jerusalem, the illegality of Israeli settlements
in occupied Palestinian territories and a two-State
solution, in line with United Nations resolutions. They
agreed that this is the only realistic way to bring an
end to an occupation that began in 1967 and includes
East Jerusalem, as well as to arrive at a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace between the Israelis and
Palestinians through direct negotiations among the
parties that deal with all final-status issues.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by welcoming your presence here, Madam
President, and the fact that the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Indonesia is presiding over our meeting,
which reflects the importance of the subject we are
discussing today. I thank Special Coordinator Nickolay
Mladenov for his briefing, which was very precise and
informative, as always. I also thank the CommissionerGeneral of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA),
Mr. Pierre Krähenbühl, whose presence in the Chamber
today is very welcome. I would like to pay tribute to
Mr. Krähenbühl’s commitment and to UNRWA’s work
with Palestinian refugees and its contribution to the
stability of the region. I also want to welcome the
participation in our work of the Special Representative
of the President of the United States, Jason Greenblatt.
I would first like to mention the situation in Gaza,
where the humanitarian, political and security equation
is particularly alarming. Earlier this month, the Gaza
Strip once again experienced an outbreak of violence
that runs the risk of tipping into a new conflict, like
the other three it has experienced over the past decade.
France, which will never compromise Israel’s security,
has condemned in the strongest terms the firing of
rockets into populated areas of Israeli territory from
the Gaza Strip on 4 and 5 May. Those shootings and
the ensuing clashes have once again claimed civilian
casualties on both sides. The developments since
2014 are of an unprecedented gravity. Israelis and
Palestinians alike have the right to live in peace, dignity
and security.
The efforts of Egypt and the United Nations
Special Coordinator have made it possible to achieve
a ceasefire, which must be consolidated and sustained.
We call on the parties to exercise the utmost restraint in
that regard. Beyond that, however, there will be lasting
19-14870

22/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8532

stability in Gaza only in the context of a negotiated
settlement, including the full return of the Palestinian
Authority and the lifting of the blockade accompanied
by credible security guarantees for Israel.

minds, however, the acceleration of settlement activity
undermines the foundations of the two-State solution.
Today, we are inching ever closer to the point of
no return.

We also recall that the stabilization of the Gaza
Strip requires an immediate improvement in the
humanitarian situation in the territory, to which all
stakeholders must contribute. In that respect, Israel’s
announcement of the expansion of the fishing zone is
a step in the right direction. In the Gaza Strip, where
two-thirds of the population is composed of Palestinian
refugees, the main humanitarian actor is UNRWA.
In Palestinian refugee camps in Gaza and the region,
access to education, health and, for some people, food
aid depends entirely on UNRWA.

In addition to the facts, legal developments have
led to the progressive application of Israeli law to the
inhabitants of West Bank settlements. That situation
does not correspond to the aspirations of either the
Palestinians or the Israelis, and it is emerging in
violation of international law, including the resolutions
of the Council.

Beyond the humanitarian dimension, the dignity of
Palestinian refugees and their ability to build a future
are at stake. It is also a question of the stability and
security of a region that has been shaken by crises,
to which we cannot allow the addition of yet another
factor of fragility. We must therefore respond to
Pierre Krähenbühl’s call for us to maintain our level
of collective financial engagement this year. UNRWA’s
ability to maintain services is not guaranteed beyond
summer, and the issue of the reopening of UNRWA
schools will arise in August. The mobilization of us
all will be crucial in the preparation for the donors
conference, scheduled for late June in New York.
France, for its part, has doubled its contribution to
UNRWA in 2019.
Our support for UNRWA will also require political
mobilization for the renewal, in the fall, of the three-year
mandate entrusted to it by the General Assembly. Until
a just, equitable, realistic and lasting solution to the
Palestinian refugee problem is found in the context of
a peace agreement, the UNRWA mandate will remain
necessary, not only for the refugees themselves and
their future and the stability of the region, but also for
the international community. We cannot collectively
afford to leave the refugee camps to themselves, at the
risk of making them the ideal recruitment pools for
terrorist groups that are active in the region.
The situation in Gaza, with which I began my
statement, cannot be dissociated from the IsraeliPalestinian conflict as a whole or from the two-State
prospect. There will be no viable Palestinian State
without Gaza and no lasting and just peace without
a Palestinian State. On the ground and in people’s

As we can see, the issue we are facing collectively
is urgent and fundamentally political. We take note
of the scheduled holding of an economic workshop
in Manama on 25 and 26 June, at the initiative of the
United States and Bahrain. France stands ready to
support all efforts, including of an economic nature,
as long as they are in line with the prospect that we
have defined together: the establishment of a viable
and independent Palestinian State, real conditions for
the economic resurgence of Palestine and, beyond that,
the construction of a stronger and more integrated
regional economy.
We must not hold back from engaging in serious
negotiations to implement the two-State solution,
with both States living in peace and security within
recognized borders, with Jerusalem as the capital. That
is what the law says. That is the objective that France is
pursuing, as a friend of Israel and the Palestinians, and
it is on that basis that we will evaluate the initiatives
that can be undertaken.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I thank you for joining
us in the Security Council, Madam President. I think
that your presence here again underlines your country’s
commitment to the issue that is at stake today.
Germany remains steadfast in its commitment to
Israel’s security as a Jewish and democratic State. The
German Government recently underlined its support to
Israel in a declaration on the occasion of the seventieth
anniversary of Israel becoming a Member of the United
Nations. We condemn all attacks on Israel in the
strongest possible terms, including the recent firing of
rockets from Gaza, which put Israel’s security and the
lives of civilians at risk. Germany will not be silent when
Israel’s right to exist is questioned or compromised.
Let me underline that, from our perspective,
only a two-State solution can meet the aspirations

19-1487011/28

S/PV.8532

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of both parties and deliver peace and security in a
sustainable way. European Union member States are
united in stating that any future plan should consider
the parameters, as laid out in resolution 2334 (2016), in
order to be successful. We believe that this is essential
for Israel’s security. It is indispensable that a solution be
negotiated and guarantee the right to self-determination
of the Palestinians as well. Any peace plan should not
preclude solutions negotiated between the two parties.
We are deeply concerned about developments that
increasingly undermine the prospects for a two-State
solution and contribute to entrenching a one-State
reality, which cannot be in anybody’s interest. I can
only repeat what my French colleague just said that,
with regards to the developments on the ground, we are
moving closer to the point of no return.
The latest unilateral actions and decisions — the Israeli
decision to partly withhold Palestinian tax revenue, the
rejection of any tax revenue transfers by the Palestinian
Authority, the move of the United States Embassy to
Jerusalem and the United States recognition of Israel’s
sovereignty over the occupied Golan Heights — have
all added to growing tensions and are not helpful in an
already fragile situation.
We reiterate our position that settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territories are illegal under
international law and undermine the prospect of a twoState solution The continuous expansion of settlement
activity by Israel in the Palestinian territories is a
matter of great concern to us. That includes the recent
approvals of construction for thousands of new housing
units in settlements in the West Bank.
We call upon Israel to end the expansion of
settlements, the legalization of outposts and the
demolition and seizure of Palestinian-owned
structures. Those actions jeopardize the prospects
for a peace agreement on the basis of a two-State
solution by creating enclaves, obstructing Palestinian
development and leading to frustration and despair.
We are also extremely concerned about statements of a
possible annexation of parts of the West Bank. Should
such statements be translated into Government policy
or law, Germany would see that as a clear violation of
international law.
We also remain deeply concerned by the dire
economic and humanitarian situation in Gaza.
Protests in Gaza have to be peaceful, and the rights
of demonstrators to express their opinion freely and
12/28

22/05/2019

peacefully have to be respected. At the same time, the
right to peaceful protest must not be used as a pretext
for incitement or exploited in order to commit violent
acts. In that context, we call on all sides to refrain from
the use of excessive force.
Let me turn to the very impressive briefing by
Commissioner-General Krähenbühl. For we are deeply
concerned about what he had to report to the Council
with regard to the current challenges facing the mission
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).
We believe that UNRWA remains indispensable for
providing humanitarian assistance and essential
services, not only in the Palestinian territory but also
in Jordan, Lebanon and Syria. What he mentioned
concerning East Jerusalem is worrisome. We would
like to commend UNRWA’s efforts to overcome the
recent financial crisis as well as its tremendous work in
the light of that crisis.
In continuing to provide services that encompass
education, health care, relief, social services, camp
infrastructure and improvement, protection and
microfinance, UNRWA remains key to maintaining
stability in the region. We continue to firmly support the
mandate of UNRWA and encourage others to similarly
continue to show their political and financial support
for the Agency’s work. In that regard, let me express
once again, as I did earlier, that we very much regret
that the United States, which had been a consistent
donor to UNRWA, is no longer contributing.
The question that I have asked the United States
delegation is, who does it believe will teach the more
than 200,000 students in the Gaza Strip, who would
no longer receive UNRWA schooling were funding
unavailable? The question of who would provide such
teaching has not been answered. I am afraid that, as
my French colleague just said, Hamas and others would
teach the children. We are therefore very grateful that,
in very difficult circumstances, UNRWA does what it
does. As the representatives of Kuwait and France said
earlier, Germany is proud to be among the top donors
in sponsoring that important work. In that context, I
have a question for Mr. Krähenbühl. Mr. Greenblatt
mentioned that the Commissioner-General scheduled
the donor conference for the same date as the Bahrain
conference. I would ask Mr. Mr. Krähenbühl if he might
clarify that.
19-14870

22/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

With regard to the situation of the Palestinian
Authority, we look forward to working with the new
Palestinian Government. Although the intra-Palestinian
reconciliation process remains in deadlock, progress is
urgently needed in order to build strong and inclusive
Palestinian institutions. That includes the renewal
of democratic legitimacy through well-prepared
elections, which are overdue. It is also important that
the Palestinian Authority remain financially stable
and functioning. That is important for the delivery
of health care, education and security to millions of
Palestinians, which, we believe, is in the interests of
both the Palestinians and the Israelis.
Resolution 2334 (2016), to which I alluded earlier,
needs to be fully implemented, not only with regard to
settlement activities but also violence against civilians,
including acts of terror, incitement, provocative
actions and inflammatory rhetoric. We welcome that
that the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/251)
also focuses on those obstacles to achieving peace.
We strongly urge all parties to de-escalate tensions,
exercise restraint and refrain from provocative rhetoric
and actions.
In conclusion, let me share the Secretary-General’s
concern in his report about the weakening of the
international consensus to achieve the realization of a
negotiated two-State solution, based on internationally
agreed principles. Joint efforts to restore a political
perspective for the resumption of the peace process
are urgently needed. We support any attempt to restart
meaningful direct talks and negotiations between the
parties, with the objective of creating a lasting peace,
based on the internationally agreed parameters. At the
same time, we have to counter collectively the negative
developments on the ground that are undermining
the viability of a negotiated two-State solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, based on the internationally
agreed parameters.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I welcome you back
to the Security Council, Madam President. I also thank
Special Coordinator Mladenov and CommissionerGeneral Krähenbühl for their respective briefings.
Since the Council’s previous monthly meeting on
this issue (see S/PV.8517), we have witnessed the worst
violence in Gaza since 2014. The United Kingdom was
gravely concerned about that escalation, during which
both Israeli and Palestinian civilians were killed. We
utterly condemn all rocket fire from Gaza towards

S/PV. 8532

Israel, and we are clear that it must stop. It is ultimately
the ongoing decision by Hamas to embrace violence
and reject the Quartet principles that lies at the heart of
the Gazan tragedy. The United Kingdom’s support for
Israel’s right to self-defence is unequivocal, but we are
equally clear that Israel’s action must be proportionate
and guard against civilian casualties.
We welcome to ceasefire brokered by the United
Nations and Egypt and support their efforts to
maintain calm. We urge all parties to demonstrate
restraint and make progress towards reaching a longterm agreement. As well as creating fear among the
Israeli and Palestinian populations and damaging the
prospects for peace, this hopeless cycle of violence
further undermines the humanitarian situation in Gaza.
Against that backdrop, the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) is a necessary humanitarian and stabilizing
force in the region, providing vital services to millions
of Palestinian refugees.
The United Kingdom remains a firmly committed
supporter of UNRWA and Palestinian refugees across
the Middle East. We will do everything we can to
maintain the continuity of essential services at this
time. The United Kingdom almost doubled its original
core support for UNRWA last year and, over the next
two years, the United Kingdom will provide the Agency
with up to $100 million. We also recognize the need for
UNRWA to reform in order to ensure its sustainability.
UNRWA has undertaken significant cost-cutting
measures to respond to budget cuts and growing need.
We welcome UNRWA’s efforts to broaden its donor
base. We encourage others to step up with more funding
and predictable disbursements.
The United Kingdom remains worried about the
impact of Israel’s decision to withhold tax revenues
from the Palestinian Authority (PA). The Israeli
decision will have significant consequences for stability
and security. It is impacting ordinary Palestinians and
risks exacerbating the already dire humanitarian and
economic situation in Gaza. The United Kingdom
continues to have concerns about aspects of the
Palestinian system of payments to detainees. We
encourage the reform of the system to be needsbased, transparent and more affordable. But that is not
justification for withholding agreed tax revenues.
A stable Palestinian Authority is in the interests of
both Palestinians and Israelis. This is the PA’s money.

19-1487013/28

S/PV.8532

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We encourage Israel to reconsider this decision, or find
other ways to counteract the risks, while abiding by all
signed agreements. Given that the risk of fiscal collapse
is very real, we also urge the PA to accept the remaining
tax revenues. We welcome the calls made at the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee for the Coordination of International
Assistance to Palestinians for enhanced dialogue
between the Israeli and Palestinian Governments to
address the current fiscal crisis, as well as the offers
made to assist the parties in addressing the outstanding
fiscal issues adequately and urgently.
The United Kingdom continues to believe that
substantive peace talks between the parties leading
to a negotiated two-State solution, based on the 1967
borders, with agreed land swaps, Jerusalem as a
shared capital and a just, fair, agreed and realistic
settlement for refugees, is the way to end the ArabIsraeli conflict, provide security and justice to both
Israelis and Palestinians and preserve Israel’s Jewish
and democratic identity.
I want to thank the representative of the United
States for his comments, including on the proposed
meeting in Bahrain. We look forward to studying the
United States Administration’s proposals for a viable
Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement that addresses the
legitimate concerns of both parties.
In order to have the best chances of success, the
peace process must be conducted in an atmosphere free
from violence. We call on all parties to work together
to maintain calm.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Allow me at the outset
to welcome you very warmly, Madam President, to the
Council. I also thank Special Coordinator Mladenov
for his very comprehensive, although again alarming,
briefing. I would also like to thank CommissionerGeneral Krähenbühl for his valuable insight into the
situation of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).
We now live in a time when the very fundamentals
at the heart of the Oslo process appear to be challenged.
The foundation of the two-State solution, which remains
the core of internationally agreed parameters, is being
impacted by facts on the ground. We have to restore
a political horizon for the resumption of a meaningful
peace process. We believe that it is only through the
negotiated two-State solution that a resolution of all
final-status issues, including Jerusalem, can be found.
14/28

22/05/2019

We also have to be frank with ourselves — on the
political track, we have to acknowledge that the process
is currently almost entirely blocked, even taking
into consideration all of the commendable Egyptian
mediation efforts.
In terms of the security track, unfortunately, two
weeks ago we witnessed the consequences of one of
the biggest escalations in Gaza since 2014. Poland
strongly condemns rocket attacks from the Gaza Strip
targeting Israel and remains committed to supporting
its legitimate security interests. Hamas and Palestinian
Jihad’s incitement to violence, as well as the exploitation
of protests for their own political objectives, have to
stop. At the same time, Israel should calibrate its use of
force and protect its borders using only proportionate
means. We call on both sides to exercise restraint and
engage constructively in efforts aimed at breaking the
vicious cycle of violence in and around Gaza.
The recent increase of violence is paving the
way for growing frustration among the citizens,
allowing extremism to grow. It is also combined with
the extremely difficult humanitarian situation on the
ground, mainly in Gaza, where basic needs continue
to be unmet and many people lack access to basic
services, including health care. This could easily lead
to an escalation of social tensions that may destabilize
the situation in the region even further. In our opinion,
the current situation depriving the inhabitants of Gaza
of hope and real prospects creates an environment
conducive to inflammatory rhetoric that could again
result in violence and extremism, particularly among
the youth.
While addressing the question of future generations,
let me underline the critical financial shortfalls being
endured by UNRWA. UNRWA has worked for nearly
70 years to ensure access to quality education, which
is a human right fundamental to helping each child
achieve his or her full potential. In this context, the
unprecedented financial crisis of 2018 forced the Agency
to take some very difficult measures, sometimes with
tragic personal consequences for its staff members.
As already mentioned by many in this Chamber,
the educational and humanitarian services, including
medical care, provided by UNRWA are key for young
Palestinians and their teachers, as well as the staff of
the Agency. UNRWA runs one of the largest school
systems in the Middle East, teaching nearly half a
million children in over 700 schools. Education remains
19-14870

22/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

key to sustainable human development, and we should
do our utmost to support the agency in its endeavours
in this matter, especially in the light of the fact that
UNRWA is too often the only entity that offers people
any positive perspective.
In this regard, I commend the extraordinary
mobilization of donors, hosts and other partners, as well
as the support of the Secretary-General and many other
leaders, ministers and senior officials around the world,
that have allowed additional funding to be secured for
the UNRWA budget in 2018. It is vital to continue these
efforts also this year, as UNRWA remains a key factor
for stability and security in the region.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): It is a pleasure to see you in the Council,
Madam President. We thank the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
and the Commissioner-General of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA), Mr. Pierre Krähenbühl, for their
informative reports.
Exactly two weeks from now, on 4 June, it will be
52 years since Israel occupied the Palestinian territories
of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. This date is an
important milestone in the Middle East conflict and
has a sensitive symbolic meaning for Israelis and
Palestinians and for Arabs in general. For example,
for the Syrians, it marks the loss of the Golan, which,
despite everything, remains occupied Syrian territory.
Unfortunately, that day was not the last tragic date in
the calendar of the Middle East. Others have followed.
As a result of various internal causes and brazen
external intervention in the region, several other
hotbeds of crisis have emerged, in particular in
Yemen, Libya, Syria and Iraq. While the situation in
the Republic of Iraq is steadily returning to normal,
and most of the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic
has been stabilized, resolving the Yemen and Libya
conflicts will still require a great deal of effort on the
part of the international community.
Recently, new tensions have appeared around
Iran. This artificial escalation of tensions could have
the most negative consequences for the entire Middle
and Near East and beyond. There must be urgent
de-escalation and a search for negotiated solutions to
existing disagreements. Confrontation must give way
to dialogue. We recall the relevant mandate of the

S/PV. 8532

Secretary-General in accordance with resolution 598
(1987).
It is necessary to recognize the interconnectedness
of everything taking place in the region. This is not
surprising, since the region has a common history
of development and a common civilizational space.
Encouraging and strengthening close, friendly and
mutually beneficial relations among the States of the
region would help to improve the overall situation there.
Based on that logic, the settlement of one conflict would
have a positive impact on the reconciliation processes
in other hotbeds of crisis.
In this regard, we believe it necessary to redouble
efforts on the Palestinian-Israeli track of the Middle
East peace process. A just solution to the Palestinian
problem would be key to improving the situation
throughout the region. Should the conflict between
Israel and the Palestinians persist, by contrast, it would
continue to constantly poison the overall international
atmosphere, adversely affect efforts to resolve other
regional crises and fuel terrorism.
At the same time, there is no need to reinvent the
wheel. There are agreed, internationally recognized
parameters, including the Security Council’s resolutions,
the Madrid principles — including the principle of land
for peace — and the Arab Peace Initiative. Some may say
that this basis has not resolved the Palestinian question
and is therefore irrelevant. However, the problem is
not with the basis, because its final details must in any
case be discussed by Palestinians and Israelis in direct
negotiations. The problem is in factors preventing the
resumption of the negotiation process. Those factors
can be eliminated through the implementation of the
recommendations indicated in the 2016 report of the
Middle East Quartet of international mediators.
First of all, Israeli settlement activity on the West
Bank of the Jordan river and the policy of demolishing
Palestinian property must be ended. Palestinians and
Israelis should refrain from aggressive and provocative
rhetoric and eschew violence. We need to jointly put
an end to terrorist attacks. It remains necessary to
restore unity within the Palestinian ranks. Palestinians
and Israelis should be helped to take the first steps to
implement these recommendations. That would open
up the prospects for reaching a comprehensive, just
and lasting Palestinian-Israeli settlement. That should
lead to an end to the Israeli occupation of Arab lands
that began in 1967 and the creation of an independent,

19-1487015/28

S/PV.8532

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

viable, contiguous Palestinian State existing side by side
and in peace with Israel within secure and recognized
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital and of course
West Jerusalem as the capital of the State of Israel.
We see no alternative to a two-State formula. We
believe that it is the only realistic way to put an end to
the Palestinian-Israeli confrontation and resolve their
mutual claims. Other concepts are only misleading
and make it difficult to resume the political process.
We do not believe that the Palestinians will renounce
their legitimate aspirations to statehood, whatever they
are promised in exchange. Imposing a ready-made
solution on the parties will not work. We believe that
now more than ever it has become essential to take
practical measures to help the peace process emerge
from its dangerous impasse. Russia will continue its
efforts bilaterally and in other formats to bring about a
resumption of direct dialogue between Palestinians and
Israelis. Our proposal for holding a meeting between
Mahmoud Abbas and Benjamin Netanyahu in Moscow
is still on the table.
As long as the Palestinian question remains
unresolved, we believe it is important to continue to
provide support, including financial assistance, to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). The Agency’s
activities have a political as well as a humanitarian
dimension, providing an important stabilizing effect
in the Palestinian territories and the countries of the
Middle East. We made our latest financial contribution
to UNRWA’s budget for 2019 only the other day.
Israel and Palestine have major religious
significance for hundreds of thousands of followers
of the monotheistic religions. The establishment of a
lasting peace in those lands as soon as possible is in the
interests of all Christians, Muslims and Jews. However,
the destabilization of the situation in the Middle East
and North Africa has hit Christians and other religious
and ethnic minorities in the region extremely hard.
Extremists exploit ethnic and religious factors to
foment discord and enlarge their ranks. It is important
to take immediate measures to spread a culture of
peace among religious and ethnic groups, which will
help to prevent new upheavals based on ethnicity or
religion. Russia’s experience with coexisting ethnicities
and religions is unique. On that basis, we support the
Inter-Parliamentary Union’s proposal for organizing
a world conference on interreligious and inter-ethnic
dialogue together with the United Nations, in which
16/28

22/05/2019

Heads of State and Government, parliamentarians and
representatives of world religions would take part. We
are willing to host that conference in Russia in 2022.
We call for intensifying the joint work on the
Middle East as a whole, including in the Security
Council. We believe that sending missions to areas of
conflict can strengthen the Council’s unity. Russia is
ready to work on all of those and other aspects together
with interested partners on an open and impartial basis,
without threats or negative pressure.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): It is a pleasure to have you back
with us presiding over the Council, Madam. We thank
Mr. Mladenov and Mr. Krähenbühl for their updates
today and are grateful for their commitment and vital
work. We also welcome Mr. Greenblatt.
Once again, this issue brings only accusations and
counteraccusations, without solutions. We reiterate
our firm condemnation of the attacks at the beginning
of this month in which rockets were fired from Gaza
into Israel, and of the resulting reprisals, which
resulted in tragic losses of both Israeli and Palestinian
lives, leading once again to a dangerous escalation of
tensions and distancing us from the understandings
recently reached between the parties. We commend the
mediation and cooperation efforts that countries such
as Egypt are making to ease tensions as quickly as
possible and prevent any further loss of life, as well as
of United Nations agencies such as the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East, which, through human development
initiatives and humanitarian assistance, help to relieve
the suffering of the inhabitants of Gaza, who continue
to endure a severe humanitarian and security crisis. We
therefore urge friendly countries to continue to support
those efforts and initiatives.
We remain optimistic about the recent formation
of the Palestinian Government and the start of a new
stage for the Government in Israel and hope that they
can bring renewed impetus to the quest for a definitive
solution to the conflict that can deliver the longedfor peace, considering that we are seeing a continued
increase in tensions between the parties thanks to
widespread violence in which civilians, including
women and children, are the most affected; various
kinds of provocations and inflammatory rhetoric; a lack
of internal reconciliation; and actions that contradict
and violate international law and order.
19-14870

22/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We had an important discussion at our previous
meeting, at the end of April (see S/PV.8517), on
the environmental dimension of the peace process
and the precarious situation in Gaza and the West
Bank created by the severe water shortage and its
impact on the economic and social development of
the region, including by increasing its vulnerability
to food insecurity. We must therefore recognize the
transboundary nature of water as a relevant element in
peace negotiations. We are also concerned about the
Palestinian Government’s difficult financial situation,
which has worsened with the involuntary withholding
of tax revenues and the decrease in international
assistance, which have led to a substantial loss of
income and forced it to take austerity measures, with
negative effects on the economy and society.
We continue to be dismayed at the continued
expansion of settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, with thousands of
units being advanced, approved or bid on and action
taken to legalize a number of enclaves and homes,
all under the shadow of possible annexation. We also
strongly condemn the excessive use of force and any
acts of violence and intimidation against civilians,
including women and children, and reiterate our
condemnation of the indiscriminate firing of rockets,
mortars and incendiary devices.
Finally, we urge for international consensus
on this conflict to be strengthened, based on the
peaceful settlement of conflicts, international law
and multilateralism, while recognizing the important
mediation role of the United Nations, and on agreements
previously arrived at, based on a solution whereby two
democratic States, Israel and Palestine, live side by side
in peace within secure and recognized borders.
Ms. Mogashoa (South Africa): I would like to
welcome you to the Council, Madam President. We are
delighted that you are presiding over our deliberations
today. I would like to begin by thanking Mr. Mladenov
for his briefing on the situation in the Middle East,
particularly the question of Palestine, and Mr. Pierre
Krähenbühl for his briefing on the status of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).
The security and humanitarian situation in all
of the occupied Palestinian territory continues to
be of great concern to my delegation. The escalation
of violence in Gaza has only worsened the already

S/PV. 8532

dismal humanitarian situation, which has persisted for
years. It cannot be denied that the grave situation in
Gaza is a direct result of the illegal Israeli blockade
and occupation of the area. That has shattered any
prospects for normal economic and social development
for the 2 million Palestinian people trapped in what has
been called an open-air prison. In that regard, South
Africa reiterates its call for the complete lifting of
the illegal Israeli blockade, which continues to cause
untold humanitarian, social and economic suffering for
the Palestinian people.
We would like to acknowledge the efforts of all
parties, particularly Egypt and the United Nations,
through the Office of the Special Coordinator, in
brokering a ceasefire agreement in Gaza earlier this
month. My delegation reiterates that violence in all its
forms and from all quarters is unacceptable, and calls
on all parties to adhere to their commitments under
the ceasefire agreement in order to prevent a further
escalation of violence in Gaza.
The cumulative impact of unilateral actions has had
a destructive impact on the lives of all who live in the
occupied Palestinian territory and has further hindered
the prospect of the long-standing aspiration for peace in
the Middle East, based on the established parameters.
Key among those actions is the continuation of
illegal settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian
territory, in direct contravention of a resolution of the
Council. Resolution 2334 (2016) is clear in stating that
any settlements built on occupied land have no legal
validity and are a flagrant violation of international
law. The blatant paralysis in addressing systematic
violations damages the credibility of the Council. My
delegation once again reiterates its call for the full
implementation of all General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions, particularly resolution 2334 (2016).
As we have just heard from the CommissionerGeneral of UNRWA, which is tasked by the United
Nations to assist Palestinian refugees in the region, the
Agency is having immense difficulty in carrying out its
mandate due to a lack of funding. That, in turn, also has
a negative impact on the quality of life of Palestinians
in the occupied Palestinian territory.
In conclusion, it must be unequivocally stated that
any proposed peace plan should not allow Palestinian
statehood to devolve into an entity devoid of sovereignty,
territorial contiguity and economic viability. Doing
so would severely undermine previous peacemaking

19-1487017/28

S/PV.8532

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

22/05/2019

efforts, accelerate the demise of the two-State solution
and fatally damage the cause of a durable peace for
both Palestinians and Israelis alike.

reconciliation between Fatah and Hamas in order
to enable the Palestinian Authority to regain all its
prerogatives on the Palestinian territory.

As many in the Council have stated today and
on many other occasions, the only credible solution
to the situation in the Middle East is that of a twoState solution, within the 1967 borders and with East
Jerusalem as the capital of an independent Palestinian
State. Every effort must be made to bring all sides
to the negotiating table to allow them to find a longterm peaceful solution. The Council must do its part to
support the parties in that endeavour and not condone
any violations of its resolutions.

The Council is concerned about the structural
weaknesses affecting the Palestinian territories, in
particular an estimated unemployment rate of 53 per
cent and a drastic reduction in the supply of decent
housing and school and hospital facilities, as well as
the continuing shortages of basic social services, such
as drinking water and electricity.

Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): For my
part, on behalf of my delegation, I would like to welcome
you, Madam President, and express our gratitude
for your participation in this meeting. My delegation
congratulates Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, and
Mr. Pierre Krähenbühl, Commissioner-General of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), on their detailed
briefings on the latest developments in the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
Côte d’Ivoire expresses its concern over the
deadlock in the Israeli-Palestinian peace process,
the consequences of which are reflected in sporadic
outbreaks of violence and a disastrous humanitarian
situation in Gaza and the West Bank. My country notes
with regret the recent violence in the Gaza Strip and
border towns, which killed 27 people and injured a
number of others, including many civilians. We would
like to take this opportunity to reiterate our call to
stakeholders to exercise restraint and resume dialogue.
We call on the parties to refrain from any unilateral
action that could compromise the mediation activities
of the international community.
Côte d’Ivoire wishes to reiterate its commitment
both to the security of the State of Israel and to the
inalienable right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination. We also reaffirm our strong support for
the two-State solution, coexisting peacefully within the
pre-1967 borders.
The current security and humanitarian situations
remain closely linked to a political settlement of the
crisis. Côte d’Ivoire therefore encourages the warring
parties to continue the peace talks and calls on the
Council to support all mediation initiatives towards
18/28

With regard to the current humanitarian situation
in the Palestinian territories, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates
its call for the convergence of the Council’s views
and encourages it to work to mobilize the necessary
assistance in order to meet the essential needs of
the affected populations. My delegation also urges
humanitarian donors to continue their support to
UNRWA, whose role is crucial in assisting those
in need.
My country would like to recall that the peace
process remains the appropriate framework for
seeking mutually acceptable solutions to the IsraeliPalestinian dispute. In that regard, it urges the parties
concerned to fulfil their commitments with a view to
facilitating the implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions and creating the conditions for the
implementation of the peace agreements, in particular
the Oslo Accords.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its support
for the tireless efforts of Mr. Nickolay Mladenov
and wishes him every success in the execution of
his mandate.
We remain convinced that there can be no military
solution to the various crises in the Middle East, in
particular in Palestine. My country therefore reaffirms
that only inclusive talks will make it possible to achieve
peace and stability in a region whose peoples have a
legitimate aspiration to prosperity and happiness.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting and your
presence this morning, Madam Minister, presiding
over the work of the Council. We would like to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov and Mr. Pierre Krähenbühl for
their detailed briefings.
Peru notes with deep concern the deterioration in
the political and humanitarian conditions underpinning
the question of Palestine. Putting an end to that serious
19-14870

22/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

situation is a major undertaking, which requires a sense
of urgency. The risk of escalation in the Middle East
must be viewed by the Council as a serious threat to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
It is from that perspective that we encourage the
authorities of both parties to refrain from hate speech,
anti-Semitism and discrimination in all its forms. In
any society, ethnic, cultural and religious diversity
must be seen as an asset and never as a threat.
In that regard, we recall the obligation to implement
the resolutions of the Security Council. In particular,
we believe that it is urgent to put an end to the increased
settlement activities, house demolitions and evictions
in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967. We
recall that such practices represent an open challenge
to international law and to specific Council resolutions,
such as resolution 2334 (2016), and that they undermine
the possibilities of achieving a two-State solution.
Peru strongly condemns the firing of rockets
and incendiary devices, which endanger the lives of
innocent people and cause material damage, as well as
all terrorist acts by Hamas and Islamic Jihad. At the
same time, we emphasize Israel’s obligation to observe
in its responses to such threats the basic principles of
international humanitarian law, such as proportionality
in the use of force and precaution in relation to its effects.
We also emphasize the urgent necessity to address
the basic needs of Gaza’s population, as poverty
and marginalization are fertile ground for those
who promote violence and terrorism. We therefore
believe that it is essential to continue mobilizing the
international community’s support to deal with the
still complex financial situation of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East so that its crucial assistance work will not
be interrupted given the new arguments of those who
promote radicalization.

S/PV. 8532

viable solution, that of two States living side by side
with secure and mutually recognized borders.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov
and Commissioner-General Pierre Krähenbühl for their
insightful briefings.
The recent escalation of violence in Gaza has
been the most intense of any in recent years, bringing
both sides to the brink of a new conflict. This kind of
escalation comes with considerable human cost and
jeopardizes any prospects for peace. We firmly condemn
the firing of rockets into Israeli territory and reaffirm
our support for the mediation efforts undertaken by
the United Nations and Egypt to reduce tensions. We
call on all the parties to exercise restraint and remind
them of the vital importance of protecting civilians and
respecting international humanitarian law, including its
principles of proportionality and distinction.
The humanitarian and socioeconomic situation
in Gaza is a continuing concern for us. Free access
to humanitarian actors and unconditional access to
medical care are essential. In that regard, we would
like to commend the role of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), whose mandate and action we fully
support. Despite a precarious financial situation and
a difficult working environment, UNRWA is doing a
remarkable job, thanks in part to the tireless efforts and
professionalism of its staff. Its efforts in the areas of
education, health and protection, to mention just a few,
enable Palestinian refugees to exercise their human
rights and see their dignity respected. And frankly, I do
not believe that closing schools in Gaza is the best way
to combat radicalization and violent extremism.

We also believe that it is indispensable to redouble
efforts to advance the intra-Palestinian reconciliation
process because of the relief that its realization would
bring to the humanitarian situation and the impetus
that it would provide for a resumption of dialogue
with Israel.

Resolving the crisis in Gaza demands fundamental
change, including lifting the blockade and fully
opening the crossing points, while taking Israel’s
legitimate security concerns into account. A political
solution to the crisis also requires returning full
control of the territory to the Palestinian Authority. We
therefore call on all the parties to engage constructively
in intra-Palestinian talks on reconciliation. Unity is in
the interest of the Palestinian people and of peace in
the region.

We would like to conclude by expressing our full
support for Mr. Mladenov in his intense efforts to prevent
further escalation and foster a climate of understanding
between the parties, with a view to reaching the only

In the month of April alone, 63 houses and other
structures were demolished in East Jerusalem, reflecting
the ever-increasing pressure on the Palestinian
population of the city. The demolitions and subsequent

19-1487019/28

S/PV.8532

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

displacement of people are an integral part of a policy
of colonization that is illegal under international law
and constitutes a serious obstacle to just and lasting
peace. Belgium firmly condemns the colonization
policy and its related measures and demands respect
for resolution 2334 (2016). The settlement policy
undermines the viability of a two-State solution, with
two States living side by side in peace and within
secure and internationally recognized borders. That is
why any credible initiative to revive a peace process
must be accompanied by measures to halt colonization,
reverse the current trend and allow Palestinians full
and free access to their resources and rights.
Bridging the gap between the parties is a matter
of urgency. It can be achieved only by respecting
international law and the relevant Security Council
resolutions. There is no alternative to a negotiated
two-State solution, based on the coexistence of two
States, with the city of Jerusalem as their future
capital, in accordance with internationally agreed
parameters. Those parameters must be the basis for
any comprehensive, just and lasting peace plan that
addresses both Israel’s concerns for its security and
the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinians for a
sovereign, democratic and viable State. The Council has
a key role to play in helping to create an atmosphere that
is conducive to dialogue, while ensuring compliance
with its previous resolutions and international law. It
is in that spirit that we will continue to oppose any
unilateral initiative that is at variance with those values
and principles.
Mr. Ndong Mangue (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): This month violence escalated between
Hamas militias and the Israeli army, claiming many
lives and resulting in injuries and extensive material
damage. Such events once again confirm that Gaza
is the hot spot in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Equatorial Guinea strongly condemns those events and
expresses its condolences to the bereaved families.
We welcome Her Excellency the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Indonesia back to the Council today.
We congratulate your delegation, Madam President, on
its successful conduct of our work since your country’s
presidency began.
We thank the team led by Mr. Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
detailed briefing. We also thank Mr. Pierre Krähenbühl
for his valuable contribution.
20/28

22/05/2019

To get back to our monthly meeting on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question,
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea would like to express
its concern about the continuing aggressive exchanges
that have dominated the long-running PalestinianIsraeli conflict. We believe that the escalation of
violence has merely exacerbated the hostility between
the parties, which has had a very negative effect on the
socioeconomic development of the Palestinian people.
It has created a sense of insecurity for both peoples
and led to the abandonment of arrangements regarding
issues that had been agreed on for decades.
The current plight of women, children and all who
live in Gaza as it has evolved over the past decade is a
clear example of how the tension between the parties
affects the Palestinian population. Reliable and recent
reports indicate that more than half its people of working
age are unemployed and that their prospects of finding
work remain poor. A regular supply of electricity
and drinking water has still not been restored, while
hospital care is inadequate and schools are damaged.
The ongoing situation in Gaza affects the
development capacity of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), which is currently experiencing funding
difficulties. We are grateful to UNRWA, which, despite
its situation, continues to meet the needs of all those
benefiting from its humanitarian aid. In that regard,
we reiterate our call to the international community
to continue providing voluntary funding to the
Agency, which plays a very important role in assisting
Palestinian refugees from Gaza and other parts of the
Middle East.
We must bear in mind that violence is the cause
of the suffering of the people of Gaza. Our delegation
therefore urges Hamas and its militias to refrain from
any provocative actions against Israel. We also call on
the Israeli army to be measured in its responses and do
everything it can to prevent the suffering of innocent
civilians. However, a political settlement is essential
if the blockade of Gaza is to be lifted, and it requires
reconciliation between the Palestinian factions.
Now that we have lost the valuable contribution,
lasting more than two decades, of the Temporary
International Presence in Hebron, which worked to
prevent conflict and protect the Palestinians there, we
are concerned about the future coexistence of Israelis
and Palestinians there. In that regard, we hope that the
19-14870

22/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Israeli Government and the Palestinian Authority will
take care to avoid provoking the parties unnecessarily.
On the subject of the situation in Hebron, we would
like to point out that the issues of coexistence that
arise in the various occupied Palestinian territories
where Israeli settlers and Palestinians cohabit must be
addressed while taking into account the fact that errors
can be made on both sides, since they are both human,
obviously. In that regard, the Israeli occupation forces
should act fairly and without bias regarding the origins
of those involved.
Finally, Equatorial Guinea’s position on the IsraeliPalestinian conflict has always been unequivocal and is
based on the international instruments in force. In the
same way that we defend Israel’s right to exist in peace
and security, we therefore also support the inalienable
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination and
the right of Palestine to exist as a free and independent
State. That is also the position of the African Union,
whose decision we have a responsibility to respect. In
short, Equatorial Guinea fully supports a two-State
solution, with two States coexisting in conditions
of peace and security and in harmony with the other
States of the region.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would first like to welcome Your Excellency, Madam
Foreign Minister, to New York and to thank you for
presiding over this meeting. I also thank Mr. Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
and Mr. Krähenbühl, Commissioner-General of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), for their briefings.
China has been closely following the recent tensions
in the Gaza Strip and Jerusalem. We express our deep
concern and sorrow over the casualties resulting
from the clashes. We welcomed the recent ceasefire
agreement reached and commend the United Nations,
Egypt and others for their good offices. Safeguarding
the legitimate rights and interests of the Palestinian
people is a joint responsibility of the international
community, and in that context I want to emphasize
the following.
First, we must adhere to the principle of a twoState solution in seeking a just and durable solution
to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. The international
community should base its efforts on the Arab Peace
Initiative, the principle of land for peace and the
relevant Council resolutions with a view to facilitating

S/PV. 8532

a settlement of the question of Palestine and eventually
establishing a State of Palestine with full sovereignty,
based on the 1967 borders, and with East Jerusalem as
its capital. Any new initiative must comply with those
basic international norms. That is the only way to ensure
a fair and durable solution that is broadly acceptable to
the international community.
Secondly, it is necessary to implement resolution
2334 (2016) effectively. The party concerned must
immediately cease all settlement activities in the
occupied territories, the demolition of Palestinian
houses and the destruction of Palestinian property, and
take measures to prevent violence against civilians. It
is crucial to ensure that all legal actions or unilateral
measures aimed at legitimizing settlements cease
immediately and take practical measures to reverse
their impact.
Thirdly, there must be unity in promoting a
resumption of Palestinian-Israeli peace talks as soon
as possible. It is vital to refrain from actions that
could worsen the situation or jeopardize trust, and
to create the conditions necessary for the resumption
of dialogue. Parties that have strong influence in the
Middle East must play a constructive role and refrain
from unilateral actions that could escalate tensions in
the region. Intra-Palestinian reconciliation must be
actively facilitated.
In recent years the hotspot issues in the Middle
East have triggered numerous humanitarian crises. In
extremely harsh and difficult conditions, UNRWA has
continued its humanitarian relief efforts with positive
results. We have noted that it has been working hard
to improve the humanitarian situation of Palestinian
refugees, safeguard their rights, alleviate the burden
on their host countries, actively promote regional
peace and stability and prevent the spread of terrorist
and extremist ideologies in the refugee camps. China
applauds such efforts. We call on the international
community to lend greater support to UNRWA. We
hope that the pledging conference to be held in June
will be a success. Last year, China greatly increased its
annual contribution to UNRWA, and we will continue
to contribute to it financially.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia.
I would first like to convey my appreciation and
thanks to Mr. Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, and Mr. Krähenbühl,

19-1487021/28

S/PV.8532

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, for their briefings.
In January, I made a statement in this Chamber to
the Council on this very agenda item (see S/PV.8449).
Among other things, I underlined that the Palestinian
question defined the credibility of the Council.
Unfortunately, nothing has improved since then. If
anything, the situation has deteriorated. Earlier this
month we saw yet another wave of violence in Gaza
that resulted in at least 29 casualties on both sides. I
appreciate the roles that the Secretary-General and
Egypt have played in working to de-escalate the
situation. However, we are concerned about the fact
that the construction of illegal settlements in West Bank
persists and has become a de facto annexation. That is
why Indonesia and Kuwait, together with South Africa,
organized an Arria Formula meeting on this issue two
weeks ago. We have seen the closure of the Temporary
International Presence in Hebron and the increasingly
limited resources and capacity for humanitarian
assistance. We urgently need to revive the political will
of all the parties to work towards a credible peace plan
and improve the humanitarian situation on the ground.
In that regard, there are a number of bottom-line points
that I want to raise.
The first is the protection of Palestinian civilians.
I would like to recall the report of the Independent
Commission of Inquiry issued in February
(A/HRC/40/74). The report details the use of extreme
violence by the occupying Power, including towards
journalists, medical personnel and persons with
disabilities. That is clearly against the basic principles
of human rights. It justifies our belief that we have
no option but to provide international protection for
Palestinian civilians.
Secondly, we need to address the humanitarian
conditions. Improving the economic and social situation
is crucial. Not only is this a matter of fundamental
rights, but it would also prevent needless violence.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East is facing another
year of crisis. We commend the work of its staff, who
have been instrumental despite the Agency’s difficult
security and financial situation. We also thank those
who have stepped up their contributions to support the
Agency’s programmes. Rest assured that Indonesia is
fully committed to doing so.
22/28

22/05/2019

Thirdly, the peace process must be resumed.
The cycle of violence must end. All sides must show
maximum restraint and be willing to engage in
meaningful dialogue. There is an urgent need for a
credible process that allows all the relevant parties
to engage on an equal footing to work towards an
acceptable peace plan. A fresh perspective should not
mean abandoning internationally agreed parameters on
the issue. For Indonesia, there is no alternative to a twoState solution.
Finally, the world has seen enough evidence of how
protracted conflicts in the Middle East have serious
repercussions on peace and stability in many other parts
of the world. This is indeed an issue that has global
consequences. Therefore, the Security Council must
make real progress on this issue, particularly on the
Palestinian question — the oldest item on the Security
Council’s agenda.
All parties must exercise maximum restraint and
continue working in good faith to advance the peace
process by upholding the principles of multilateralism
through dialogue and negotiation so that we can arrive
at our common goal — a genuine and lasting peace.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the observer of the Observer
State of Palestine.
Ms. Abdelhady-Nasser (Palestine): I thank the
Indonesian presidency for convening this important
meeting of the Security Council. I especially thank
you, Minister Marsudi, for presiding. I also thank
Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov and Mr. Pierre
Krähenbühl, Commissioner-General of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA), for their comprehensive
briefings and sober assessments of the current situation
in all its dimensions.
We reiterate our thanks to the Special Coordinator
for his efforts, in cooperation with Egypt, to de-escalate
the recent cycle of violence, which brought about more
loss of civilian life, destruction and displacement. We
stress once again the urgency of providing protection to
the Palestinian people and lifting the Israeli blockade
of the Gaza Strip, which continues to subject an already
traumatized population to dire humanitarian conditions
and increasing needs.
19-14870

22/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We also renew our gratitude to the CommissionerGeneral and the entire staff of UNRWA for their fortitude
in implementing the Agency’s mandate, in spite of the
very challenging circumstances on the ground and
recurrent financial crises. With the generous support
of the international community, the Agency continues
to provide vital, life-saving assistance to the Palestine
refugees in all fields of operation — ensuring education,
sustenance, stability and hope where there would
otherwise be none. We are grateful to all the United
Nations agencies that extend support to the Palestinian
people, in recognition that UNRWA remains at the fore
of upholding that responsibility pending a just solution
to the plight of the refugees, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 194 (III).
We completely reject attacks against UNRWA
and its programmes, which are recognized globally as
providing exemplary humanitarian and development
assistance. Attempts to characterize the Agency as part
of the problem, when it has done extraordinary work
to alleviate the plight of millions and to contribute to
regional stability, are cynical, unfair and rejected — not
only by us but also by the vast majority of States that
continue to strongly support UNRWA’s mandate, as we
have heard today. We urge continued support for the
Agency and solidarity with the refugees.
The Palestinian people have just solemnly marked
71 years since the 1948 Nakba, lamenting not only the
tragedy of the violent uprooting, dispossession and
ethnic cleansing of our people from their homeland
seven decades ago but also lamenting the Nakba that
continues to be suffered as their rights continue to be
grossly and systematically violated.
In the absence of justice, Palestinians continue to be
denied their rights to return and to self-determination,
continue to be dispossessed of their homes and forced
off their lands, and continue to be marginalized and
subject to all forms of humiliation and deprivation
by an illegal Israeli occupation that knows no bounds
and stands in absolute contempt of the international
community, including the Security Council.
This protracted injustice has kept 5.4 million
Palestine refugees away from their ancestral homes
and lands, forced to live in limbo, suffering one misery
and one crisis after another — their vulnerability and
despair interminably deepening. It is a primary factor
in the degradation of international law and has bred

S/PV. 8532

a dangerous culture of impunity. And the protraction
and gravity of this injustice have kept this issue on the
United Nations agenda for decades and have brought
us to the Chamber time and time again to plead for
the Council to uphold its duties and implement its
resolutions, certain that this constitutes the key to the
establishment of peace and security.
That conviction is shared by the overwhelming
majority of the international community, which
continues to reaffirm, at every juncture, the pillars and
parameters of a just solution to the Palestine question.
The global consensus remains strong on the two-State
solution, with the pre-1967 borders, as the foundation
of a peaceful solution on the basis of international law,
the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road
map. The Council has reaffirmed that unequivocally,
most recently in resolution 2334 (2016), and it remains
the core of the international community’s position.
Israel’s actions stand in sharp contrast to that
global consensus and, regrettably, its intransigence
and violence have only been further emboldened by
recent decisions by the United States disregarding,
contradicting or completely undermining the pillars of
that consensus and foundations of a peaceful solution.
Ignoring the Council, Israel has persisted with
its crimes and entrenched its belligerent military
occupation and settler colonization of our land,
especially in and around Jerusalem. Israel’s appetite for
expansion and annexation has only grown in tandem
with its belief that it can get away with it.
After 52 years of calling and appealing, cajoling and
appeasing, it should be self-evident to the international
community that only accountability can break this
toxic cycle to finally end this illegal occupation, assert
the rights of the Palestinian people and establish lasting
Israeli-Palestinian peace.
No one can deny that we are in need of new efforts
and new energy to overcome the suffocating political
deadlock, least of all us. But new cannot mean trampling
the law or mocking and discarding the long-standing
international consensus. As we have heard repeatedly in
the Chamber, a solution can be founded only on respect
for the law and human rights, the implementation of
United Nations resolutions and good-faith negotiations
to resolve all final-status issues, including Jerusalem,
refugees and borders. For a genuine lasting peace, such

19-1487023/28

S/PV.8532

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

core issues must be justly resolved and cannot simply
be relegated as non-issues.
That is the path for ensuring justice and creating
the peaceful and secure Middle East we have long
sought, where all States can live side by side in peace
within secure and recognized borders, including an
independent, sovereign State of Palestine.
The saying that peace requires painful compromises
is borne out starkly by the Palestinian experience.
The Palestinian people and leadership made the most
monumental and painful compromise over 30 years ago
in accepting the two-State solution on the 1967 borders
and declaring the independence of their State on only
22 per cent of their historic homeland.
Contrary to the myths and rhetoric, that is actually the
most generous offer for peace ever made. But Israel has
rejected it over and over, never missing an opportunity
to obstruct and undermine it. The one-State apartheid
reality we face today is its doing. Claims otherwise
are false. We are committed to a peaceful solution and
to political, legal, popular and non-violent means for
achieving it. Our pledge to respect international law
and United Nations resolutions is unwavering. For the
sake of peace and coexistence, we have for decades
engaged with courage and in good faith in negotiations
and cooperated with every single credible peace effort,
believing firmly in multilateralism and dialogue as
essential for realizing peace.
But assumptions that further, unfair compromise
can be forced upon us by financial or political pressures
are faulty at best and cynical and destructive at worst.
Only in the context of a just solution is compromise
possible, logical and defensible. Occupation, annexation
and human rights violations will never be acceptable
and will never become the new normal, no matter the
spin, rhetoric or pretext. Likewise, we cannot accept
dangerous attempts to convert this conflict into a
religious battle.

22/05/2019

occupation and the realization of the national rights of
the Palestinian people, embodied in their independent,
sovereign and viable State within the 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, and realization of
the Palestine refugees’ right to return, in accordance
with the relevant United Nations resolutions and
international law.
The Palestinian leadership cannot accept merely
improving the lives of the Palestinian people while
this illegal occupation continues apace. Nor have the
Palestinian people endured decades of suffering and
waited nearly a century for freedom to resign themselves
to limited autonomy. Those who believe that ignore
history, international law and the resolve of a people to
attain justice and human equality and dignity.
The vision that will offer Palestinians new
opportunities to realize their full potential is one in
which independence is the centrepiece. Despite all
the setbacks and challenges, the Palestinian people
have long demonstrated their resilience, ability and
ingenuity. What they need and are entitled to is selfdetermination and control over their land, borders and
resources — not endless international aid. They will
not accept half-solutions or faits accomplis as their fate,
and they will not surrender to despair. They will persist
on their journey to fulfil their legitimate national
aspirations and inalienable rights, including to be a free
people and live in security and peace in their homeland.
We appeal to the international community,
particularly the Security Council, to rise to its
responsibilities and act now to salvage the prospects for
peace and spare future generations of Palestinian and
Israeli children the conflict, strife and suffering their
ancestors have so tragically borne.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.

In truth, no one can accuse us of not wanting peace
or not seeking the best interests of our people. There
is only one legitimate basis for peace — international
legality — and that cannot be characterized as a
condition. It is a minimal ask, not only for Palestine but
the wider international community.

Mr. Danon (Israel): This is unfortunately not the
first time I have had to speak on the troubling reality
that is the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).
UNRWA has been political since its inception. It
continues to amaze me how the States Members of the
United Nations do not see the hypocrisy that lies within
the Agency’s very existence.

As stressed recently by the Palestinian Government,
a solution to the conflict can be achieved only through
a political solution that guarantees an end to the

Let us start with organization itself. No other
refugee population in the world currently has an
UNRWA — not the Syrian refugees, not the Yemeni

24/28

19-14870

22/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

refugees, not the refugees from any other conflict in
the world. Every other refugee in the world is under the
jurisdiction of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
The United Nations created UNRWA and its
unique criteria specifically for the Palestinians.
UNRWA defines its beneficiaries as refugees, but an
UNRWA refugee is different from an UNHCR refugee.
An UNRWA refugee has a special refugee status that
is automatically passed down to future generations.
Palestinian refugees can obtain citizenship from other
countries while maintaining their refugee status. The
vast majority of UNRWA beneficiaries do not meet
the recognized criteria for what constitutes a refugee
under international law. No other refugee population
in the world enjoys these same criteria. Why, then,
does UNRWA grant its beneficiaries all of this special
treatment? Let us take a look at history.
In 1947, the United Nations partition plan proposed
the formation of two States — a Jewish State and an
Arab State — in the land of the former British Mandate.
The Jews accepted the proposal immediately, but the
Arabs did not. Following their rejection, five Arab
armies launched a war on the young and tiny State of
Israel, attacking our borders from all sides. We won.
UNRWA was established following that war — 68 years
ago.
In 1952, Lieutenant General Alexander Galloway,
director of UNRWA in Jordan, spoke candidly about
UNRWA’s purpose. I was not born back then. He said,
“It is perfectly clear that the Arab nations do not
want to solve the Arab refugee problem. They want
to keep it as an open sore, as an affront against the
United Nations, another weapon against Israel.”
The Palestinians have never let go of that agenda.
The unique status of automatic inheritance continues and
worsens the Palestinian refugee problem. What began as
750,000 Palestinian refugees has now turned into over
5 million, simply because of UNRWA. By manipulating
the scale of the Palestinian refugee problem, UNRWA
plays a direct and biased role in the politics of the
conflict. In addition, 2.1 million Palestinians living in
the West Bank and Gaza, who have never crossed an
international border, are still considered by the United
Nations to be refugees. In every other case on Earth but
the case of the Palestinians, a person must be forced
to leave one country and cross an international border

S/PV. 8532

into another to be considered a refugee by the United
Nations.
Let me ask the Council members, why is it that a
Palestinian who was born in Ramallah and lived there
his entire life considered a refugee? How come? But
that is indeed the case.
Had the original 750,000 refugees been resettled
in 1949, the Palestinian refugee crisis — and therefore
the illegitimate claim of return — would not exist. But
today approximately 5.4 million so-called refugees still
hold on to the hope of returning to houses in which they
have never lived. That hope, if realized, would erase
the State of Israel simply by sheer numbers. Under the
guise of the claim of return, the Palestinians, through
UNRWA, are refusing to accept the Jewish right to
self-determination in any part of the land of Israel and
within any borders. Those sentiments run rampant in
Ramallah today.
In September, we all heard Mahmoud Abbas say
in the General Assembly that he believes in a twoState solution (see A/73/PV.10). But he also said that
he would fight for the return of over 5 million so-called
refugees. Those views are contradictory. If the millions
of so-called Palestinian refugees return, Israel, as the
one and only Jewish State, will cease to exist.
Numerous reports reveal close ties between
UNRWA employees and the Hamas leadership. In April
2017, Suhail Al-Hindi, an UNRWA teacher and the
Chairman of the UNRWA employees’ union in Gaza,
was accused of being elected to the Hamas leadership.
He resigned amid those allegations.
For years, UNRWA has been empowering the refugee
problem instead of trying to solve it, while adopting a
unilateral political position. The organization’s schools
have been transformed into terror and incitement
infrastructures, with textbooks that deny Israel’s
existence distributed on the ground and underground
tunnels dug by Hamas. UNRWA employees assist
terrorist groups by using official UNRWA vehicles to
transport weapons and terrorists to carry out attacks
against Israel. As if that were not enough, every
UNRWA school has a Hamas-appointed representative
on campus who is responsible for recruiting students to
participate in the Hamas student group.
In the light of recent events, Israel simply cannot
take lightly the alliance that appears to have been
formed between members of UNRWA and Hamas.

19-1487025/28

S/PV.8532

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Just two weeks ago, Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad
and other terrorist groups in Gaza fired more than 700
rockets and mortars into civilian population centres
in Israel. Those rockets hit Israeli homes, hospitals,
factories and even kindergartens. Four Israeli civilians,
Jews and Arabs alike, were killed. Moshe Agadi, Ziad
Alhamada, Pinchas Pshuzman and Moshe Feder were
killed in those acts of terror, and more than 100 others
were injured. Two Palestinians in Gaza, Falastin Abu
Arar and Saba Mahmoud, were also killed by a Hamas
rocket that was fired towards Israel, but landed in Gaza.
As protectors of international peace and security, the
United Nations should wonder why its Agency, which
is meant to help the Palestinians, is working so closely
with the Hamas terrorists, who do nothing but hurt
the Palestinians.
It is therefore in the best interest of UNRWA, Israel,
the Middle East and the Palestinian people for the
United Nations to take the following two actions. First,
the Security Council must finally designate Hamas as a
terrorist organization. Secondly, the time has come for
a reassessment of UNRWA, its objectives, its success
in implementing those objectives and whether or not
those objectives match the reality on the ground. It is
time to stop pumping money into an organization that
has perpetuated the plight of the Palestinian people in
Gaza. UNRWA has failed to rehabilitate the Gaza Strip.
It has succeeded only in inciting violence against the
State of Israel. UNRWA’s mandate must come to an end.
I have a question for the representative of UNRWA.
Like any other organization, it must have clear goals.
Can the UNRWA representative present those goals?
How long will it take to reach those goals? Will we still
be sitting here in 10 or 15 years? How much money will
it cost to achieve those goals? The Security Council
should receive answers within three or six months, but
we need to hear those answers.
The President: I now give the floor
Mr. Krähenbühl to respond to the question raised.

to

Mr. Krähenbühl: I thank you for this opportunity,
Madam President. I am especially grateful for the
outstanding and repeated expressions of support and
trust offered by numerous members of the Security
Council present at today’s meeting. It is extremely
important both for Palestinian refugees and the staff
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to have
such very strong expressions of trust and confidence in

26/28

22/05/2019

the work, results and contributions of the organization
to regional stability and human dignity.
I will first address the question that was raised by
the Permanent Representative of Germany regarding
the pledging conference. The meeting, otherwise
known as the Ad Hoc Committee of the General
Assembly for the Announcement of Voluntary
Contributions to UNRWA, is an annual feature in
the calendar. The particular week of 24 June was
identified in December 2018, and any suggestion of
ulterior motives in the decision about the date would
be mistaken. The pledging conference fulfils a very
important role in seeking — at a very critical juncture
in the year, in particular just before the summer — to
mobilize additional resources that are needed to keep
our different activities running, installations open and
community served. We therefore appeal, as several of
the participants highlighted, for renewed engagement
and strong additional commitments to be announced at
that moment. We would be very grateful for that.
I would like to briefly react to some of the remarks
that were made by the representative of the United States
in relation to UNRWA. When the original decision
of the United States to cut funding to UNRWA was
announced in early 2018, as those present can imagine,
it was a matter of deep regret and disappointment at my
level and the level of the Agency because it affected one
of the most robust and rewarding partnerships in the
history of humanitarian and development work.
At the same time, of course, we are extremely
conscious that the decision of a Member State to
contribute or not, and if so at what level, to funding
humanitarian organizations is a voluntary and entirely
sovereign decision, of which we need to take note. At the
same time, I want to say here, repeating something that
I said in the course of last year, that while recognizing
that fact — in other words, that it is a voluntary and
purely sovereign decision whether Member States
support or not humanitarian organizations such as
UNRWA — I unreservedly reject the accompanying
narrative and the suggestions that the UNRWA model
is “irredeemably flawed”.
I think that it is very clear that the responsibility for
the protracted nature of Palestinian refugeehood, the
increasing number of refugees and the growth in needs
lies squarely and clearly with the parties themselves
and the international community, in particular because
of the lack of will sometimes or, at other times, the utter

19-14870

22/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

inability of the political actors to once and for all bring
about a solution in political terms to that long-standing
crisis, which everybody in the region — Israelis,
Palestinians and others — deserve and have deserved
for very long. The suggestion that one could simply
deflect attention from the political responsibilities and
somehow make a humanitarian organization responsible
for the unresolved crisis is therefore something that I
believe to be misguided and certainly unhelpful.
The Permanent Representative of Israel addressed
a question to me specifically, so I will just take a few
minutes to address some of the points he made. The
question that was specifically addressed was: For
how long? Indeed, I return the question — for how
long? — because it was never the intention of any
member of the General Assembly, and most certainly
never the intention of anyone in UNRWA, to see the
organization in existence and operation for as long as
it has been.
Once again, our ongoing activities are the
illustration of two things, one of which is positive in
terms of what can be done with regard to investing
in the capabilities, the aspirations and the hopes of a
long-term refugee community and, the other of which,
as I said, is the abysmal failure in political terms to
bring about a solution. The way in which UNRWA was
mandated has to be recalled here.
The question addressed to me as to how long it
should continue was not addressed to the right entity. It
is the responsibility of the General Assembly to answer
that question because, when we were tasked, we were
not a self-created organization that one day decided
that this would be an important issue to address. We
are an organization mandated by the General Assembly
and, until a decision is made that that should change,
we will continue with resolve, determination, pride
and humility to implement the mandate that we were
given. Given the attempt to delegitimize our actions
with general statements about the nature and definition
of refugeehood in ways that I have really never come
across in terms of the misrepresentations of actual
situations, let me talk and address the question of the
definition of “descendants”.
It is well known to the members of the Council and
General Assembly — and, therefore, I repeat it here
with great clarity — that under international law and
the principle of family unity, the children of refugees

S/PV. 8532

and their descendants are also considered refugees
until a durable solution is found. Both UNRWA and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) recognize descendants as refugees
on that basis — a practice that has been widely accepted
in the international community, including both donors
and refugee-hosting countries.
Palestine refugees are not distinct from those of
any other protracted refugee situation, such as those
from Afghanistan or Somalia, for example, where
there are multiple generations of refugees considered
by UNHCR to be refugees and supported as such. As I
have said, protracted refugee situations are the result of
the failure to find political solutions to the underlying
political crisis.
Let me now just briefly address the comments
that were made by the Permanent Representative of
Israel concerning UNRWA’s neutrality. I can simply
not accept that the efforts that UNRWA undertakes
every single day, in one of the most — if not the
most — polarized contexts on the planet, to preserve
the integrity, dignity and neutrality of its operations be
questioned in that manner. I reject it robustly, and the
Permanent Representative knows it because we have
had such conversations before. During the war in 2014,
UNRWA discovered weapons components in some
of its schools during the conflict. We found that out.
We informed the parties — Israel and the Palestinian
Authority. We informed the world and condemned the
fact that those weapons components had been found.
When two of our staff members were elected to
positions two years ago and allegations emerged that
they had been elected to positions in Hamas, we not
only immediately investigated the matter, but as soon
as we found the truth we dismissed them. They did not
leave of their own accord. When, the same year, during
repair work carried out by UNRWA under our schools,
we discovered that tunnels had been dug by Hamas, we
not only condemned Hamas publicly for that, but we
also sealed the tunnels by injecting cement into them,
which is fairly extraordinary in terms of the measures
of the robustness of what humanitarian organizations
are prepared to do in a conflict environment where
its staff is at risk every single day, not because we
invented the mandate, but because we were tasked by
the General Assembly.

19-1487027/28

S/PV.8532

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Therefore, it is with great determination that we
will uphold the integrity of this organization, use and
work with the immense generosity and support of States
Members that trust our work, and seek and continue to
engage in dialogue both with the United States, Israel
and other parties on aspects of critical review that we
are always and have always been prepared to look into.
The integrity with which we approach such situations
is a matter of public record, and we have received
widespread recognition for it.

28/28

22/05/2019

I apologize that I took a little bit longer than intended.
I remain available for any further elements that members
might require during the informal consultations.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

19-14870
