United Nations

S/PV.6672

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6672nd meeting
Wednesday, 30 November 2011, 11.05 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Moraes Cabral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Portugal)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Yang Tao
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mr. Amieyeofori
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Mashabane
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)
Letter dated 18 November 2011 from the Permanent Representative of
Portugal to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2011/726)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-61237 (E)

*1161237*

S/PV.6672

with Japan, our predecessor in chairing the Informal
Working Group. We also participated in the meeting of
the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the
General Assembly.

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions has held four
meetings. Allow me to draw attention to some of the
issues discussed among the members of the Informal
Working Group in those meetings.

Implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2010/507)
Letter dated 18 November 2011 from the
Permanent Representative of Portugal to
the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2011/726)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Australia, Belgium, Costa Rica,
Egypt, Finland, Guatemala, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Japan, Jordan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Singapore,
Slovenia, Spain, the Sudan, and Switzerland to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/726, which contains a letter dated
18 November 2011 from the Permanent Representative
of Portugal to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): First, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this open debate on working methods of the
Security Council. This is the fourth open debate on the
topic, which reflects the increased interest on the part
of the entire United Nations membership, as well as the
increased transparency of the Security Council in its
work and its intention to interact with the general
membership when addressing matters of mutual
concern and benefit.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has chaired the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions with great interest and a firm
commitment to further promoting the transparency and
efficiency of the Security Council’s work. With that in
mind, we organized a workshop on working methods
for the United Nations membership, in cooperation

2

With regard to streamlining the summary
statement on matters of which the Council is seized,
we began looking at ways to reduce the list of those
issues under active consideration. The present
guidelines governing the maintenance of the summary
statement are contained in section IX of the note by the
President of 26 July 2010 (S/2010/507). However, this
is an ongoing process, and further progress is needed,
bearing in mind that paragraph 53 of document
S/2010/507 provides for the Council to review the
summary statement at the beginning of each year to
determine if the Council has concluded its
consideration of any of the listed items. Therefore,
January 2012 might be an appropriate time to take up
this matter.
We also discussed the evenness of the Council’s
work, which implies a more even distribution of the
adoption of resolutions pertaining to mandate cycles
and reporting.
During the meeting held on 28 April 2011 on
General Assembly revitalization, we witnessed the
interest of the United Nations Member States in
possible ways of involving them in matters of the
Security Council’s working methods. We were asked
questions about their possible involvement in
rationalizing the items on the Security Council agenda,
revitalizing the working methods of the Security
Council, and the review and decision-making processes
related to items on the Security Council agenda.
Mindful of the calls of the general United Nations
membership for enhanced cooperation, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has raised the issue of further increasing
the transparency of the Council’s work and has
suggested to the members of the Informal Working
Group that they consider the idea of holding regular
briefings on Security Council working methods for
non-Council Member States. We are of the view that
this exercise could be of common benefit. It could be a
valuable opportunity for the Council to periodically

11-61237

S/PV.6672

review progress in the implementation of certain
measures, take into account the views of the general
membership, and, if necessary, consider possible
adequate adjustments.
Bearing in mind the primary responsibility of the
Security Council for maintaining international peace
and security, Bosnia and Herzegovina believes that the
Security Council has achieved substantial progress in
recent years regarding the improvement and openness
of its working methods, as outlined in the presidential
note 507. We reiterate our previously stated stance that
the implementation of presidential note 507 should be
based on the need to find a proper and adequate
balance between generally accepted principles or
guidelines on efficiency, transparency and interaction,
on the one hand, and dialogue with non-members, on
the other. In this regard, we welcome the continued
engagement of the group of five small nations in
making constructive and positive contributions to the
improvement of the Council’s working methods, both
formally and informally.
Having been a member of the Council for almost
two years now, we must acknowledge the importance
of informal consultations to the decision-making
process. Nevertheless, there must be more balance
between the Council’s informal consultations and the
holding of public meetings. Moreover, we cannot
neglect the importance of informal interaction with the
wider membership, including informal interactive
dialogue. This year, the Council has held four informal
interactive dialogue meetings on Burundi, Darfur,
Eritrea and Libya. We are of the view that such
interaction is an added value to the Council’s decisionmaking process, and has the potential to generate a
sense of common ownership and strengthen the
prospects for effective implementation.
We recognize the improvement made with regard
to continued briefings and consultations by the Council
with troop- and police-contributing countries as part of
the efforts to implement peacekeeping mandates more
effectively. We deem that there is room for the Security
Council to enhance its interaction with other United
Nations bodies, especially the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council. The main
communication tool between the Council and the
general membership is the Security Council’s annual
report, which we believe should comprise more
analytical and substantial features.

11-61237

When we speak about the transparency of the
work of the Security Council, we imply not only
interaction with non-Council members, but also
increased transparency concerning the broader public,
non-governmental organizations and the media. Bosnia
and Herzegovina feels that the Arria Formula meeting
is an adequate tool for engaging in a more informal
dialogue with the United Nations membership,
concerned countries, regional and subregional groups,
experts, representatives of civil society, and the media.
Today, the United Nations Member States have
another opportunity to reflect on the successful
working methods of the Council, as well as on those
practices where there is room for possible
improvement. This exchange of experiences and
perspectives can be useful in consolidating the Security
Council’s best practices for the common benefit.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We attach great importance to the convening
of this open debate of the Security Council on the issue
of its working methods. In our view, the very fact of
conducting the meeting in this format bears witness to
the improved transparency of the Council’s work.
Pursuant to the United Nations Charter, the Security
Council is responsible for establishing its own rules of
procedure, but we are prepared today to listen carefully
to the views of our colleagues on how to make the
Council’s work more effective.
It is clear that the Council is the organ that bears
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security and is at the service of
the international community as a whole. We wish
nevertheless to note that, in the context of the
discussion of working method reform, questions are
often focused on broader topics, such as how
successfully and appropriately the Council is
implementing its Charter-mandated tasks. For instance,
the Council is criticized for encroaching on the
prerogatives of the other United Nations bodies. I note
that we share this concern. Our colleagues on the
Council are well aware that the Russian Federation has
always soberly and selectively reacted to initiatives for
the Council to consider thematic issues, particularly if
they are generic in nature. We believe that the Council
should focus on issues on which it can and must take
concrete decisions.
We also understand the concern that the Council
may too often resort to Chapter VII of the Charter,

3

S/PV.6672

including the application of sanctions. In that regard,
we stress that the Russian Federation has consistently
called on the Council to make more active use of the
toolkit of preventive diplomacy and to invest in the
development of mechanisms for the peaceful
settlement of disputes. The provisions of Chapters VI
and VIII should be fully exploited. Sanctions and the
use of force to settle conflict are appropriate when all
possibilities for peaceful settlement have been
exhausted, the threat to international peace and security
is clear, and the decision to resort to Chapter VII
enjoys the broadest possible support of Council
members.
An interesting and very relevant example is that
we have recently seen inconsistent and broad
interpretation of the decisions of the Security Council
in situations where such decisions are supplemented or
undermined by unilateral measures of pressure. We
believe such activities to be unacceptable and to
undermine the Council’s authority. We stress the
importance of this issue, but in our view it transcends
the agenda item on the Council’s working methods.
Another set of provisions that bear no relation to the
Council’s working methods is that pertaining to the
right of veto.
In order to make the Council even more effective
and responsive to realities on the ground, we must
work meticulously to improve its working methods. To
that end, we established and operationalized the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. Although its activities are not
public, it is working in organized, rational and
constructive interaction with all interested delegations
of Member States. It should be understood in that
respect that proposals to enhance the transparency of
the Council’s activities should not undermine its
effectiveness or its ability to respond promptly to
situations. Dialogue on this important issue must be
carried out in a balanced and professional manner,
without politicization.
We feel that improving the quality of the
Council’s interaction with other United Nations bodies
on issues within the Council’s competence to be
another key issue in improving the Councils working
methods. One relevant task in that regard would be the
future formulation of effective forms and methods for
dialogue between the Council and the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, other
United Nations bodies, regional organizations and

4

international partners. The practice of holding
operational consultations between Council members
and troop-and police-contributing countries must be
maintained.
Much has been done recently to improve the
Council’s working methods. The number of open
meetings on various issues has grown, and informal
interactive dialogue and Arria Formula meetings have
been held. One instrument of regular contact between
the Council and interested non-members is the
traditional briefing given by the Council presidency.
Russia will assume the presidency tomorrow, and we
invite all to a meeting, to be held on Friday,
2 December, at which I shall discuss the highlights of
the Council’s schedule for next month. I note that 178
Permanent Representatives have been invited to that
meeting, but only eight attended the last such briefing.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
like, at the outset, to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this debate on the Security Council’s
working methods. I also wish to thank the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina for his
introduction, as well as for his outstanding work as
Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
This debate should first be an opportunity to hear
from Members of the Organization about the way in
which the Security Council works. On our part, we
consider the working methods to be a tool for the
Council to work effectively. In that regard, I should
like to make several comments.
My first comment has to do with the efforts that
have been made to improve the Council’s working
methods. The 2010 revision of presidential note 507
(S/2010/507) on best practices clarified our working
methods, for which we thank the delegation of Japan.
Several points are worthy of mention. The presidency
has a responsibility to provide all Members and
officials of the Organization with the information they
need with regard to the Council’s work. It is therefore
important to continue with the established practice of
providing them the programme of work at the
beginning of each month.
Most of the Council’s meetings are held in public
or entail a public part. Moreover, there are today more
debates open to all delegations, which is a good thing.
We believe that the public format should prevail when
it comes to issues of general interest. Recently, we

11-61237

S/PV.6672

should have heard from the High Commissioner for
Human Rights here in the Chamber, rather than in
consultations.
On the initiative of France and the United
Kingdom, a regular dialogue has been established with
troop contributors to peacekeeping operations. With the
agreement of all delegations concerned, we should now
make that dialogue more substantial. Another positive
aspect is the fact that the President of the Council now
meets regularly with the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and that the Chairs of the countryspecific configurations are invited to participate in the
Council’s meetings.
My second comment pertains to the fact that the
Council has demonstrated its ability to adapt to new
demands. The Council is the master of its agenda and
its procedures, which are uncomplicated and allow for
its practices to change with the needs. It is an asset for
the Council to be able to adapt its work and
functioning to new demands. Many examples point to
the fact that it can do so. The Council meets more
frequently to hold thematic debates, which make it
possible for it to refine its approach to issues pertaining
to international peace and security. To that end, it turns
to the expertise of regional organizations and
specialized international bodies, as well as to civil
society in general. At the same time, we should
implement the recommendation of the group of five
small nations to strengthen the links between the
Security Council’s work on thematic issues — such as
the rule of law, combating impunity, protecting
civilians and new threats — and its efforts on specific
situations.
Another example is the fact that the Council now
has regular exchanges with the Department of Political
Affairs on situations of risk that merit particular
attention. In doing so, it is better able to anticipate and
predict crises. It is important to pursue that effort and
to bring in representatives of the Secretary-General on
thematic issues, in particular when it comes to
preventing war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide.
Lastly, today the Council has better follow-up of
crisis situations and of the decisions it takes. In that
connection, during its presidency in May, France
organized a debate on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (see S/PV.6539) that brought together the main
stakeholders as well as other Congolese officials. The

11-61237

meeting was preceded by a seminar with
non-governmental organizations that made it possible
to consolidate consensus on a complex issue. We
believe that such an exercise, including broad
agreement, could be useful and productive.
Finally, I would like to underscore the importance
of continuing to innovate. In the course of the past
month, the reality on the international stage has
compelled the Council to take important decisions in
difficult circumstances. It is also worth noting that, in
spite of our political differences at times, cases of
recourse to procedural points were the rare exception.
That illustrates that the Security Council works well.
We should therefore continue to innovate to take better
decisions. To that end, various avenues could be
pursued. First, missions to the field provide an
opportunity for members of the Council to better
understand the reality and to speak directly with local
stakeholders. There should be a way to better define
the goals for such missions in more operational terms.
Videoconferencing is now being used to
communicate with United Nations missions on the
ground. That makes it possible for the Council to be
informed directly and in real time. It also allows
United Nations officials to avoid having to make a trip
to New York when it is important for them to be
present in the field. The use of this tool could perhaps
be made more systematic.
The Council has developed a new meeting format
that allows it to better exchange views with Members
of the United Nations on situations that concern them
directly. In that regard, the interactive dialogue format
is sufficiently flexible to respond to several categories
of need. For instance, it made it possible to hold
several meetings with Chadian officials before we
withdrew the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad. In principle, we support
this type of exercise.
In conclusion, today we will hear many ideas for
improving the Council’s working methods. We
encourage the Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation
to
compile
the
operational
recommendations to be made.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): First of all, I would like to commend you,
Mr. President, for your initiative to organize this debate
on the Security Council’s working methods. Clearly,
this is one of the most important issues on our agenda.

5

S/PV.6672

I should also like to thank Ambassador Ivan Barbalić
of Bosnia and Herzegovina for the competency with
which he leads the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
Lastly, I would like to emphasize that the contribution
of previous chairs of the Group, including Japan,
should also be acknowledged.
The issue before us has to do with the very
functioning of this body and, beyond that, with global
governance itself, in particular when it comes to
international peace and security. In order to grasp the
full scope of the issue, it would be useful to consider
the Council’s working methods in the context of the
letter and spirit of the Charter of the United Nations,
which
confers
important
responsibilities
and
competencies on the Security Council.
The work of the General Assembly Open-ended
Working Group on the Question of Equitable
Representation on and Increase in the Membership of
the Security Council and Other Matters Related to the
Security Council serves as a framework for the
deliberations of Member States on the issue of the
Council’s working methods. Moreover, the Informal
Working Group on Documentation has made it possible
to consolidate the momentum on internal reform with a
view to achieving greater transparency and
participation in the Council’s work for States that are
not members of the Council.
Effectiveness in carrying out the Security
Council’s mission calls for establishing a more open
and collegial relationship in the Council and between
its members and the membership of the Organization
as a whole.
My delegation welcomes the considerable
progress that has been made over the years in
improving the working methods of the Council. That
progress reflects the Council’s outstanding ability to
adapt to the sweeping changes in our world with the
emergence of new State and non-State actors on the
international stage and the growing role of regional and
subregional organizations in conflict resolution and
peacekeeping.
I wish to make two observations in that respect.
The first concerns the need for closer cooperation
between the Council and regional and subregional
organizations in the management of crises and armed
conflicts. Sending timely high-level missions of
Council members to countries facing unstable

6

situations that could threaten international peace and
security could be a powerful mechanism for crisis
management and the prevention of armed conflict,
assuming, of course, the full cooperation of the States
in question and of subregional institutions. Such
actions could be initiated either by the Council by
direct recommendation of the Secretary-General, or by
invitation of the Governments concerned. That would
give greater visibility to the Security Council’s role in
crisis management well before such situations explode
into violent armed conflicts that often require onerous
peacekeeping operations.
My second remark concerns the need to increase
the number of consultations between the Security
Council and subregional organizations that play an
active role in crisis resolution and the settlement of
armed conflicts, such as the African Union, above all
when the Council acts under Article VI of the Charter.
That would enhance coordination with the relevant
bodies of the African Union and guarantee more
effective short-, medium- and long-term action with
respect to lasting solutions to crises.
In that spirit, we call for greater interaction with
troop-contributing countries, not only once a
peacekeeping mission is under way, but from the
earliest stage of its conception. The role of troopcontributing countries is therefore indispensable to
assuring the success of peace missions authorized by
the Council. It not only enables the Council to better
respond to the wishes of a host country, but also
guarantees closer adherence to the principle of good
conduct by troops on the ground serving under United
Nations mandate.
It would also be useful to encourage the regular
exchange of information between the Security Council
and other bodies of this Organization, in particular
between the Council and the General Assembly and the
Peacebuilding Commission. That would contribute to
increasing transparency and confidence in the
Council’s actions.
Another important evolution in the Council’s
work can be seen in the thematic debates organized by
the Council’s rotating presidencies. Those debates,
which are often open to the entire membership of our
Organization, make a significant contribution to our
consideration of the multiple challenges to
international peace and security. It is nonetheless
important to clearly define their focus so as not to

11-61237

S/PV.6672

encroach on the competencies of each organ. Taken as
a whole, such measures also highlight the importance
of the Council acting with a degree of flexibility in
order to make them more effective.
Before concluding, I would like briefly to
emphasize the need for greater transparency in the
process of negotiations on certain resolutions. All
resolutions, along with many other documents, should
be subject to a broad process of consultation well in
advance of their submission for discussion. That would
guarantee greater transparency and cohesion, as well as
greater unity within the Council. Such an approach
should also prevail in the designation of the leadership
of the organs and subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Sir, for having convened this
debate, which is of great interests to the entire
membership of our Organization. I would also like to
take this opportunity to recognize the preparatory work
by the Permanent Representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Ambassador Ivan Barbalić, as Chairman
of the Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Matters, a subsidiary body of the Council
whose work is important to all Members. The Working
Group has identified certain areas and issues that
demand the Council’s attention in order to achieve
greater transparency, participation, efficiency and
accountability in the Council’s fulfilment of its
responsibilities in the areas of international
peacekeeping and security.
The Group’s work is summarized in presidential
note S/2010/507, whose adoption represented a
significant step forward. Although we feel that it would
be premature to undertake an evaluation of the process
of implementing the guidelines for the practices
contained in that important document, we believe that
Council members should keep this issue under
permanent review.
We stress the importance of the goal set forth in
the note with respect to interaction and dialogue with
non-member of the Council. The rigidity imposed by
the traditional formats of Council meetings has been
gradually overcome through the establishment of such
practices as holding informal interactive dialogues in
which members of this organ have benefited from the
opportunity to make their views heard on a range of
themes in direct exchange with intergovernmental

11-61237

organizations and with representatives of Governments
of non-member countries. Aside from the question of
the capacity in which Council members act in such
meetings, the central point is that direct contact with
such organizations and countries offers benefits that
otherwise would be difficult to obtain. We wish to
emphasize the role that new technologies should play
in that process.
To those who maintain that the efforts required
for the Council to consider matters of a general nature
would unnecessarily dilute the Council’s attention,
when discussion of such matters more natural belongs
in the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council or other United Nations organs, we believe
that that is simply a way to rationalize the working
methods of other organs.
An important development that contributes to
improving transparency is the noticeable increase in
the number of open debates held each month. The
participation of non-members in such debates should
contribute towards the same goal of airing different
points of view and enriching the arguments available to
Council members in adopting their decisions.
It may seem contradictory for open debates to be
held in which presidential statements or resolutions
that had been previously negotiated among Council
members are adopted. A reasonable break should be
allowed between an open debate and the negotiation
and adoption of such documents to allow Council
members to incorporate points of view that emerged in
the debate. By the same token, it would be useful to
reflect on possible formulas that would guarantee
broad participation in those debates, as well as to
ensure that statements are confined within rational
limits and serve to convey a substantive conceptual
contribution.
The same logic can be applied to meetings with
troop-contributing countries, whose raison d’être
should be to enrich the basic outcomes so that the
Council adopts them and acts in the areas of
peacekeeping operations in greatest need. If that
exercise is to have greater significance, it is imperative
for meetings to be scheduled sufficiently in advance
and for the Secretariat produce an executive summary
of the main points, from which Council members can
extract elements to be included in or to enrich their
decisions on renewing the mandates of ongoing
peacekeeping operations.

7

S/PV.6672

The established practice of meeting with
interested countries at the start or end of every month
to enable the presidency to inform them about the
provisional programme of work and discuss it is of
great use and an important contribution to the
transparency of the Council’s work. My delegation
believes it important to stress that the reports of the
Secretary-General are key to matters under
consideration by the Council. That should not prevent
the Council from consulting other sources of
information, so long as such sources are accurate,
objective and verifiable.
Another positive development is the greater
transparency that has been established with respect to
the management of the procedures and selection
criteria that have been established to decide on the
inclusion of persons, groups, organizations or entities
on the lists related to terrorism as well as their
exclusion. We welcome the decision to establish the
Ombudsman Office as an independent and impartial
body charged with reviewing such lists in order to
ensure that the Council’s actions take matters of due
process into account.

Undoubtedly, the activities of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, under the able leadership of Ambassador
Ivan Barbalić, have also helped to reinforce this
improvement.
The Council should not, however, rest on its
laurels. Much work could still be done to enhance
efficiency and transparency, thus engendering greater
confidence on the part of the broader United Nations
membership and global public. There is no doubt that a
continued improvement in the content and narrative
quality of the Council’s annual report is necessary if
we are to meet the expectations of non-members of the
Council.
Here we commend the efforts of the German
delegation in preparing the annual report for 2010/2011
(A/66/2), particularly for continuing with the practice
of consultation with non-members of the Council. We
would recall that the important suggestions received
from non-members of the Council greatly enriched our
work in preparing the report for 2009/2010 (A/65/2).
This practice should be sustained and improved upon.

Mr. Amieyeofori (Nigeria): Mr. President, allow
me to convey our appreciation to you for having
convened this timely debate on the working methods of
the Security Council. We also appreciate the precise
concept paper (S/2011/726) circulated by your
delegation in advance of this discussion.

To improve on the information available to the
broader United Nations membership, the respective
Presidents of the Council should speak more often to
the media, and lead countries should provide more
information to the public. The Presidents of the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Security Council will need to sustain their
regular
discussions
in
order
to
improve
complementarity in the work of those organs. In
addition, the Chairs of subsidiary bodies should be
encouraged to hold periodic briefings on their activities
and schedule more spontaneous and productive
sessions with non-Council members. Adequate and
timely information on their activities will be useful to
the wider United Nations membership.

Reforming the working methods of the Security
Council remains a matter of urgency given the decisive
role that the Council plays in the affairs of Member
States. It is therefore encouraging that the Security
Council has done much work recently to improve the
efficiency and transparency of its work as well as its
interaction and dialogue with non-members of the
Council. Just last year, the Council adopted a revised
presidential note (S/2010/507) that reinforced its
intention to enhance dialogue with troop-contributing
countries and the use of informal dialogue.

Nigeria welcomes the efforts made to improve
interaction with troop- and police-contributing
countries and regional organizations. As a major troopcontributing country, we see great value in enhancing
interaction with troop-contributing countries as well as
the Peacebuilding Commission. This is imperative
during implementation, change in, renewal of, or
completion of mandates, or when there has been a
rapid deterioration of the situation on the ground. The
proper sequencing of such meetings is crucial if we are
to achieve meaningful results. It is also essential to

In conclusion, I should like to say that my
delegation shares the views of those speakers who
stated that any debate on the methods of work of the
Council should focus on matters such as transparency,
interaction with non-members and the efficiency of the
Council’s work. We stand ready to listen closely to the
points of view of all delegations that have requested to
speak during today’s debate.

8

11-61237

S/PV.6672

invite the countries and parties concerned to the
deliberations of the Council to share local perspectives
and specialized knowledge relating to issues on the
Council’s agenda. That principle informed our
commitment to greater and more frequent involvement
of the troop-contributing countries in the activities of
the Council’s Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, chaired by Nigeria.
The Security Council’s field missions have been
useful in providing an adequate impression of local
realities. Council discussions have also been enriched
through dialogue with various actors at the national
and regional levels. As a nation from the continent
accounting for about 70 per cent of the issues on the
Council’s agenda, we see such missions as very useful
and productive. It may be helpful to prolong the
duration of such visits so as to provide ample time for
engagement with local and regional actors.
The Council’s working methods offer the tools
necessary to ensure efficiency and transparency in its
work. We are under no illusion that the tools are
sufficient to address all challenges. The right mix of
these tools and flexibility will help to underpin the
Council’s efforts, pursuant to presidential note
S/2010/507. It is also important to continuously
identify gaps and make the required changes.
Our discussion today, under the Portuguese
presidency, represents such an effort. In that context,
we must not lose sight of the need to improve the
Council’s effectiveness in preventing conflicts. The
Council’s commitment to Chapters VI and VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations and preventive
diplomatic strategies will greatly contribute to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): Mr. President, I, too,
should like to thank you for having initiated today’s
open debate. It provides a good opportunity to reflect
on what has been achieved so far and where
improvements could be made.
Much has been achieved. Discussions at this
year’s retreat for the incoming newly elected members
were also dedicated to ideas and suggestions on how to
improve the work of the Council and make it more
transparent and efficient.
The regular briefings by the Department of
Political Affairs are an important improvement,
particularly in the context of the Arab Spring. These

11-61237

briefings have allowed for discussions on matters of
international peace and security that have not yet
become formal agenda items. They also allow the
Council to be more flexible and responsive to evolving
situations on the ground, contributing also to a stronger
preventive role of the Council.
Among the Council’s subsidiary bodies, the
sanctions committees have become a major field of
activity for the Council and its members. Here, too, the
working methods have become more efficient and
transparent over the past years. The establishment of a
focal point for delisting, and, in the case of the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated
individuals
and
entities,
of
an
Ombudsperson in particular are important innovations
with direct benefit for the wider United Nations
membership.
There is also some discussion on the selection
procedure and the accountability of the expert panels
established to support the sanctions committees in their
work. While a discussion on this issue may be
warranted, it is our view that this should neither result
in excessively delaying the beginning of the work of
new experts, nor lead to any infringement on the
independence of such experts in the implementation of
their mandate. It is precisely their independence,
combined with their expert knowledge, that provides
the added benefit not only to the Security Council but
also to the wider United Nations membership. We thus
are strongly in favour of their reports, as a general rule,
being made public.
An open and transparent relationship between the
Security Council and the wider United Nations
membership remains crucial for the political
acceptance and relevance of the Council, as well as for
the implementation of its resolutions. As President of
the Security Council for the month of July 2011,
Germany drafted the introduction of the annual report
of the Security Council to the General Assembly
(A/66/2). In preparing for the compilation of the report,
we built on the good practice of holding, together with
Nigeria and Portugal, an informal meeting with the
wider United Nations membership. We also asked the
presidency to separate the debates on the annual report
and on the issue of Security Council reform in order to
allow for a more focused debate on both issues. These
are but two examples of how the Council can better
satisfy the legitimate interests of the broader

9

S/PV.6672

membership in enhanced transparency and accessibility
of the Council in its work.
We fully agree with the goal expressed in your
concept paper, Mr. President, preparing for today’s
debate, of improving involvement by all stakeholders
such as concerned non-members of the Council and
relevant regional organizations. Concrete steps could
include more frequent use of the Arria-formula
meetings or giving troop contributors and other
stakeholders the opportunity for joint input in Council
consultations. We also share the goal of enhancing the
role of the Military Staff Committee. We appreciate the
current practice of regular informal meetings of the
Committee open to all 15 members of the Council, and
encourage its continuation.
The relationship between the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) has become
more interactive and dynamic. The chairpersons of the
PBC country-specific configurations now regularly
brief the Council when a particular country’s situation
is under consideration. They bring to the table a
different perspective that can complement the
Council’s assessment of a given situation. In this
context, their participation in Council consultations
should also be envisaged. There is also still potential
for improvement in ensuring that the Council can and
will draw on the PBC’s advice on broader
peacebuilding perspectives.
Important progress has been made in enhancing
the relationship between the Security Council and
thematic Special Representatives of the SecretaryGeneral, such as those for children and armed conflict
and sexual violence in conflict. Similarly, the briefings
provided by the Executive Director of UN-Women and
representatives of the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights have been important to the Council’s
work. In our view, the Council has greatly benefited
from their analyses and reports. The same holds true
for the briefings provided by the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court. Germany supports
regular participation by these Offices in briefings and
at consultations of the Security Council.
We also believe that the Council should be more
open to an enhanced relationship with the Human
Rights Council, not least because of the role that the
independent commissions of inquiry established by the
Human Rights Council play in several situations on the
Security Council’s agenda.

10

Lastly, we welcome the initiative of Member
States in presenting concrete proposals for reform of
the working methods of the Security Council. As I
mentioned before, we support many of the ideas
contained in the initiative proposed by the so-called
group of five small nations. However, Germany
strongly supports improvement of the Council’s
working methods as part of a comprehensive reform of
the Council. Focusing only on its working methods
resembles a band-aid approach to a more structural
issue that, in our view, can be addressed only by
making the membership of the Council more
representative of the world we live in today.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): We
commend you, Mr. President, for holding this open
debate to consider and assess the working methods of
the Security Council, the organ primarily responsible
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
That is the reason for the particular significance of the
working methods the Council uses to carry out its
duties and responsibilities, and their ability to help it
improve its efficiency in view of its increasing
workload and the growing number of peacekeeping
operations and political missions. I should like to
commend the role played in this by the delegation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, especially its Permanent
Representative Ambassador Barbalić, and the
important follow-up undertaken by the group of five
small nations and the proposals they have submitted.
The Security Council’s working methods have
evolved considerably in the past few years. We are
pleased to note the action it has taken to increase
transparency and interaction between Council members
and non-members, and we would like to see more of
this approach. Improving the Council’s working
methods, in our view, should be a means to enhance its
effectiveness in implementing its resolutions without
selectivity or bias, pending the comprehensive reform
that we all desire and that should, of course, include
the issue of membership. The issue of the right of veto
and the way it is exercised should also be revisited.
We stress the importance of increasing the
number of open debates and reducing the number of
closed meetings, which would enable the Council to
listen to and interact with non-members’ proposals and
ideas, and add to the transparency of its work. We do
recognize, however, the need to strike a balance
between transparency and efficiency in order to ensure
that such meetings are productive and non-routine. We

11-61237

S/PV.6672

also welcome the coordinating meetings that the
Council holds with troop- and police-contributing
countries, which are among the instruments that enable
the Council to implement its policies. Such interaction
should be strengthened so as to include host countries.
In accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter, it
is essential that we increase cooperation between the
Council and regional organizations, especially on
matters concerning international peace and security.
We also call for strengthened interaction between the
Security Council and the heads of other United Nations
organs, particularly the Presidents of the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council and
the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission.
We also believe that the Security Council’s
annual reports and the monthly reports prepared by the
rotating presidencies should include more detailed
analysis useful to non-members of the Council. The
monthly informational briefings that the President of
the Council holds for non-member States are a
beneficial practice, while informing the media as to the
basic thrust of closed consultations also enables other
Member States to follow the Council’s activities.
Finally, we support the ongoing review process of
the Council’s agenda items by the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions. This process must be more flexible and
dynamic. In this context, all documents should be
issued in all six official languages in a timely manner,
which is an important step towards strengthening
transparency.
In conclusion, I am grateful to the President for
the concept note (see S/2011/726, annex) prepared by
the Portuguese delegation for this debate.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
debate and for preparing the concept note on the
Security Council’s working methods (see S/2011/726,
annex).
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the representative of Egypt on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.
We welcome the improvements in the
implementation of the July 2006 note by the President
of the Council (S/2006/507) and the overall progress
that has been made in improving the working methods
of the Security Council. We acknowledge that the

11-61237

implementation of the note is an important contribution
to enhancing the efficiency and transparency of the
Council’s work.
A welcome development has been the significant
improvement the Council has shown in increasing the
number of its public meetings, and the greater
frequency of public briefings by special envoys and
representatives. We also commend the increased
interaction between the President of the Council and
the general United Nations membership. While these
measures are modest, they are nonetheless important
steps towards improving the Council’s work and
ensuring greater transparency and accountability.
More, however, must be done to ensure that such
developments translate into substantive and meaningful
engagement between the Security Council and the
general membership, and that the views of the latter are
reflected in the Council’s actions. My delegation also
welcomes the increased interaction between the
President of the Council and the Presidents of the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council.
There is growing recognition of the linkage
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The Council,
in our view, has thus gained from its increased
interaction with the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
This interaction should, however, translate into a
reflection of the views of the PBC in the Council’s
consideration of peacekeeping mandates. Similarly,
interaction with troop-contributing countries has
increased and meetings have been scheduled well in
advance of Council meetings. My delegation has also
appreciated hearing the views of force commanders in
their briefings to the Council during the year. A further
challenge is ensuring that these measures are
implemented and made permanent. In that regard, we
support the call for formalizing the Council’s rules of
procedure in order to improve its transparency and
accountability.
There has been some progress in enhancing and
strengthening the partnership between the United
Nations Security Council and the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union (AU). Nonetheless,
challenges still exist in achieving the desired
complementarity in the areas of conflict prevention,
management and resolution between the United
Nations and the African Union. We are of the view that
the President of the Security Council could interact

11

S/PV.6672

regularly with the President of the African Union Peace
and Security Council on issues that are on the agendas
of both Councils. The two Councils could further
benefit from more interaction and substantive
discussion on a regular basis. In that regard, the use of
video technology could be successfully deployed to
regularize such interactions between the United
Nations Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council.
In conclusion, we are of the view that minor
changes to the working methods will not necessary
address the more fundamental issue that affects the
legitimacy and credibility of the Council, which is
linked to the fact that the current configuration of the
Council is unrepresentative, in particular in the
permanent category. We think that we must therefore
speed up the process of reform of the Council to make
it more representative.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): The Security
Council is mandated by the United Nations Charter
with the primary responsibility for maintenance of
international peace and security, including by coercive
action. What it does and the manner in which it goes
about doing its work are, however, of interest to the
entire international community. The Council’s work as
well as its working methods thus become of
importance for us all.
I would like to place on record, Mr. President, my
delegation’s deep appreciation that you and your
delegation have organized this open debate on the
working methods of the Security Council, despite a
clear lack of enthusiasm on the part of some members
of the Council, who openly state that the issue of the
Council’s working methods is the exclusive preserve of
its permanent members. I also want to take this
opportunity to express our appreciation for the efforts
of our colleague from Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ivan
Barbalić, for chairing the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
I also want to align myself with the statement that
is to be made by my colleague from Egypt on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.
The Security Council’s composition — rooted in
the situation obtaining in 1945 — and its working
methods are both divorced from the contemporary
reality of international relations. Its non-transparent
rules of procedures remain “provisional”, even after
the Council’s existence for six and a half decades. The

12

Council’s reluctance to consult with those affected by
its decisions, its refusal to harness the capabilities of
the wider United Nations membership and its all too
evident eagerness to apply methods of coercion under
Chapter VII, to the neglect of provisions under
Chapters VI and VIII, are not only anachronistic, but,
as experience has shown on a day-to-day basis, also
counter-productive. They also detract from the
Council’s effectiveness and efficiency in the
implementation of its mandate to ensure international
peace and security. Despite all of that, the Council is
ever more eager to encroach on the Charter-mandated
role of other United Nations organs.
The time has come, therefore, for the Council to
seriously consider why many of its decisions are not
having their intended effect; why a large number of
Member States are not able or willing to respond to its
numerous
requests
for
national
reports
on
implementation of its coercive decisions; why it has to
resort so often to coercive measures under Chapter VII;
why it does not command enough trust and respect
from the international community — or even
confidence in itself — to mandate measures under
Chapter VI; why it fails to take recourse to cooperation
with regional organizations under Chapter VIII to solve
regional problems; and, most important of all, how the
Council can address its failures and increase its
effectiveness and efficiency.
Let me share an Indian perspective on how the
Security Council could better its performance. First,
the permanent members of the Security Council must
recognize, not only individually but also collectively,
that the Council must be reformed to make it reflect the
contemporary realities of the international system.
Secondly, the international community as a whole must
be cognizant that enlarging the Security Council to
reflect contemporary geopolitical realities would
improve its representative character. It would also
increase the representation of developing countries —
which comprise the vast majority of the United Nations
membership — who are ready, capable and willing to
shoulder responsibility and contribute through all
required means to the maintenance of international
peace and security. Thirdly, there is need for real
improvement in the Council’s working methods to
enhance its legitimacy, effectiveness and efficiency.
Cosmetic changes will not help. Real improvements
demand change in both process and approach, which
requires reform of the composition of the Council.

11-61237

S/PV.6672

Insofar as the working methods of the Security
Council are concerned, the first and foremost necessity
is to make them transparent. Access to documentation
and information is an issue of particular concern. The
tendency of the Security Council to hold closed
meetings that have no records should also be curbed.
We then have the issue of “pen holders”. Quite
apart from the fact that it takes quite a while to
understand what the concept of a pen holder is and
which member is holding which pen for which issue, it
is difficult to understand why pen holding should
basically be a monopoly of permanent members, with
concentration in even fewer fingers.
The quality of briefings that we receive often
gives rise to questions of their being skewed and not
really neutral, objective and based on observed facts. I
also find it strange that reporting of the Council’s
proceedings tends to be judgmental. For example, on
both occasions during our term on the Council when
vetoes were exercised, the Department of Public
Information reports used the expression “failed to
adopt” to describe what transpired.
Based on our experience during the past 11
months, I would like to suggest some specific points
for consideration. First, the Council should amend its
procedures so that items do not remain on its agenda
permanently. There are matters that have been
discussed for decades. In such cases, further attention
should require that some valid reasons be proffered by
those seeking retention of those items on the agenda.
Second, the Council’s consideration of issues should be
rationalized, so that issues do not come for
consideration so often and routinely as to bog down the
limited time that the Council has at its disposal.
Third, Articles 31 and 32 of the Charter must be
fully implemented, by consulting with non-Security
Council members on a regular basis, especially
Members with a special interest in the substantive
matter under consideration by the Council. Fourth,
non-members must be given systematic access to
subordinate organs of the Security Council, including
the right to participate. Fifth, the participation of troopand police-contributing countries in decision-making
about peacekeeping operations must extend to the
establishment, conduct, review and termination of
peacekeeping operations, including the extension and
change of mandates and specific operational issues.

11-61237

Sixth, countries having a specific interest in a
particular agenda item must be consulted before an
outcome document on that item is adopted. Seventh,
the Council should concentrate its time and efforts on
dealing with issues concerning its primary
responsibility for international peace and security as
mandated by the Charter, rather than encroaching on
the mandate of the General Assembly. Eighth, before
mandating measures under Chapter VII of the Charter,
the Council should first make serious efforts at pacific
settlement of disputes through measures under Chapter
VI. In that connection, the Council must also improve
its cooperation with regional organizations, particularly
with the African Union, since a large volume of the
Council’s work concerns the African continent. Such
cooperation must be serious and include providing
assistance to the African Union in its capacity-building
efforts as per their requirement and not just when it is
convenient or fashionable.
In conclusion, let me reiterate the considered
view of my delegation that genuine reform in the
working methods of the Council really requires a
comprehensive reform in the membership of the
Council, with expansion in both permanent and
non-permanent categories and improvement in its
working procedures. This is essential for both the
credibility and the continued confidence of the
international community in this institution.
Mr. Yang Tao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank the Portuguese presidency for the
initiative to hold this open debate on the working
methods of the Security Council. It will not only help
Council members to engage in in-depth consideration
and discussion of the working methods but will also
help them to hear the opinions of others, particularly
those of the developing countries, which make up the
majority of the United Nations membership. We have
listened carefully to previous speakers, including the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We wish to
express our appreciation to Bosnia and Herzegovina
for its contribution as Chair of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions.
In recent years the Security Council has held
several open debates on its working methods. China
has always valued and supported improving the
working methods of the Council so as to enhance its
transparency and efficiency so that it can better carry
out its work in accordance with the United Nations

13

S/PV.6672

Charter and the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure and to better implement its primary Chartermandated responsibility of maintaining international
peace and security.
The Security Council has made many efforts to
improve its working methods, including, among others,
using the format of public meetings as much as
possible and the regular briefings for non-members of
the Council by the rotating Council presidency on the
monthly schedule of work. Innovative methods such as
informal interactive dialogue have given Council
members opportunities to exchange opinions with
regard to sensitive situations on the Council’s agenda
with countries involved. The Council has also
improved its annual report submitted to the General
Assembly.
On the other hand, there is still room for
improvement of the Council’s working methods. The
2010 note by the President of the Security Council
(S/2010/507) should therefore be further implemented.
The Security Council and various other United
Nations organs should carry out their work in
accordance with the division of labour, their
comparative advantages and the demands of the United
Nations Charter in an integrated and coordinated
manner that results in synergy instead of duplication of
efforts, controversy and waste of resources. The
Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council should maintain
communication through their Presidents.
China supports the Security Council providing to
countries involved in situations on the Council’s
agenda more opportunities to present their positions
and opinions. We also hope that mechanisms such as
the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations and
the meetings of the troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) will be better used to strengthen interaction
among the Security Council, the TCCs and the
Secretariat in carrying out preventive diplomacy and in
the peaceful resolution of conflicts. The Council
should encourage and support regional organizations
such as the African Union and the League of Arab
States and hear their opinions better before making a
decision.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to begin by thanking Portugal for calling for
today’s debate. Ensuring that the Security Council
adopts the most efficient working methods is essential

14

to the continuing effectiveness of this body. The
Council has a responsibility to ensure that it is
equipped to deal with all matters of international peace
and security as effectively as possible. The United
Kingdom treats this obligation seriously and fully
supports the ongoing process to seek out new ways to
improve efficiency, transparency and effectiveness.
The United Kingdom has made some important
contributions to this process over the last year, in
particular those aimed at strengthening its focus on
conflict prevention. I am pleased that we have helped
to embed the horizon-scanning sessions into the
Council’s programme of work as a regular item. The
United Kingdom has promoted more informal sessions
to stimulate debate on various challenges facing the
United Nations, particularly around peacekeeping.
We have also made more use during our
presidency of video technology to get real-time updates
from the various front lines where the United Nations
operates. We are pleased that that has now become
standard practice. Several special representatives have
themselves commented to us that they welcome the
fact that they can now keep the Council informed and
updated without having to take days out of their
schedule to travel to New York. We are also
encouraging more opportunities for the Council to hear
expert and specialized advice, for instance from the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Military Staff
Committee.
We should continue to support those practices and
find new ways in which to evolve and adapt. If we see
something that does not work as well as it could, we
should not be afraid of addressing it. And if we see an
opportunity to make a positive change to how we work,
we should consider how best to embrace it. We should
continue, for instance, to welcome more ways to
increase the transparency of the Council, provided that
this is balanced against the need for it to work
effectively. We support more open sessions with
different formats, such as Arria-style, or informal,
briefings if that helps to increase understanding,
awareness and debate.
The Council should always be on the lookout to
find new ways of opening up its work to non-members.
We should also be ready to fully use existing
opportunities to demonstrate the openness and
transparency of our operations. We very much regret,
for example, the fact that the position of some Council

11-61237

S/PV.6672

members prevents the wider circulation of reports from
panels of experts working for the Council’s subsidiary
bodies. Experts’ reports should be published as a
matter of course.
Equally, however, we should be clear that many
discussions must be held without record, behind closed
doors, among the 15 members of the Council. To
suggest otherwise is not serious.
The Security Council’s dialogue with regional
bodies needs to continue and to become more strategic.
Regional organizations can bring added value to the
Council’s deliberations with local knowledge and
expertise, as has been shown this year in the Council’s
interactions with the Arab League and the African
Union.
It is also important that the Council is flexible
when considering how new technology can aid our
work. Social media networks have played a significant
role in some of the momentous events in the Middle
East in the past year, including in Libya, Egypt and
Syria. These networks spread news, pictures and ideas
directly into society at a speed unimaginable even just
a few years ago. The situations develop quite literally
before our eyes, and the Council needs to consider how
that affects our ability to stay on the front foot.
Ensuring a robust online digital presence, including by
supporting live broadcasts of Council meetings on the
Internet, is part of the answer. Using videoconference
technology more regularly to get on-the-ground
assessments also helps in this regard.
But we must all be ready to accept that the
Council may need to address issues more quickly and
act faster. Twenty-four-hour news coverage, social
media networks and the ubiquity of mobile telephones
mean that “wait and see” will become a less and less
acceptable position if the Security Council is to remain
at the forefront of international efforts to maintain
peace and security. This is an ongoing process. The
Security Council needs to be prepared to evolve
continually if it is to operate as effectively and
transparently as possible.
In closing, I would like to reaffirm the United
Kingdom’s commitment to participate in this important
process.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important open debate on working
methods of the Security Council. Brazil has long been

11-61237

supportive of improvements in working methods that
make the Council more transparent, inclusive and
accessible. As a Council member, we have remained
attentive and responsive to the needs and interests of
the wider membership.
Brazil supported and welcomed the adoption last
year of the revised presidential note 507 (S/2010/507),
in particular the intention expressed by members to
maintain regular interaction with the Peacebuilding
Commission and to enhance dialogue with troopcontributing countries, the reference to the increasing
use of informal interactive dialogue by the Council in
recent years, and the new section on planning and
reporting for Security Council missions. Under the
chairmanship of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions has been looking into ways to
enhance the Council’s transparency, accountability and
efficiency. Such efforts can greatly benefit from further
interaction and dialogue with the wider membership.
Last February, during our presidency of the
Security Council, Brazil made a conscious effort to
involve every member of the Council in its
deliberations and keep them constantly informed of
developments, so as to help build unity of purpose. We
also sought to keep in close contact with all parties
directly concerned with the issues of which the Council
was seized.
At the end of the month, Brazil organized a
briefing for non-members of the Council to exchange
views on issues covered during the month, the first of
that kind since 2005.
It is essential that non-members have the
opportunity to be heard and have their views duly
taken into account and, therefore, to legitimately
influence the decisions especially relevant to them. The
more the Security Council moves in that direction, the
more it will observe the letter and spirit of the Charter.
Enhancing the Council’s outreach to non-members will
greatly contribute to strengthening its credibility and
increase the effectiveness of its decisions, especially
concerning the implementation of resolutions by all
Member States.
As suggested in the concept note (S/2011/726,
annex), I would like to point out some concrete
measures designed to further improve the working
methods of the Security Council.

15

S/PV.6672

We fully agree that the Council should strengthen
the trend of meeting more often in public. In fact, it
should meet in public as a general rule, without
prejudice to the usefulness of consultations of the
whole in preparing Council decisions. Private meetings
should be reserved for exceptional circumstances. Even
some traditionally private meetings could be turned
into public sessions. A clear example is the annual
briefing by the President of the International Court of
Justice. As suggested by the President of the Court, the
interaction between the Council and the Court should
be more frequent. Both organs stand to benefit from a
more regular exchange of information on the work
being carried out, without prejudice to their
independence and the specific nature of each body.
On the relationship between the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), more
should be done to make full use of the advisory role of
the Commission. The Chairs of the PBC countryspecific configurations should be invited to participate
in relevant consultations as often as possible.
We also believe that it would be useful for the
functioning of the Council and its overall legitimacy if
it adopted the practice of consulting with non-members
on a regular basis, especially members with a special
interest in the substantive matter under consideration
by the Security Council and holding frequent, timely
and qualitative briefings for non-members, even
granting non-members access to the subsidiary bodies
of the Council, including the right to participate, as
appropriate.
In regard to accountability, I would like to
highlight the importance of enhanced procedures that
could help to monitor and assess the manner in which
the resolutions adopted by the Council are interpreted
and implemented, in particular those that authorize the
use of force. Brazil raised that point during the open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
earlier this month (see S/PV.6650). When the use of
force is authorized by the Council, the Member States
or organizations entrusted with that responsibility are
accountable to the Council and to the broader
membership. We believe that an in-depth discussion on
objective parameters is needed in order to ensure such
accountability. There is a need to enhance the
Council’s procedures so as to ensure that the
implementation of resolutions involving the use of
force does not raise doubts regarding the objectives of
the action to be taken. The way in which resolutions

16

are implemented should be a matter for consideration
by the Council itself.
In that context, reports on military operations
should be required and should include such parameters
as proportionality and the fit between the measures
taken and the goals to be achieved. We invite Member
States to further reflect on and discuss the benefit of
specific mechanisms to follow up on the
implementation of mandates, for the purposes of
monitoring and assessment and reporting to the
Security Council during the course of military action
so that the duties of accountability are fulfilled.
To conclude, Mr. President, it must be noted that
some of the shortcomings in the Security Council’s
working methods cannot be entirely corrected without
real reform, including changes in the Council’s current
power structure. In order for the Council to be aligned
with the current political realities, it should be enlarged
in the permanent and non-permanent categories of
membership, with increased representation of
developing countries in both. We remain convinced
that such comprehensive reform would enable the
Council to make a fresh start and would ultimately give
rise to new and improved dynamics in its daily work.
May I stress that Brazil will continue to work —
inside and outside the Security Council — towards
effective improvements in its working methods, with a
view to making the Council more transparent, inclusive
and accessible.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): The
United States appreciates the commitment of Portugal
to improving the working methods of the Security
Council, as shown by your initiative, Mr. President, in
convening this fourth open debate on the topic.
Additionally, we recognize Ambassador Ivan
Barbalić of Bosnia and Herzegovina for his work as
Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, and
the excellent management of those issues by the
Bosnian Mission.
Our discussions of the working methods of the
Council are important in order to ensure that the
Council remains able to address the challenges of the
twenty-first century. Acting on behalf of the
membership of the United Nations, the Council bears
the primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security. It is essential that, in carrying out

11-61237

S/PV.6672

this role, its work be as effective, efficient and
transparent as possible. Article 30 of the Charter
mandates the Council to adopt its own rules of
procedure. In doing so, the Council recognizes the
need for other United Nations Members who are our
partners in the maintenance of international peace and
security to be informed of and appropriately involved
in the work of the Council.
To that end, the Council some years ago
revitalized its Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions. Our
discussion today builds upon the Group’s extensive
work and the recommendations outlined in the annex to
note by the President of the Security Council contained
in document S/2006/507. In that regard, we would like,
once again, to thank Japan for its efforts to develop
updates to that note.
We should bear in mind the steps taken thus far
by the Council to implement those recommendations.
With respect to transparency, Council Presidents brief
non-Council members shortly after the adoption of the
programme of work each month. Each Council
President further prepares a published assessment of its
month-long term, thereby expanding the information
available to all Member States on the problems facing
the Council and how those problems have been
addressed.
The Council has increased its interaction with
non-Council members by holding open debates and
informal discussions. We are encouraged by the
growing number of Member States that choose to
participate in open meetings, such as today’s, and look
forward to subsequent open sessions on a range of
issues that are relevant to the Council’s agenda.
The Council has further welcomed the Chairs of
the various country-specific configurations of the
Peacebuilding Commission, inviting them to
participate in Council deliberations. The subsidiary
bodies of the Council, such as the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, have held more open meetings, and
sanctions committee Chairs have organized more open
briefings for the broader United Nations membership
to discuss sanctions regime objectives and committee
activities. Sanctions committees have also invited
representatives of Member States to brief them on
issues of mutual concern, and we encourage interested
Member States to pursue such opportunities.

11-61237

Troop-contributing countries play a critical role
in the development of peacekeeping operations. The
Council has sought to increase the role that troopcontributing countries play in discussions of the
mandates of missions to which they contribute. To
highlight the importance that the United States assigns
to troop-contributing countries, President Obama met
with top contributors in September 2009 to hear their
perspective on ways to improve United Nations
peacekeeping.
The Council has also increased its interaction
with non-Council members through informal
processes, such as groups of friends. The Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security, for instance,
informs the Council’s actions through inclusive and
transparent dialogue between Council and non-Council
members.
Making the work of the Council more efficient
requires constant effort. In that regard, we all face the
challenge of balancing the substance with the length of
our remarks. All of us, Council members and
non-Council members alike, should aim to convey our
message succinctly, so that as many Member States as
possible can speak with the many other States that are
present to hear them.
Today’s debate offers members the opportunity to
share views on whether the practical applications of the
innovations listed in the 507 note have helped them to
better follow and participate in the Council’s work. The
United States welcomes constructive comments that
will inform future efforts of the Working Group and
allow it to assess the effectiveness of measures to
enhance transparency, dialogue and efficiency. We look
forward to continued discussions on those issues and
thank the Portuguese presidency once again for this
initiative.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes in
order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
(spoke in Spanish): I give
representative of Guatemala.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow us to thank you, Mr. President, for convening

17

S/PV.6672

this open debate on the working methods of the
Security Council and for the lucid concept note that has
been circulated. We hope that this debate will renew
our commitment to making further progress in
improving the efficiency and transparency of the
Security Council.
Our delegation associates itself fully with the
statement to be made by the representative of Egypt,
who will speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, and we also support the statement to be
made by, and the proposals to be submitted by, the
group of five small nations (S-5), with which we
traditionally identify ourselves. From a national
perspective, we will make just a few brief comments.
We take this opportunity to recognize the
significant advances and improvements in some
practices and new measures, which were reflected in
the 507 note. Along those lines, the unusual detail
provided in the report of the Security Council for the
period 1 August 2010 to 31 July 2011 (A/66/2),
especially in its introduction highlighting some of that
progress, is commendable. However, we think that
there is still ample room for improvements. In that
regard, we would like to highlight some of the
practices that we feel should be improved or
implemented more consistently.
First, we attach importance to the interaction with
the broader membership through briefings, not only at
the beginning of each presidency, but also at the
conclusion thereof. It seems a very timely and useful
practice, which we see as a voluntary exercise in
accountability. We recognize, in that regard, the
initiative taken by Brazil, which has, unfortunately, not
been replicated by other members of the Council.
Secondly, we believe it is important to continue
improving the interaction between the Chairs of the
Committees and Working Groups and all Member
States. In particular, it seems necessary to us to
develop a mechanism of interaction with those member
States that will assume the chairmanships, especially
with those entering for the first time as members of the
Council, and to allow them, if not the opportunity to
express their preferences, at least the possibility of
better preparing for the role and work being assigned to
them.
Thirdly, we also consider it appropriate to
emphasize the importance of the interaction between
Council members and their respective regional groups.

18

I refer specifically to our experience in the Latin
American and Caribbean Group, where we consistently
receive a monthly report of the activities of the Council
during the course of each month. I take this
opportunity to thank the delegations of Brazil and
Colombia, which have kept us constantly informed this
year. Of course, we would like to see the reports
become more candid, especially because they are often
restricted to an account of the meetings and decisions
adopted by the Council without going into detail as to
the most interesting aspects of why one or another
action was adopted by the Council.
A fourth and final aspect that we would like to
highlight is that of the rationalization of the
programme of work. We are pleased to see the progress
in the disclosure of the programme of work and its
availability. However, we consider it possible to
improve on the Council’s allocation of time to its
routine work, allowing greater availability for conflict
prevention and resolution. Along those lines, the
rationalization of the Council’s agenda is also still a
work in progress; despite the progress made in
establishing a procedure for the elimination of items,
there have been few concrete results.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, in my personal capacity, I would like to
express my pleasure in seeing you preside over the
Security Council and also in seeing someone wearing a
bowtie as President of the Council.
I have the honour of speaking on behalf of the
group of five small nations (S-5), comprising Costa
Rica,
Jordan,
Liechtenstein,
Singapore
and
Switzerland, and I would like to thank Portugal, not
only for the timely organization of the fourth debate on
this important matter, but also for Portugal’s overall
commitment to this relevant topic, namely, the working
methods of the Security Council. The S 5 appreciates
this opportunity to engage in a dialogue with the
Council, as we believe that decisions on behalf of the
membership of the United Nations are more effective
when they are taken in a transparent, inclusive and
accountable manner.
Let us imagine for a moment that we were sitting
here some decades ago, for example in 1950,
discussing action during the war on the Korean
peninsula, or in 1960, sending the first peacekeepers to

11-61237

S/PV.6672

the Congo, or in 1966, taking decisions on the first set
of binding sanctions against Rhodesia. Let us try to
imagine not only how differently the world was shaped
at that time and how differently Council members may
have been interacting, but in particular how radically
different the way of working must have been back in
the 1950s and 1960s. At that time, as was noted by the
representative of the United Kingdom, there were no
computers, no mobile telephones, no rapid reporting by
our embassies during a given crisis. Nor did we receive
media alerts or images from a remote part of the world
after a massacre had been committed. Our predecessors
had to make strenuous efforts to find reliable
information and await instructions from capitals by
cable before they could use their room for negotiations.
I assume no one in this room would deny that
technological progress has had a huge impact on our
working
methods.
The
new
proximity,
interconnectivity and extremely fast flow of
information in and out of this Chamber have, on the
one hand, increased pressure on the Council, pushing it
to take rapid, legitimate and effective actions, and, on
the other, increased the stakes in handling information
responsibly.
In addition, the Council has become increasingly
more active over the decades. There have never been
so many sanction regimes, United Nations operations
in the field or other Council mechanisms as there are
today. Our predecessors had fewer items on their
agenda to monitor or Council decisions to implement.
It was therefore easier to track the Council’s
work, whether as a member or as a non-member of the
Council. Therefore, while the main tasks of the
Security Council as set forth in the United Nations
Charter under Articles 1 and 24 have remained the
same, the ways of performing those tasks and the
consequences of a given decision have dramatically
changed.
The Council is still working either under the
provisional rules of procedure prepared in 1946 for the
first meeting after its creation — which were last
updated in 1982 — or is following informal traditions.
The Council will agree when I say that these rules of
procedure are neither adequate nor adapted to the needs
of today.
In 2005, the World Summit — in line with Article
10 of the United Nations Charter, which clearly
mandates
the
General
Assembly
to
make

11-61237

recommendations, including to the Security Council —
reflected in its Outcome (General Assembly resolution
60/1) the need for far-reaching measures to achieve the
goals of legitimacy, transparency and accountability.
The S-5 group was formed for the sole purpose of
contributing to the improvement of the working
methods of the Security Council.
In 2006, we presented to the General Assembly a
draft resolution with a set of recommendations
(A/60/L.49). The Council reacted with presidential
note S/2006/507, which was an important step in
Council working methods. The S-5 also welcomed the
update of note 507 in 2010 (S/2010/507). We commend
Japan, Bosnia and Herzegovina and all the other
members of the Council involved for their invaluable
contribution to improving the working methods in
recent years.
However,
the
implementation
of
the
recommendations in note 507 has been inconsistent.
While commending the Council for the progress
achieved so far, the S-5 group continues to argue for
improvement in their implementation. We therefore
call for the adoption of an action plan to implement the
recommendations in note 507. The Council’s Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions could be mandated with this task
and could regularly report to the Council and the wider
membership of the United Nations on progress in its
work, including in the analytical part of the Council’s
annual report.
The S-5 also considers that complementary
measures are needed to enable the Council to enhance
its authority and effectiveness and to be more
responsive to the United Nations membership as a
whole. There is considerable agreement among
Member States that the Security Council must improve
its working methods. That agreement transcends the
various interest groups with regard to the enlargement
of the Council and forms a large common denominator.
This is why a few months ago the S-5 group
presented a new draft resolution with concrete,
pragmatic and easily implementable proposals. In this
resolution, we suggest measures to enhance the
implementation of note 507, and we propose further
measures. The draft resolution is attached to my
written intervention. This text, on which we have
consulted with the membership as a whole, has met

19

S/PV.6672

with considerable support. Let me highlight some of
the proposals.
First, as chair of a country-specific configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, I appreciate that the
chairs are invited to the relevant Council debates. I
support statements by France and the United Kingdom,
among others, favouring stronger interaction between
the Council and the Commission. I encourage the
Council to take a step further and invite chairs to
informal consultations as well, as my colleague the
representative of Brazil proposed earlier. And more
generally, peacebuilding considerations should be
integrated at all levels of the Council’s work.
Secondly, with its composition in 2012, the
Council will have unique expertise in peacekeeping.
We therefore encourage it to continue to improve the
drafting of mandates and to articulate clear goals for
new operations, taking into account the needs on the
ground as expressed by the relevant stakeholders,
including non-State actors. The Council should
strengthen its cooperation with troop- and policecontributing countries. And the Council should review
progress on the basis of clear criteria and, at the end of
each mandate, draw the lessons learned from the
experience.
Desiring to make its contribution, Switzerland
commissioned from the Center on International
Cooperation a study of working methods of the
Council in the case of the United Nations Mission in
the Central African Republic and Chad. Advance
copies are available outside the Chamber. A discussion
of the findings will be organized soon.
Thirdly and lastly, the designation of the chairs of
subsidiary bodies by the five permanent members only,
and of the elected members only, is an anachronism.
Likewise, the practice of the P-5 taking the lead on
nearly all country-specific resolutions is outdated. We
encourage the P-5 to revisit these practices. Given the
complexity of today’s world, the Council should make
the best use of the expertise of each of its members.
The S-5 group takes note of the position of the
P-5 that improving the working methods is a matter for
the Security Council only. If the Council wants to be
solely responsible for its working methods, it should
act accordingly by improving them soon.
The S-5 group has always taken a constructive
approach and will continue to do so. We are ready to

20

work hand in hand with the Council to improve
openness and transparency. That is why we call upon
the Council to take up our proposals and to relaunch
the process for improvement. If there is no action, calls
for reform by the wider membership will become more
pressing. That would put at risk the relevance of the
most important organ for ensuring peace and security
in the world.
In closing, I wish to recall the commitment of the
S-5 group to the cause of improving the working
methods and to stress its constructive approach. The
group is ready to embark on an institutionalized
dialogue with the Security Council on implementing
note 507 and on any other improvement in its working
methods along the lines that the S-5 set out in its draft
resolution. We expect the Council to react promptly,
openly and constructively to our ideas. The S-5 will
remain seized of this matter.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): At the outset, allow me to
express my deep gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
your initiative, which includes convening today’s open
debate on the working methods of the Security
Council — an issue on which Japan places great
importance — and holding a separate and in-depth
discussion in the General Assembly earlier this month
on the annual report of the Security Council. We also
acknowledge the work of Ambassador Barbalić,
Permanent Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
for his contribution in his capacity as Chairperson of
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions.
The discussion on working methods is crucial to
ensuring prompt and effective action on the part of the
Council for the maintenance of international peace and
security and to securing the support of the wider
United Nations membership in the implementation of
Council decisions. Continuous attention and effort,
such as the better use and implementation of
presidential note 507 as revised last year (S/2010/507),
are vital to achieving improvement in the working
methods.
The issue of working methods is also important in
the context of Security Council reform. The
intergovernmental negotiations on Security Council
reform have identified working methods as one of the
five key issues for reform. Achieving real progress in

11-61237

S/PV.6672

this area will require continuing and sincere efforts on
the part of the Council as well as initiatives led by
Member States. In this connection, we highly
appreciate the dedication shown by the S-5 group.
We recognize that the Security Council has been
engaged in an effort to increase transparency and has
made some significant progress in that regard, as
reflected in its more frequent interaction with
non-Council members. It has also shown some success
in improving efficiency. For example, the programme
of work is briefed by the presidency to non-Council
members at the beginning of each month and is readily
available on the Council website. In its interaction with
non-Council members, the Council has not only
engaged in dialogues with relevant parties such as
troop- and police-contributing countries and the
Peacebuilding Commission but has also made use of
informal interactive discussions. Such improvements
are duly reflected in the revised note 507.
Furthermore, under Japan’s initiative, a
comprehensive Handbook on the Working Methods of
the Security Council, commonly referred to as the
“green book”, was compiled to assist newly elected
members of the Council, as well as the wider
membership, in gaining an understanding of the
workings of the Security Council. I am delighted to
announce that the handbook is now available as a
publication of the United Nations. It can now be
purchased for $12 at the United Nations bookstore or
online at amazon.com. Incidentally, the colour is no
longer green, but white and blue.
We also listened with keen interest to your
presentation, Mr. President, at the General Assembly,
which described recent efforts in the Council to
improve its internal efficiency, and commend members
of the Council on such undertakings.
While it is important to acknowledge the progress
made to date, we must continue our efforts to improve
the working methods. More specifically, the
improvements that we hope to see include
improvement of the monthly assessments by the
President on the work of the Council through
summaries of major discussions. That will help the
creation of a more substantive annual report.
It is also critical to acknowledge that
effectiveness is not antithetical to openness. The
Security Council must recognize that interaction with
concerned parties is necessary in order for the Council

11-61237

to take prompt and effective actions. In that context,
we note that progress in improvement of the Council’s
working methods cannot be achieved without the
cooperation of the permanent members. Needless to
say, a periodic review of progress is necessary, and,
with help from existing and newly elected members,
we hope for continued engagement on that issue in the
coming years.
In conclusion, the participation of many
non-Council members in today’s meeting testifies to
the fact that the working methods remain a critical
issue. We appreciate the work of countries that have
helped promote the issue from both inside and outside,
such as the S-5 and Portugal. Japan will also maintain
its engagement in this very important issue in order to
promote continuous improvement in the working
methods of the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Jordan.
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan): I,
too, would like to thank you, Mr. President, most
warmly for having convened a meeting devoted to
working methods of the Security Council, I also wish
to congratulate you on your distinguished leadership in
presiding over the work of the Council for this month.
Placing yourself at the end of today’s list of speakers is
a gracious gesture that is deeply appreciated.
I wish to use my following intervention in this
thematic debate not to repeat what the Permanent
Representative of Switzerland has offered in the way of
thoughts governing the position of the group of five
small nations (S-5), which, naturally, we support fully,
but to focus on the two paragraphs 18 and 19 of the S-5
draft resolution, which cover the use, or threat of use,
of the veto. I will attempt to explain why we have
inserted them into our draft resolution, given that they
are of direct relevance to the work of the Security
Council and, in particular, to the permanent members.
The Security Council derives its rights and
obligations from the United Nations Charter. Its
functions and powers are spelled out broadly in Article
24 of the Charter, including, inter alia, its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security and its obligation to act in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter in the discharge of its
functions.

21

S/PV.6672

While Article 24, paragraph 1, appears to be clear
in its ordinary meaning, over the past 65 years, our
predecessors have argued — and often — over whether
or not “primary” is equal in meaning to “exclusive”.
That discussion has not found consensus between the
permanent members and the rest of the membership,
and I will not dwell on it today. What was also missing
in our previous discussions was a common
understanding over the ordinary meaning of the word
“responsibility”, which has, unfortunately, been
regarded by some as conferring rights, without due
regard being equally paid to the implied duties flowing
from that responsibility.
What I would, therefore, like to fix our attention
on today is the next paragraph in Article 24 —
paragraph 2. I would also like to invite members to
read that important provision together with Article 1,
paragraph 1, which we believe we are required to
undertake for a correct reading of the Charter.
Article 24, paragraph 2, states:
“In discharging these duties the Security
Council shall act in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the United Nations”.
It reads “shall act”. It does not read may act, or should
act. It reads “shall act”. In other words, there is no
discretion here. What we find instead is an obligation.
It is also worth noting that, like Article 24, paragraph
2, the Council’s powers pursuant to Chapter VII, set
out in Article 39, are similarly couched in obligatory
language:
shall
determine
and
shall
make
recommendations, or decide.
The second part of paragraph 2 of Article 24 then
explains where, in the relevant chapters of the Charter,
the specific powers of the Council are laid down, and
yet all of it rests — must rest, as I noted a few minutes
ago — on the purposes and principles of the United
Nations.
Among the purposes of the United Nations, as
defined in Chapter I, Article 1, of the Charter, and of
greatest relevance to the responsibility of the Security
Council and our discussion today is the purpose
elaborated in the first paragraph of Article 1, which
reads:
“To maintain international peace and
security, and to that end: to take effective
collective measures for the prevention and
removal of threats to the peace, and for the

22

suppression of acts of aggression or other
breaches of the peace, and to bring about by
peaceful means, and in conformity with the
principles of justice and international law”.
That last phrase “and in conformity with the principles
of justice and international law” was inserted by
Senator Arthur Vandenberg of the United States, on
2 May 1945, and accepted immediately by the “Big
Four”, and, subsequently, by the rest of the
representatives in San Francisco, without argument and
by consensus.
So, when considered together, Article 24,
paragraph 2, and Article 1, paragraph 1, in very
abbreviated form, read: in discharging its duties the
Council shall act in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter and,
therefore — my addition — in conformity with the
principles of justice and international law.
Now, we must understand two issues. The Charter
confers those powers on the whole Council and does
not specify what each individual member of the
Council should do. That much is undeniable. If,
however, the use or threat of use of a veto by a
permanent member prevents the Council, by virtue of
the majority required in Article 27, paragraph 3, from
acting to deter, prevent or dismantle alleged serious
violations of the sort that not only threaten
international peace and security, but also create an
obligation erga omnes on all Member States to address
it, the question arises as to whether that exercise by
one permanent member subverts the Council’s ability
to fulfil its responsibilities under Article 24 and to
uphold the principles of justice and international law,
in accordance with Article 1, paragraph 1.
Should we continue, therefore, to read Article 27,
paragraph 3, in a manner in which it effectively
eclipses the purposes of the United Nations and the
responsibilities of the Security Council? Are we not
entitled, or even obliged, to look towards an
understanding that reconciles those provisions?
We may be able to continue as we are when
dealing with lesser crimes but, when faced with the
worst systematic abominations of human cruelty that
often threaten international peace and security, such
questions become increasingly difficult to ignore, for
there is little that is common between normal
criminality and the outer extremity of human
misconduct.

11-61237

S/PV.6672

I would ask the Council to consider, for example,
the description provided by the Nuremberg Tribunal in
its 1947 judgment, following the main proceedings
prosecuted by Ben Ferencz in the trial of the
Einsatzgruppen. The Tribunal found:
“If what the Prosecution maintains is true, we
have here participation in a crime of such
unprecedented
brutality
and
of
such
inconceivable savagery that the mind rebels
against its own thought image and the
imagination staggers in the contemplation of a
human degradation beyond the power of language
to adequately portray.”
And this is the second point we need to
understand. However we interpret the principles of
justice, when there are serious allegations of crimes
being committed — crimes of a gravity approximating
the description found in the aforementioned judgment,
and which threaten international peace and security —
any member of the Council, and particularly if it is a
permanent member, voting against measures otherwise
agreed upon by a majority of the Security Council
should at least explain how its position is consistent
with the Charter — that is, with the purposes and
principles of justice — and international law.
The S-5 is aware of the foundational and historic
role played by the permanent members. Whatever we
may say about some of the Council’s performances in
the past, the permanent members must be given due
credit for having prevented, in a nuclear age, the
recurrence of the sort of war that devastated very large
portions of the Earth twice in the twentieth century.
And we are not calling, as the S-5, for a Charter
amendment to have the veto abolished or even
restricted. The veto does have an important role. But
that role should now be reconciled with Articles 24 (2)
and 1 (1) — Articles that should no longer simply be
overlooked. And this could best be achieved through
the forging of a new understanding.
We therefore suggest to the permanent members,
and we do so most respectfully, to consider refraining,
voluntarily, from the use or threat of use of the veto
altogether in situations where there are serious
allegations of genocide, crimes against humanity and
grave breaches of international humanitarian law. The
S-5, in offering the content of paragraphs 18 and 19 of
its draft resolution, to be presented in due course to the
General Assembly pending final consultations, is

11-61237

basing these recommendations on the right accorded to
the General Assembly under Article 10 of the United
Nations Charter.
The President: I
representative of Egypt.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the pleasure to
speak today on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM). At the outset, I would like to convey the
Movement’s appreciation to the Portuguese presidency
of the Security Council — and to you personally,
Ambassador Moraes Cabral — for having convened
this important open debate to discuss the progress
achieved in the implementation of the measures set out
in the note by the President of the Security Council of
26 July 2010 (S/2010/507), and the related concept
paper (S/2011/726, annex) to direct the discussions
towards enhancing the transparency and efficiency of
the work of the Security Council in order to meet the
expectations of the general membership of the United
Nations.
I would like also to seize this opportunity to
congratulate
Azerbaijan,
Guatemala,
Morocco,
Pakistan and Togo — members of the Movement — on
their election as non-permanent members of the
Security Council for the years 2012-2013, and to thank
the outgoing members Gabon, Lebanon and Nigeria for
all their efforts in support of NAM principled
positions.
Without prejudice to the interlinkage between
Security council reform and improving its working
methods, as the latter represents a component of the
overall reform of the Council pursuant to General
Assembly
decision
62/557, the Non-Aligned
Movement attaches great importance to the issue of
improving the working methods of the Security
Council, as reflected in its long-standing position
reiterated in the relevant paragraphs of the Bali Final
Document (see S/2011/407), adopted by the sixteenth
NAM Ministerial Conference held in Bali, Indonesia,
in May 2011.
The Non-Aligned Movement appreciates the
work of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, and
the efforts of its Chair, Bosnia and Herzegovina. NAM
stresses the importance of further enhancing its key
role in improving the working methods of the Security
Council, taking into due consideration the positions of
the larger membership of the Organization, particularly

23

S/PV.6672

during the annual General Assembly debate on the
report. In this regard, the Movement expects that the
upcoming annual reports of the Security Council to the
General Assembly shall reflect in detail the activities
of the working Group and the conclusions of its
deliberations, including the steps taken to promote the
full implementation of presidential note S/2010/507
and any other future notes, in order to properly analyse
and assess what has been achieved and what needs to
be done.
NAM welcomes the steps taken by the Security
Council, pursuant to note 507, in publishing its updated
programme of work and the tentative forecast on the
Council’s website in a timely manner, and also
appreciates the practice of several Presidents of the
Security Council of briefing the wider membership
about the monthly programme of work following its
adoption by the Council at the beginning of each
month, and in this regard looks forward to that practice
being complemented by the holding of informal wrapup sessions at the end of each presidency to evaluate
what has been achieved.
In relation to this issue, the Movement welcomes
the personal initiative of some Presidents of the
Security Council in preparing a comprehensive and
analytical assessment of the work of the Council under
their presidency. This positive trend, when
institutionalized, will definitely provide a more
coherent account of how the work of the Security
Council evolves each month in dealing with issues on
its agenda. Therefore, those monthly assessments
should include cases in which the Council has failed to
act, including the reasons for the resort to veto, and the
views expressed by its members during the
deliberations on the agenda items under its
consideration.
Furthermore, the assessments and the annual
report should elaborate the circumstances under which
the Council adopts different outcomes, be they
resolutions, presidential statements, press statements or
elements to the press. It is imperative that the General
Assembly be aware not only of the decisions adopted
by the Council, but also of the rationale, reasons and
backgrounds of those decisions, as well as the
effectiveness and impact of those decisions on the
situation on the ground.
With regard to the Security Council’s annual
report, the Movement welcomes as a step forward the

24

informal meetings between the July presidencies of the
Council and the wider membership on the preparation
of the annual report, which contribute to enhancing the
quality of those reports, which still need to be more
comprehensive and analytical. It would be relevant to
benefit from the input of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation in the preparation of the annual
reports. At the same time, the Security Council should
submit, pursuant to Articles 15 (1) and 24 (3) of the
United Nations Charter, special reports for the
consideration of the General Assembly.
The Movement notes the increase in the number
of public meetings, and expects that the quantitative
increase of those meetings shall be associated with a
qualitative improvement through the provision of real
opportunities and more meaningful exchanges of view
to take into account the contributions of non-Council
members, particularly those whose interests are or may
be directly affected by possible decisions of the
Council. Furthermore, statements or comments should
not be restricted to Council members after briefings by
the Secretariat or the Special Envoys and
Representatives of the Secretary-General; the
concerned party should be given the opportunity to
express its views and position on such briefings. The
general observations and positions formulated by
numerous non-members of the Security Council during
its debates or open debates should be properly taken
into account in any possible outcome of those debates
and should also be reflected in the Council’s annual
report.
On the other hand, the Movement stresses the
importance of convening more frequent Arria Formula
meetings as a practical way to ensure more interaction
with non-Council members and regional and
subregional organizations, and of the Council’s
continuing to hold informal interactive meetings,
similar to the recent meeting on 2l November of the Ad
Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa on lessons learned in coordinating
response and supporting local capacity.
The Non-Aligned Movement welcomes the
continued briefings and consultations of the Council
with the troop- contributing countries (TCCs) as part of
the effort to plan and execute peacekeeping operations
more effectively and with clearer mandates. The
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations should
involve TCCs more frequently and intensively in its

11-61237

S/PV.6672

deliberations through sustained, regular and timely
interaction.
The Non-Aligned Movement believes that the
initial and major concrete step towards improving the
working methods of the Security Council should be to
reach an agreement on permanent rules of procedure to
replace the current provisional rules, which have been
in force for more than 60 years. Moreover, the Security
Council should establish its subsidiary organs in
accordance with the letter and spirit of the Charter of
the United Nations, and those organs should function
in a manner that would provide adequate and timely
information on their activities to the general
membership.
The Security Council should fully take into
account the recommendations of the General Assembly
on matters relating to international peace and security,
consistent with Article 11 (2) of the Charter, instead of
continually encroaching on the functions and powers of
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council by addressing issues that traditionally fall
within the competence of those two organs. In that
regard, it is imperative to revisit the relationship
between the Security Council and the other principal
organs of the Organization in order to restore the
missing institutional balance in accordance with the
Charter.
Furthermore, regular interaction between the
Presidents of the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and the Security Council is needed in
order to discuss and coordinate the agendas and
programmes of work of the respective principal organs
that they represent in order to establish increased
coherence and complementarity among those organs in
a mutually reinforcing manner.
It is indeed a positive step for the Security
Council to have held three open debates since 2008 on
improving its working methods in order to
systematically analyse the progress achieved in that
regard. The Non-Aligned Movement encourages the
Security Council to continue improving that practice,
not only by convening those debates, but also by taking
into consideration the views and proposals expressed
by the non-Council members in any outcome of such
debates.
In conclusion, the Movement believes that more
steps are needed, along with the necessary political
will of Member States, particularly the permanent

11-61237

members of the Council, to improve the working
methods of the Council through both the General
Assembly and the Security Council. Transparency,
accountability and consistency are key elements that
the Security Council should observe in all its activities,
approaches and procedures. Improving the Council’s
working methods would no doubt contribute to
strengthening its ability to maintain international peace
and security and to deal efficiently and effectively with
its mounting workload and with the multiplicity and
complexity of the issues on its agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): As a member of the
group of five small nations (S-5), we align ourselves
with the statement delivered earlier by the Permanent
Representative of Switzerland. I will focus my
comments on two specific parts of the revised draft
General Assembly resolution that we circulated earlier
this year.
First, the S-5 advocates a more systematic use of
the mechanisms available to the Council to ensure
accountability for the most serious crimes under
international law. Clearly, the Council has a certain
track record in this respect, ranging from the
establishment of ad hoc tribunals in the 1990s to two
referrals of situations to the International Criminal
Court (ICC). At the same time, the engagement of the
Council has been ad hoc and not driven primarily by
the gravity of the situations. We believe that the
effectiveness and legitimacy of the Council’s important
work in this area would benefit from a number of
considerations.
Decision-making needs to be based on a thorough
assessment. Ideally and time permitting, the Council
should act on the basis of extensive information
documenting the seriousness of the situation and the
nature of the crimes involved, produced for example by
a commission of inquiry. At the same time, swift action
must of course be possible, as the example of Libya
illustrates.
National proceedings should be promoted. Given
the primacy of national jurisdictions, the Council
should also consider asking more frequently for
effective national proceedings to be put in place,
supported where necessary by capacity-building
measures or by an international component.

25

S/PV.6672

There also needs to be sustained political support.
Where the Council establishes accountability
mechanisms, it should be willing to take the action
required to make such mechanisms effective. There has
consistently been a problem with the execution of
arrest warrants, and Council action in that respect has
been consistently lacking. When the ICC is involved,
the Council should insist on the cooperation of those
States that have a legal obligation in that respect.
As to financial support, lack of financing can be a
significant obstacle to the effectiveness of international
criminal justice and lead to significant delays in
proceedings. While financial aspects have played a
significant role with respect to almost all of the
accountability mechanisms used by the Council in the
past, a discussion is needed in particular with respect
to ICC investigations mandated by the Council.
Secondly, the S-5 suggests three measures on the
use of the veto. The Permanent Representative of
Jordan has just spoken very eloquently on the use of
the veto in situations that involve the most serious
crimes under international law. In addition, we believe
that, given the Council’s practice of considering that an

26

abstention does not constitute a non-concurring vote,
meaning a veto, a new practice could be established
that would allow a permanent member to cast a
negative vote without giving it the effect of a veto.
That additional tool would enable any permanent
member to take a clear position on the substance of a
text, while making it clear that it does not intend to
block the adoption of a proposal.
As is well known, the S-5 is pursuing its goals on
different tracks, including in direct engagement with
Council members. We thus highly appreciate today’s
opportunity. At the same time, we are continuing our
efforts to advance our draft resolution in the General
Assembly. We remain open to all possible tracks to
improve the workings of the Council through a
pragmatic and constructive approach. We note,
however, that the response from the Council so far has
largely been silence.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers on my list for this meeting. I intend, with the
concurrence of the members of the Council, to suspend
the meeting until 4 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1:20 p.m.

11-61237
