United Nations

S/PV.5043

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-ninth year

5043

rd meeting
Friday, 24 September 2004, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Moratinos Cuyaubé . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Spain)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Baali
Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Adechi
Mr. Valle
Mr. Maquieira
Mr. Wang Guangya
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Fischer
Mr. Khalid
Mr. Romulo
Mr. Motoc
Mr. Denisov
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Danforth

Agenda
The situation in Africa
Briefing by the President of Nigeria and current Chairman of the African
Union

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

04-52142 (E)

*0452142*

S/PV.5043

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Africa
Briefing by the President of Nigeria and current
Chairman of the African Union
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, I request the Protocol Officer to
escort His Excellency Mr. Olusegun Obasanjo,
President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, to his seat
at the Council table.
Mr. Olusegun Obasanjo, President of the Federal
Republic of Nigeria, was escorted to a seat at the
Council table.
The President (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to the President
of the Federal Republic of Nigeria and current
Chairman of the African Union, His Excellency Mr.
Olusegun Obasanjo.
I also welcome very warmly the President of
Namibia, Mr. Sam Nujoma.
I also welcome the presence of the SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan, at this
meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I should like to draw the attention of members to
document S/2004/755, which contains the text of a
letter dated 22 September 2004 from Nigeria addressed
to the President of the Security Council.
Before giving the floor to the Secretary-General
and President Obasanjo, I should like, in my capacity
as Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
Spain, to make some general comments on the item
under discussion.
We all join in appreciating the tremendous efforts
that President Obasanjo of Nigeria and the African
Union are undertaking to find a solution to the very

2

grave problem of Darfur, a satisfactory solution that
would put an end to the suffering experienced by so
many people. The Security Council cannot overlook
the needs of 1.2 million refugees and displaced persons
and tens of thousands of victims, as well as the threat
of a regional crisis.
Last week I was able to visit Sudan. In my trip I
was able to perceive the complexity of the conflict in
Darfur. There are no simplistic lessons or solutions to
be found. I had the impression that the humanitarian
situation is beginning to improve, however slowly,
especially in the refugee camps where international
assistance is being effectively delivered. This, without
any doubt, is a first step and the most urgent one that
needs to be taken.
Nonetheless, the attacks on the civilian
population, although somewhat lessened, do not appear
to have stopped entirely. For this reason, it is essential
that the cease-fire agreement signed by the parties in
April in N’djamena be respected. The Security Council
notes that the Government of Sudan needs to disarm
and control the Janjaweed militias and put an end to
the attacks on the civilian population. At the same
time, it must insist that rebel groups, the Sudan
Liberation Army and the Justice and Equality
Movement, fulfil their obligations under the cease-fire
and cantonment arrangements.
It is in this area that the work being done by the
African Union observer mission is extremely
commendable. It will help to find a peaceful solution to
the crisis. Their commitment is helping to save lives in
Darfur and demonstrates Africa’s will to manage and
resolve its own conflicts. The Council has recognized
this fundamental role and has supported the expansion
of this mission. The international community is ready
to provide logistical and financial support for the
African Union’s efforts in this regard.
At the same time, the African Union is
sponsoring the Abuja peace negotiations, which have
been given fresh political impetus by President
Obasanjo. However, this process, which is crucial to
make any solution last, has its ups and downs. The
rebel groups and, of course, also, the Government of
Sudan, must understand that the international
community expects them to negotiate in good faith and
in a reasonable spirit that will enable them to reach an
agreement that can be implemented as early as
possible.

S/PV.5043

We must also not forget that in the south of Sudan
there is another conflict that has been going on for
more than 20 years and has caused indescribable
suffering. Unfortunately, the last phase of this process
has been negatively affected by the events in Darfur.
We must be watchful to ensure that the Naivasha
negotiations can be concluded successfully. This will
also have very positive effects on Darfur.
For all these reasons, the Council will continue to
give Sudan all the necessary attention. It will continue
without any doubt to be a question on our agenda. I
hope that its future work will benefit from what
President Obasanjo will be good enough to tell us
today and from the work that he will continue to do in
the future.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: The tragedy in Darfur is
one of the greatest challenges the international
community faces today. The whole world is watching
this tragedy unfold, and it is watching us. No one can
be allowed to sidestep or ignore their responsibility to
protect the innocent civilians. Our urgent task is to do
everything we can to help protect the people of Darfur
from further humanitarian suffering, terrible violence
and human rights abuses, and to bring their agony to an
end.
The humanitarian emergency in Darfur is
growing, and much, much more needs to be done to
mitigate it. I take this opportunity to reiterate my
strong appeal to the international community to
respond urgently and generously to the humanitarian
appeal for Darfur.

resources — logistics support, equipment and
financing. Every country that can help must help, and
thereby give content and meaning to our own words of
concern.
The United Nations is also strongly supporting
the AU’s leadership of the political process. The only
route to true long-term safety for the civilians in
Darfur, and to the return of 1.6 million people to their
homes, is a genuine political settlement. We all must
help the African Union to achieve that goal. I call on
the entire international community to make
unambiguously clear to both sides that we firmly
expect them to resume negotiations for a political
settlement in Darfur, and that they must bring to the
table the spirit of compromise necessary to reach
agreement.
I see that the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Mr. Konaré, is here; we welcome his
presence in the Council.
The crisis in Darfur is not simply an African
problem. It concerns the entire international
community. Whatever name we give it, it imposes
responsibilities on all of us. We all must rise to this
challenge.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement and for his
continued commitment to finding a lasting solution to
the problem.
I give the floor to Mr. Olusegun Obasanjo,
President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria and
current Chairman of the African Union.

The African Union (AU) has assumed the great
responsibility of leadership in both the security and
political areas, and I warmly thank it for doing so. I am
very pleased to see the Chairman of the AU, President
Olusegun Obasanjo of Nigeria, here with us in the
Council. We must give the AU our unwavering support
in word and in deed.

President Obasanjo: I wish to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month and to thank you for
the opportunity to address this gathering on an issue
that is of paramount importance to Africa and indeed,
as we have just heard from the Secretary-General of
our Organization, of paramount importance to the
world. May I also compliment the Russian Federation
on the able manner in which it conducted the affairs of
the Council last month.

The United Nations is supporting the AU’s efforts
to strengthen its operations in all parts of Darfur.
Civilians are still being attacked. We must support the
expansion of the AU’s mission to help the people there.
A proactive AU presence can help make them safer.
But that will require substantial international

The situation in Darfur poses serious challenges
to the African Union (AU) and to the international
community. It is therefore fitting that it has, in recent
months, engaged the attention of all those who desire
peace and stability in our continent and, indeed, in the
world. It is against that background that, at the recent

3

S/PV.5043

summit held in Addis Ababa last July, African leaders
resolved to confront the problem in all its
ramifications — military, political, economic and
social.
A major outcome of our deliberations on that
occasion was the constitution of the AU Observer
Protection Force in Darfur. Much earlier, in the face of
the unfolding grave humanitarian crisis in that region,
the AU had initiated a peace process which culminated
in the signing, in N’Djamena, in April 2004, of the
Humanitarian Ceasefire Agreement. That Agreement
provided for a Ceasefire Monitoring Committee, with
the mandate to report to a Joint Commission consisting
of the parties, Chadian mediators and the international
community.
It is with satisfaction that I observe that the
African Union received the cooperation of the
Government of Sudan, and quickly mobilized and
dispatched observers to the region. Subsequently, the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union
coordinated yet another round of negotiations, in Addis
Ababa in July 2004. The subsequent Addis Ababa
agreement reinforced the N’Djamena accord by
enhancing security in Darfur and facilitating
humanitarian assistance to the victims.
I wish to stress that, in all these efforts of the
African Union, the preoccupation has been the
achievement of peace, security and development in
Darfur and in the Sudan as a whole. It is the conviction
of the leadership of the African Union that linkages
between peace, security and development should be
maintained if the objectives of the international
community are to be realized, as envisaged in the
Millennium Development Goals. This is consistent
with the ideals of the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development.
Let me now address the most recent major
initiative that the African Union has taken on Darfur
under my chairmanship. I refer to the peace talks in
Abuja, coordinated by the Government of Nigeria,
between the Government of the Sudan, the Sudan
Liberation Army and the Justice and Equality
Movement — all under the auspices of the African
Union.
The negotiation was, as expected, not easy. After
agreeing to a four-point agenda on humanitarian issues,
security issues, political arrangements and economic
and social arrangements, the parties moved to consider

4

the first item — humanitarian issues. We were able to
persuade the parties to agree on a protocol that
guarantees unimpeded and unrestricted access for
humanitarian workers and assistance to all internally
displaced persons and refugees. Specifically, the
agreement would allow the United Nations and other
non-governmental
humanitarian
assistance
organizations to travel along routes proposed by the
United Nations, without restrictions or escorts, in order
to deliver assistance to areas controlled by any party as
well as facilitate all activities undertaken.
On the issue of the protection of civilians, the
protocol reaffirmed the commitment of the parties to
take all necessary measures to prevent all attacks,
threats, intimidation and any other form of violence
against civilians, by any party or group, including the
Janjaweed and other militias. It also provided for the
protection of the property and livelihood of individuals
and communities, and ensures that the principle of
voluntary return is fully respected and complied with,
consistent with general United Nations return
principles. The parties further agreed to maintain the
civilian character of internally displaced persons; to
ensure the rights of internally displaced persons and
refugees to return to their areas of origin; to protect the
rights of internally displaced persons and refugees in
their areas of origin in order to enable them to return,
should they choose to do so; and to ensure that all
forces and individuals involved or reported to be
involved in violations of rights of internally displaced
persons, vulnerable groups and other civilians will be
transparently investigated and held accountable by the
appropriate authorities.
The proposal on security issues is on the table.
The resistance movement requested a recess to enable
them to brief their colleagues outside the venue of the
talks and a one-month recess was agreed to.
The African Union is conscious of the important
collaborative role that the international community, and
particularly the United Nations, through the Security
Council, has played and can continue to play in
enhancing our peace efforts in Darfur. That is why I
apprised the Council of developments on the Abuja
peace talks through my letter on the subject, which was
copied to the Council. We are determined to usher in
an era of peace in Darfur because we believe that the
peace and security of Sudan will have a positive impact
on the subregion, on the African continent, and,
indeed, on the world. It is essential, therefore, that our

S/PV.5043

efforts be complemented and that we do not work at
cross purposes. On behalf of the African Union, I wish
to place on record our appreciation of the humanitarian
assistance being provided to refugees and internally
displaced persons by donors and the international
community. An economically strong and viable Sudan
will definitely be at peace with itself and the
international community.
Against the background of the challenges that the
Darfur conflict poses for our region, there is a need to
go beyond the provision of humanitarian assistance.
The capacity of the AU should be enhanced and
strengthened through the provision of logistical
support, as well as the training and deployment of
personnel. In addition, there is the need to provide the
African Union with the wherewithal to effectively
carry out its current tasks, including the maintenance
of a force of about 3,000 troops. I therefore urge
donors and the international community to increase the
present level of assistance to the African Union.
I wish to acknowledge the collective wisdom of
the Security Council, which, by its resolution 1564
(2004) of 18 September 2004, not only underscored the
importance of such assistance but also welcomed the
leadership role and engagement of the African Union
in addressing the situation in Darfur, as well as
pledging support for the African Union in its resolve to
enhance its presence there. The expansion of the
African Union presence, called for in the resolution, is,
indeed, welcome; but it can only be realized through
sustained financial backing. We should avoid a
situation where African Union troops on the ground are
handicapped owing to a lack of requisite financial
resources and logistical support.
The African Union has been seized with other
issues that affect peace and security on our continent.
As the Council is no doubt aware, the African Union
has now established the Peace and Security Council, a
major organ which focuses on peace and security
issues in our region. That Council has become
operational. We are grateful to the Secretary-General
for the assistance that he provided our organization in
that regard and we look forward to a close working
relationship between that organ and the Security
Council.
Let me also convey Africa’s appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his personal interest in and quick
response to the situation in Darfur. I believe that this

has helped not only to inform the Council of the
magnitude of the challenges involved in arresting the
deteriorating situation in that region of Sudan, but has
also helped to mobilize support of the international
community.
It is a matter of satisfaction for us in Africa that
the peace process in Liberia is now irreversible. In that
connection, we welcome the recent decision of the
Council, by its resolution 1561 (2004) of 17 September
2004, to extend the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia. What is now required of the
international community is to stay the course so that
our collective investment in peace is not in vain and
our achievements are sustained.
We also acknowledge the recent decision of the
Council, in its resolution 1562 (2004), to extend the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone. The positive developments in that country are
indicative of what can be achieved when the
international community works together, and
collaborates proactively with subregional and regional
actors in pursuit of common goals.
In a similar vein, the African Union appreciates
the efforts of the United Nations in the Great Lakes
region, including the Democratic Republic of Congo.
The enormity of the challenges confronting the
Government and people of that country cannot be
overemphasized. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
recommendation to expand the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. An early and favourable decision of the
Council on that matter would ensure that our shared
goals for peace and security in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are attained.
We are in a new Africa. This is an Africa that
believes firmly in democracy, human rights, economic
reform, partnership and sustainable development. The
African Union has, of its own volition, fully embraced
the challenges of peace and security in our region.
Across the length and breadth of the continent, African
leaders have — with courage, and in the face of
overwhelming odds — initiated and implemented
policies to strengthen democratic governance and the
rule of law and to enhance the peace and security of the
peoples in our respective countries.
We urge the Security Council to continue its
current positive role in support of these efforts, and the
international community at large to increase their level

5

S/PV.5043

of assistance, especially in the areas of capacitybuilding and infrastructure development, to ensure the
achievement of social and economic development in
Africa. That is the surest way for us to arrest crises and
instability on our continent. I wish to assure you that
Africa will continue to cooperate with the Council in
the pursuit of economic development, stability, peace
and security for Africa.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria for his
statement, and I believe I may speak for all of the
members of the Security Council in expressing my
deep appreciation for the leadership that he has brought
to the African Union, as well as his personal and
political commitment to using peaceful and diplomatic
means to facilitate a resolution of the various conflicts
on that continent.
I will now give the floor to Council members
who wish to address questions to President Obasanjo.
Mr. Danforth (United States of America): I
thank President Obasanjo for his briefing and, more
important, for his excellent leadership and for the work
of the African Union, especially in connection with
Darfur. We have now adopted two resolutions in the
Security Council on the subjection of Darfur. The most
recent, resolution 1564 (2004), was adopted on
Saturday. The resolution was designed to give as much
support as we possibly could to the work of the African
Union.
My question relates to whether we are doing
everything that we — that is, the Security Council and
interested countries — should be doing to support the
work of the African Union. Our sense is that time is of
the essence in Darfur. We are told that some 10,000
people are dying each month, and our sense is that the
sooner African Union troops are deployed in Darfur,
the more lives that will be saved. My question,
therefore, is this: is there anything that we should be
doing to facilitate the rapid deployment of the African
Union in Darfur? More generally, is there anything that
the Security Council should be doing that it is not
doing to further peace in Darfur?
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to President Obasanjo to respond.
President Obasanjo: In response to the question
about what the Security Council should be doing that it
is not doing, I would say that it is doing a lot. There is

6

a proverb in my part of the world concerning lice. They
may be in your clothes, in your bed — everywhere.
Lice do not die easily. So when you find one, you have
to put it on your fingernail and press it with another
fingernail to kill it. And when you have done so, you
see a little blood on your fingernail. The saying is that,
as long as you have lice in your clothes, your
fingernails will never be free of blood. We have lice in
our clothes in Darfur, and therefore there will always
be blood on our fingernails. Until we get rid of the lice,
our fingernails will not be without blood.
That is what I would say: until we are able,
together, to resolve the problem of Darfur, we will
never be able to say we have done enough — we will
never be able to say, “Yes, here is uhuru, here is
freedom”.
But I would say, yes, we are doing a great deal of
what we need to do. I would also say, here and now,
that, with all due respect, the five permanent members
of the Council should really work together. A situation
in which it appears that one country is supporting the
rebels — they call themselves “resistance fighters” —
and another country is seen as supporting the
Government of Sudan does not provide uniform
backing for putting uniform pressure on the two sides,
the Government and the rebels. And we need to do
that.
Of course, as I have said very often, there will be
a need for adequate logistic backing for what the
African Union has to do in Darfur.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank President Obasanjo for his briefing.
A number of us recall with a great deal of pleasure the
privilege of listening to him in Abuja, when the
Security Council mission went to Nigeria.
It is clear from his presentation this morning that
we all share the goal of preventing conflict, ending it
very quickly where it exists, and building peace. The
commitment of the Council and the United Nations to
Africa — in particular, to support President Obasanjo
and the efforts of the African Union — is, I hope,
obvious. That applies not just to peacekeeping and
establishing peace, but to the whole range of issues.
We have heard President Obasanjo at least twice this
week make clear how important the Millennium
Development Goals are and why it is that we need to
support the New Partnership for Africa’s Development
and the efforts being made within the continent. I think

S/PV.5043

that imposes on the Council and on the entire
membership of the United Nations a particular
obligation to support Africa and to support his
leadership.
I would like to ask him specifically whether we
are doing enough as we try to firm up the institutional
links between the African Union (AU) and the United
Nations, and as he tries to develop his capacities. What
can we do to help him to provide the means to enable
him to take on and actually tackle successfully the
roles and objectives that he set out so clearly this
morning?
Secondly, in looking at the goal of peace and
security throughout the continent, we have, of course,
underscored very clearly some of the issues that the
High-Level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change
is addressing today. How do we tackle the issues in
good time? How do we stop conflict before it breaks
out? How do we bring forward those difficult cases so
that the African Union can address them and so that the
Security Council can do so as well? I am thinking of
cases such as the situation in northern Uganda, where
there are real issues, which are being dealt with
domestically, but where there is also an international
dimension. How can we focus on those and bring the
Council into coordinated action with the African
Union?
In terms of Darfur, I thank President Obasanjo for
his encouraging account this morning. Our immediate
priority, of course, is to stop the killings and the
deaths. Successive resolutions have set out the
requirements of the Council. What is clear is that the
Government of the Sudan needs lots of assistance. We
have encouraged in particular the efforts of the African
Union. But I would like specifically to encourage the
Government of the Sudan and the African Union in the
coming days — very quickly — to identify exactly
what reinforcements are needed on the ground in
Darfur, what the Government of the Sudan is prepared
to accept, what the African Union can provide and
then, crucially, what it needs need in order to get the
monitors and the troops on the ground.
I think that our joint objective is clear, as is the
obligation on us to provide the means and the support
so that the troops and the monitors can actually get
there and stop the killing.
My last question relates specifically to policing,
where so far the African Union has not been tasked

with a police mission — and to date that has not been
suggested. But there is a very serious lack of policing,
as well as of military deployment. In the longer term, it
is policing that is more important. The European Union
is intent on sending a fact-finding mission to work in
parallel with the AU on policing. What are President
Obasanjo’s views specifically on filling that gap, so as
to provide much-needed police cover and, especially,
security, to the displaced people who at the moment
feel so insecure?
The President (spoke in Spanish): If members of
the Council consider it appropriate, perhaps the
President of Nigeria could respond to questions by
Council members after they have all been asked, rather
than after each speaker.
Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First, I would like to thank the President of Nigeria and
Chairman of the African Union, Mr. Obasanjo, for his
briefing. China greatly appreciates Mr. Obasanjo’s
tireless efforts to find a solution to the Darfur problem.
The Chinese Government is very concerned about
the situation in Darfur. We hope that the humanitarian
and security situation will soon improve, and we firmly
support the leading role played there by the African
Union.
For us, the top priority now is to achieve, as soon
as possible, expanded deployment by the African
Union. China hopes that the African Union and the
Government of the Sudan will achieve consensus on
relevant details as soon as possible, in order to achieve
that expansion at an early date. At the same time, the
international community is called upon to provide all
possible assistance to the African Union in that
deployment. The Chinese Government is also actively
considering providing such support, within its capacity.
The genesis of the Darfur problem is very
complicated. At the core of the problem is the need to
achieve peace and alleviate the humanitarian crisis.
Only through a negotiated political settlement will it be
possible to achieve durable peace and tranquillity in
the Darfur area. We support the African Union in its
continued push for political negotiations and we call
upon all parties, especially the rebel groups, to
demonstrate more flexibility so that a comprehensive
agreement can be achieved as soon as possible.
I would also like to thank the President for
calling upon the five permanent members to take a

7

S/PV.5043

unified stand. As one of the permanent members of the
Council, China is willing to adopt an objective and fair
stand on solving problems in Africa, including that of
Darfur.
Finally, I have two questions for Mr. Obasanjo.
First, what is the current state of consultations between
the African Union and the Government of the Sudan
concerning expanded deployment, and what kind of
concrete assistance do they ask of the international
community? Secondly, does the African Union have a
timetable for its efforts to promote negotiations, and
what kind of coordination do they expect from the
Security Council?
Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): Let me join others in
extending a warm welcome to His Excellency
President Obasanjo.
The United Nations is an indispensable actor in
Africa. Its commitment to Africa is strong and abiding.
The Security Council is deeply engaged both with
individual conflict situations and cross-cutting issues
that affect the continent.
It is encouraging that reliable partners in the
efforts to promote peace and security are emerging.
African institutions are increasingly involved in
finding African solutions to African problems.
Regional and subregional organizations are making
growing contribution to conflict management,
peacekeeping and post-conflict peace-building. In
particular, we appreciate the role of the African Union
under the leadership of President Obasanjo. We are
grateful for his highly insightful briefing, which has
made us wiser concerning the continuing challenges
and opportunities.
Conflict has sapped Africa’s potential for too
long, but the continent now seems to be turning a
corner. Progress in the peace processes in Sierra Leone,
Liberia, Côte d’Ivoire, Somalia and Guinea-Bissau is
heartening. Challenges in Burundi, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Sudan must be addressed
through continued constructive engagement. Conflict
management alone, however, cannot lead to
comprehensive and durable peace. Pakistan believes
there should be four priorities: conflict prevention
pacific settlement of disputes, addressing the root
causes of conflict, and focusing on the inextricable link
between peace and development.

8

I would like to raise two questions, the first of
which relates to Liberia. I recall that Mr. Bryant,
Chairman of the National Transitional Government of
the Republic of Liberia, in his address to the General
Assembly on 22 September reiterated his call for the
lifting of sanctions on the timber and diamond sectors
to enable the Transitional Government to create jobs
and attend to the enormous social needs of the people.
We would appreciate if President Obasanjo could share
the views of the African Union with the Council on
that issue.
We have watched with deep anguish the events
unfolding in Darfur ever since the rebellion broke out
over 18 months ago. Pakistan has consistently
underscored the importance of immediate humanitarian
assistance, an end to all violence, a start of negotiations
between the parties and a solution within the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Sudan. We
are glad that significant improvement has taken place
in Darfur. The Government of Sudan is making its best
efforts to meet its commitments.
It is important to maintain constructive
engagement of the international community in an
objective and balanced manner. In that context, we
must ensure that our actions do not encourage the
rebels into intransigence.
We appreciate the leading role of the African
Union and the leadership and personal engagement of
President Obasanjo with the peace talks in Abuja. We
have been following closely the African Union’s
decisions on Darfur, which we find balanced and
objective.
The enhanced presence of the African Union
monitoring and protection mission in Darfur was the
main recommendation of the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative. Pakistan fully supports that.
We hope that the African Union and the Government of
the Sudan will soon be able to discuss and agree on the
appropriate size and mandate of that mission.
The Security Council has already expressed its
support for an enhanced African Union mission. We
would like to ask President Obasanjo how the African
Union expects that expression of the Council’s support
to be transformed into concrete assistance.
Mr. Fischer (Germany): I would like to thank
President Obasanjo for briefing us on the Abuja peace

S/PV.5043

talks and for his efforts in bringing the parties in the
Darfur crisis back to the negotiating table in Abuja.
The Security Council’s most recent resolution on
Sudan, resolution 1564 (2004) of 18 September,
stressed the importance of the African Union, and it
will contribute towards increasing the African Union
authority vis-à-vis the parties to the conflict. I
congratulate the African Union and its member States
for their willingness to take over the leading role in the
efforts to solve the Darfur crisis.
The working draft of the African Union plan for
enhancing the effectiveness of the AU mission in
Darfur, which was submitted yesterday in Addis
Ababa, seems to be a very good basis for playing such
a role. It will also help in implementing the mandate
contained in Council resolutions 1556 (2004) and 1564
(2004).
The African Union (AU) is shouldering a burden
that is heavy for it and for its newly developed conflict
management mechanisms. I am sure that international
support for this effort will be willingly given if and
when the AU asks for it. Germany has been supportive
of the AU role in helping to resolve the Darfur conflict.
The European Union (EU) also stands ready to support
the AU mission, in close coordination with the United
Nations.
Resolution 1564 (2004) is a clear signal that the
Security Council is determined to keep up the pressure
on the Government of the Sudan, on the Sudanese
Liberation Movement/Army and on the Justice and
Equality Movement to return to the negotiation table
and to meet the demands contained in Security Council
resolutions 1556 (2004) and 1564 (2004). Our goal is
to stop the killing and the suffering of the people in
Darfur. The EU will examine appropriate measures —
including sanctions — against the Government of the
Sudan and all other relevant parties, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1564 (2004), if tangible
progress is not achieved in that direction.
I would like to ask President Obasanjo and
Chairman Konaré for their opinions on several points.
How can the Security Council and other actors — such
as the EU — best supplement AU efforts to resuscitate
negotiations in Abuja and Naivasha? How do they
envisage disarmament of the Janjaweed taking place in
Darfur? What conditions would have to be put in place
in order to increase the willingness of the Government
of the Sudan to tackle disarmament? What measures

could be taken to ensure that the concerns and special
threats can be addressed with regard to women and
girls among internally displaced persons and the
population in Darfur? In which areas could the United
Nations, the EU and their member States be of special
assistance to the AU mission in Darfur? And one last
question: do they also see a role for the League of Arab
States?
Mr. Romulo (Philippines): My delegation
welcomes the presence today of the President of the
Federal Republic of Nigeria and Chairperson of the
African Union (AU), Mr. Olusegun Obasanjo. We
thank him for taking time out from his busy schedule
to brief the Council about the African Union’s effort in
Darfur. Mr. Obasanjo’s briefing is a valuable
contribution to the Council’s consideration of the
situation in Darfur. The Philippines greatly appreciates
the tireless efforts of the President as the mediator of
the Abuja peace talks on Darfur. We congratulate
President Obasanjo on his address yesterday before the
General Assembly, where he outlined the work that has
already been done and that needs to be done by the
African Union.
My delegation has always advocated the regional
approach in resolving the crisis in Africa. Therefore,
we fully recognize and support the AU’s leading role
aimed at achieving a peaceful conclusion of the crisis
and the protection of the welfare of the people of
Darfur.
As long as the international community continues
to lend its support to address the humanitarian
requirements of the crisis and to send correct, adequate
and effective messages to the parties concerned, we are
confident that the search for elusive peace in Sudan
will be found in the very near future. The Security
Council’s acknowledgement of the leadership role of
the AU and its support for the AU in the resolution of
the crisis is one of those messages. Insistence that all
the parties — both the Government and the rebels —
comply with earlier commitments and remain
committed to the negotiation process is another.
My delegation appreciates the valuable
contribution of the AU through its deployment of the
African Union mission in Sudan, which should be
appropriately supported and assisted by the
international community, including the Security
Council. We urge the enlargement and early
deployment of the mission in that regard. We also

9

S/PV.5043

welcome the announcement by the Government of the
Sudan that it is agreeing to an increase in the size of
the current AU presence in Darfur.

listen to his valuable briefing on the negotiating
process in Abuja. We followed with great attention and
much hope the various stages described.

My questions have already been answered by
President Obasanjo, so I wish to take this opportunity
to acknowledge the work of the African Union in
resolving the myriad problems in other regions of
Africa. We positively note in particular the
reaffirmation of the AU’s commitment and
determination to effectively support the outcome of the
Somalia National Reconciliation Conference, and we
look forward to future assistance as the incoming
Somali national institutions are reconstructed and
consolidated.

I should also like to take this opportunity to pay a
special tribute to President Obasanjo for his tireless
efforts since the beginning of his chairmanship of the
African Union (AU) to find a political and negotiated
solution to the wrenching crisis of Darfur and to
restore peace and security, which are so essential for
the well-being of all the Sudanese people.

In closing, we would like to express our best
wishes for success to President Obasanjo for all his
present and future endeavours.
Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I should like to welcome President Obasanjo
to the Security Council. We are pleased at the
opportunity to learn first-hand about the assessment of
the African Union (AU) with regard to developments
in the Sudan, particularly those in Darfur.
Russia
has
consistently
supported
the
peacekeeping efforts of the AU and the personal efforts
of President Obasanjo to facilitate a swift settlement of
the Darfur crisis. We are sure that peace in the Sudan
can be achieved only by political means, through more
active use of the AU’s potential and through the
development of cooperation between the AU and the
United Nations. Of course, all the Sudanese parties
must comply in good faith with their respective
obligations.
My colleagues and the ministers present here
today who have already spoken have answered the
questions we had wanted to ask of President Obasanjo,
particularly concerning what the Security Council
could do in addition to providing political support for
the AU’s efforts in Darfur and what could be done to
provide for parallel progress in the Abuja and Naivasha
negotiating processes.
Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): Permit me
at the outset to bid a warm welcome to President
Obasanjo and to thank him very much for having
kindly shared with us his vision and his message of
hope concerning developments on the African
continent and for having given us the opportunity to

10

Algeria, which is following the developments in
Darfur very carefully and at the highest level, has
every confidence in the work being done by the
African Union and fully supports President Obasanjo’s
approach aimed at rallying both sides around an
agreement that will be a solution, not only for the
Sudan, but for the entire region. We are also making
our own contribution to support the efforts of the
Chairman of the African Union.
This commitment to peace and to a settlement of
conflicts through the wise and visionary use of
negotiations deserves the full support of the
international community. That is why Algeria
welcomes both the decision that has emerged within
the Council, which fully and clearly highlights the
AU’s leading role, and the valuable political, material
and financial support that the international community
is providing for its efforts.
The current suspension of the Abuja talks is
cause for serious concern at a time when the untold
daily suffering of the people of Darfur makes us aware
of the urgent need to put an end as soon as possible to
the tragedy that has so severely affected their lives.
Algeria hopes that the Abuja talks, in which we
have great hope, will resume as soon as possible. We
therefore call on all parties to return to the negotiating
table in a spirit of cooperation and open-mindedness in
order finally to build the bridges leading to a return to
peace, which we sincerely hope for. The settlement of
the Darfur question is crucial for the people of the
Sudanese province, for the Sudan and for the peace and
the stability of the entire region, in which the Sudan
plays a major, strategic role.
Today, it is clichéd to say that the Darfur crisis
has reached a crucial stage in its tragic course.
Although there is still room for hope, the attendant

S/PV.5043

fears that the crisis will continue or deteriorate grow at
each missed opportunity.
Fully cognizant of those risks, Algeria hopes that
our joint action in the Council and in the international
community will be one of a cooperation that adds
synergy to the dynamic created by the African Union,
which has led to indisputable progress in the ceasefire
maintained by the parties and the agreement on a
humanitarian protocol of manifest importance, which
we hope will be followed by a further agreement on the
crucial question of security.
We must reinforce and strengthen that promising
dynamic by supporting it positively until it reaches its
conclusion, all the while being vigilant not to disrupt
its course. It is in that spirit that Algeria believes that
there is no alternative to the active cooperation of the
Government of the Sudan, with the support and the
assistance of the African Union and the international
community, if we are to end that crisis, whose
humanitarian aspect is a call to all of us.
My delegation welcomes the offer by the Foreign
Minister of the Sudan to come before the Security
Council and share his vision for resolving the question
of Darfur. We hope that the Council will give him an
opportunity to do so as soon as possible.
Mr. de La Sablière (France) (spoke in French):
At the outset, we greatly welcome President Obasanjo,
whose presence honours us. We have listened
attentively to his comments.
Very briefly, before I address the question of
Darfur, I shall comment on cooperation between the
Security Council and the African Union. In short, the
Council deals on a daily basis — unfortunately — with
crises afflicting the African continent. We note that, at
the same time, Africans are the first to be involved in
resolving those crises. As President Obasanjo has
said — and we are well aware — we have a new
Africa. Africa is shouldering its responsibilities
collectively and with determination.
My delegation is convinced that the Security
Council has every interest in working closely with
regional organizations, in particular with the African
Union, whenever that strengthen the Council’s actions.
Our respective actions complement one another. We
have seen that in Burundi. We see it today in the Darfur
crisis, to which I will return. As well, there is
cooperation with subregional organizations, and my

Government is very gratified to cooperate with the
Economic Community of West African States with
respect to West Africa, in particular Côte d’Ivoire.
My question is both simple and complex. I am
asking myself about how to enhance that cooperation’s
effectiveness. Might the solution be cooperation on a
case-by-case basis? Or should cooperation be somehow
institutionalized? I do not know. We are now reflecting
on how the Council could work most effectively. Any
comments from President Obasanjo on ways to
improve cooperation between the African Union and
the United Nations and the Council would enrich our
process of reflection.
On the question of Darfur, I have no questions at
this stage because the questions I had in mind have
been formulated very well by preceding speakers. I
have nothing to add to that list of questions.
I would like simply to take this opportunity to
stress before the Council the main lines of my
country’s action in the Security Council. The first is
that we believe we should be very demanding of the
Sudanese. The Council’s recent message to the Sudan
in resolution 1564 (2004) must be heeded and acted on.
It is a clear message: the Sudanese Government must
fulfil all its obligations. In particular, it must provide
safety and security for the population in Darfur and
combat impunity. For their part, the rebels must end the
violence and not hinder the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. All the Sudanese parties must participate in
good faith in the negotiations at Naivasha and Abuja.
And, as the Secretary-General said, the parties must
demonstrate their willingness to compromise.
The second base of our action is that the African
Union must receive all the assistance from the
international community that it needs. In this crisis, the
African Union has an irreplaceable role in backing up
the international community’s demands and promoting
the necessary cooperation of the Sudanese
Government.
We are fully aware that deploying in that region
of the Sudan an international presence composed of
unarmed observers and military personnel responsible
for security is not an easy undertaking. There needs to
be significant planning and logistic support, as
President Obasanjo has told the Council. We realize as
well that it is desirable to have cooperation and
assistance from Member States that possess experience
in this area.

11

S/PV.5043

France and the European Union are ready. I think
we need to act quickly. 3,000 or 4,000 men are not too
many and are probably sufficient. My country will do
its utmost within the institutions of the European
Union to ensure that the Union can support the African
Union as effectively as possible.
In conclusion, the Council, like the international
community as a whole, can act only in close
cooperation with the African Union. In is in that spirit
that France contributed its assistance to the African
Union’s mission to Chad.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I welcome the
presence among us of His Excellency President
Olusegun Obasanjo and thank him for addressing the
Council in his capacity as President of Nigeria and
Chairman of the African Union.
We have been advocating in the Security Council
that the African Union should be granted the
opportunity to provide the Council with an
authoritative and accurate perspective on the
challenges ahead to achieve stability and development
in Africa. We have been requesting that the African
Union be invited to come to the Security Council. And
to my delegation, the historical and cultural ties
between Nigeria and Brazil confer even greater
meaning to this occasion.
We all agree that regional organizations are
increasingly relevant in the overall international effort
for peace and security. They may be even more
effective since they may be in a better position to
detect security threats, they have better knowledge of
the root causes of conflict, and they are necessarily
more flexible.
Since its creation only three years ago, the
African Union has proven itself royally capable of
leading African countries in their efforts towards
peace. We wish to take this opportunity to thank the
African Union for cooperating with this Council in
bringing troops and observers to Burundi, Somalia and
Sudan.
Political initiatives to promote governance and
stabilization have also been counting on the active
support of the African Union. We cite the example of
Côte d’Ivoire, where the tripartite monitoring
mechanism has brought together the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the United Nations in efforts to have

12

the benchmarks that were set up by the LinasMarcoussis Agreement prevail over conflict.
Horizontal cooperation with ECOWAS and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
in the Horn of Africa is ever more frequent. These
initiatives translate into action the unequivocal
determination and the leadership of the African Union
in the resolution of crises within its continent.
Complementarities between the United Nations
and regional organizations ought to be further
developed and utilized. The cooperation with the
African Union is thriving, and we trust that this
Organization and its Member States, individually, will
be forthcoming in making resources, technical
assistance and logistical support available to the
African Union. Partnership is key in making African
ownership viable.
Brazil highly praises and welcomes the
unequivocal determination of the African Union to the
resolution of the crisis in Darfur, which we understand
as a laudable and timely act of African ownership and
leadership. In the Security Council, the Brazilian
delegation has made all possible efforts in order to
ensure international support for the African Union
mission in Darfur as well as to safeguard its ownership
and leading role in the search for a solution to the
problems in that region.
Let us not forget that preventive action and early
warning are at the core of regional organizations’
assets in dealing with conflicts. There must be
innovative ways to work within a logic of conflict
avoidance, committing ourselves to eradicating
underdevelopment, under-education, poverty and
hunger. This growing interrelationship between
security and economic and social development means
there should be a better coordination among the United
Nations bodies, particularly between the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council through
Article 65 of the Charter. As President Lula stated in
opening the general debate of the fifty-ninth session of
the General Assembly only three days ago, “If we wish
to eliminate violence, we must address its deep-rooted
origins with the same resolve employed against the
agents of hatred” (A/59/PV.3).
We commend President Obasanjo and his African
peers for their commitment to the advancement of the
New Partnership for Africa’s Development, in
particular to the establishment of the conditions for

S/PV.5043

sustainable development by ensuring sustainable peace
and security in the whole continent.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I wish to
welcome President Olusegun Obasanjo and thank him
for having found time to come to the Security Council
to share his views with its members on important
issues of interest for the Council and for the African
continent. We are indeed very thankful and honoured. I
also welcome the presence of His Excellency Mr.
Alpha Oumar Konare, chairman of the African Union
Commission, and we are particularly honoured that
President Sam Nujoma and distinguished ministers
have graced this occasion. This is a clear
demonstration of the high importance of the issue
under consideration this morning.
President Obasanjo, your wisdom and dynamic
action has clearly demonstrated how the personal
commitment of leaders such as yourself can positively
impact on events such as the Darfur crisis. It is our
conviction that this will reinforce a new era in the
relationship between the Council and the African
Union, especially regarding the search for partnership
in finding solutions whenever important decisions have
to be taken. The Security Council and the African
Union have no choice but to cooperate. There is a
common understanding that almost 60 per cent of the
Council’s work is dedicated to Africa. It would
therefore indicate a lack of realism to deal with African
issues without coordinating fully with the African
Union, a body entirely dedicated to the political and
economic life of the continent on a daily basis. This is
even more relevant since the creation of the Peace and
Security Council.
The strength of the partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations has been fully
demonstrated through the commitment of the two
bodies in order to find a solution to the conflict of the
Sudanese region of Darfur now. In Burundi, the
integration of the African Union contingent into the
United Nations Operation in Burundi (UNOB) is also a
clear example of cooperation. Lessons should therefore
be drawn from those two experiences. With regard to
the cooperation of the United Nations and the African
Union in the case of Burundi, it is important to know
what went wrong and how we could better integrate the
two bodies’ input in order to render them more
effective. Working together in Burundi and in Darfur
provides us with the opportunity to better take
advantage of Chapter VIII of the United Nations

Charter
regarding
cooperation
with
regional
organizations, which are to be fully tapped. In this
connection, the establishment of a better channel for
the exchange of information should be one of the
priorities, in order to enhance our joint capacity to act
resolutely and in a timely manner in dealing with crises
such as Darfur.
Another relevant aspect has to do with the means
that should be provided to the African Union,
particularly logistics, as it has been clearly stressed by
President Obasanjo. This should be done in a timely
manner when a conflict arises, to enable the African
Union to adequately play a leadership role in resolving
the continent’s crises with the support of the United
Nations and the international community as a whole.
It is important that Council members be well
informed on the work of the African Union, and this is
a particularly good opportunity to accomplish this,
given the briefing we have just had from President
Obasanjo. This is an historic session of the Security
Council and should constitute an important building
block in reinforcing the partnership between the
Security Council and the Peace and Security Council,
in providing, in a timely manner, solutions to crises
and in building peace and stability, thus creating
appropriate conditions for development in the
continent.
Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): At this
stage in our discussions, we do not have any questions
to ask. We would like to make a few comments.
At the outset, we would like to thank the
President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, President
Obasanjo, for having kindly come to meet with the
Council in his capacity as current Chairman of the
African Union. We also welcome the presence here of
His Excellency the President of the Republic of
Namibia, Mr. Sam Nujoma.
The African Union (AU) was created three years
ago to speed up the process of integrating African
States and to reinforce the capacity of the continent to
shoulder increased responsibilities in the quest for
effective solutions to its problems. The very instructive
briefing that President Obasanjo has just given the
Council on the situation in Africa clearly shows his
resolve. However, we must recognize that the African
Union cannot maintain this role, which it assumed with
courage and an acute sense of urgency, if the
international community does not mobilize resources

13

S/PV.5043

commensurate with the gravity of the situation to
effectively support the work of the African Union. We
now know what that requires, having been informed by
the most authoritative voice, that of the current
Chairman of the AU.
Accordingly, we wish to stress that assistance
from the international community must be for the long
term. Recent studies reveal that in Africa, when the
post-conflict situation is not managed properly, in 60
per cent of the cases the conflict resumes. It is a
serious challenge. Therefore the United Nations
system, in partnership with the African Union, must set
up a coordinating mechanism and realize the available
potential: coordination of actors and coordination of
action.
Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, let me first express my very sincere
thanks to the presidency for having convened this
public meeting. We appreciate this opportunity to be
able to learn directly from President Obasanjo, whose
presence here today is an honour, about the increasing
efforts of the African Union in pursuit of peace and
security in Africa, which we strongly support.
As is known, the Security Council has been
particularly active in relation to the African agenda. It
has secured some important successes in this regard,
such as the developments in West Africa. There have
been successes because it has been possible to work
together, in many cases in accordance with decisions of
the African Union or of sectors of the African Union
that have committed their support to those processes.
We have been less fortunate in the case of Central
Africa, where a general agreement eludes the efforts of
this Council and other entities involved. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda, and,
particularly until recently, in Burundi, there has been
significant progress, although we cannot in good
conscience say that peace has returned to that area. The
Great Lakes region is an area where the African Union
is playing an important leadership role, which should
lead to a successful effort.
The humanitarian disaster being experienced in
Darfur requires the resolute support of the international
community and of this Council, in particular with
regard to the efforts of the African Union. For this
reason, my country voted in favour of Security Council
resolutions 1556 (2004) and 1564 (2004), in the
conviction that through them resolute support for the

14

African Union would be established and that they
would continue a path of cooperation with the
Sudanese Government, whose purpose is to save lives
in that country.
In this regard, a number of concerns have arisen
this morning. Some have already been mentioned by
other members of the Council, but I wish, respectfully,
to address a question to President Obasanjo. I would
like to have his opinion on a possible Security Council
visit or mission to Darfur to reinforce the work that is
being done there by the African Union. And perhaps,
since much has been said this morning about
cooperation between the African Union and the
Security Council, it might be interesting, if the
logistical details can be worked out, to hold a joint
meeting of the Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council.
Mr. Motoc (Romania): I too wish to warmly
welcome His Excellency the President of Nigeria to the
Security Council. Our appreciation goes also to the
Chairman of the African Union Commission.
I wish to congratulate the Spanish presidency on
having convened this meeting, which sets a standard
for the manner in which the Security Council conducts
its business in dealing with issues of regional
significance.
Romania is and will remain committed to the
peaceful resolution of the Darfur crisis. Romania
believes in a prosperous and stable future for the entire
Sudan. We appreciate and fully support the African
Union’s efforts to work out a solution to the crisis.
We praise the personal efforts of President
Obasanjo towards enhancing and strengthening the
African Union’s role in the Darfur crisis. We would
like to thank His Excellency for today’s timely,
comprehensive and substantial briefing. We have full
confidence that, under his chairmanship, the African
Union’s involvement will really make a difference in
Darfur. Our delegation considers that, given President
Obasanjo’s outstanding track record in the last six
years as President of Nigeria, we have every reason to
hope that the African Union will take significant steps
on the road to stability and progress in Darfur.
If I may say so, our confidence in that regard is
also based on the very meaning of the name
“Obasanjo”, which, in the Yoruba language, means, if I
am not mistaken, “the king who makes the lives of his

S/PV.5043

subjects easier”. Here, we trust that, during his tenure
as Chairman of the African Union, those subjects will
include the population of Darfur. I have to confess that
my deputy, Ambassador Dumitru, is responsible for
that information: he served for five years as
Ambassador to Nigeria under His Excellency’s
presidency.
The recent resolution of the Security Council,
resolution 1564 (2004), acknowledges the regional
ownership that is at work in resolving this crisis. It
encourages and supports further contributions of the
African Union. It also adequately reflects the
architecture of cooperation in support of addressing the
Darfur situation deployed by the United Nations in
conjunction with the African Union, the European
Union and many individual nations neighbouring
Sudan as well as from other continents.
Romania attaches great value to regional
ownership and regional solutions to crises that can
affect entire regions. Such an approach is essential for
Romania, during its present tenure in the Security
Council, as an advocate of an updated reading and
practice of Chapter VIII provisions as they apply to the
realities of our times. Proximity, on-the-ground
knowledge and intimate understanding of the problems
are, in our view, guarantees of the success of such an
approach. Romania intends to organize a public
meeting of the Security Council next year on ways to
foster greater effectiveness in cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations that are
active in conflict resolution around the world.
The success of the African Union monitoring
mission in Darfur could be the success of a model to be
replicated in other African subregions and on other
continents. The partnership between the African Union
and the United Nations in facilitating the political
settlement and in solving the humanitarian crisis in
Darfur needs continuous backing from the international
community. In that regard, Romania supports the
actions of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Jan Pronk, to harmonize the efforts of
regional organizations and the global Organization on
the Darfur question.
Romania is of the view that we need to ensure
that the African Union has all the necessary resources
and our complete assistance in fulfilling its tasks.
Romania considers that a sustainable and long-lasting
solution to the Sudan’s internal crisis can be found

only through political talks. The answer to the crisis
has to be a negotiated and mutually accepted political
solution. We therefore encourage a rapid conclusion of
the Naivasha peace talks.
While so much effort has been invested in the
North-South dimension of the peace process, we also
hope to see a political, negotiated solution to the
ongoing conflict in the western region of the Sudan.
We encourage both the Government of the Sudan and
the rebels to restart negotiations in good faith in order
to stop the humanitarian crisis in Darfur. Romania
hopes that the Government of the Sudan and the rebels
got the right message from Security Council
resolutions 1556 (2004) and 1564 (2004).
In its future consideration of the Darfur question,
the Council should strive harder to speak with one
voice. Romania undertakes to continue to work in that
direction. The Security Council’s credibility and
resolve are at stake in Darfur. Now is the time for the
Council to take yet another step in implementing a new
approach involving, directly and firmly, regional
organizations in solving crises within their respective
areas. If that should prove workable in the Sudan —
which is, after all, home to the longest conflict on the
African continent — it could become a way of action
that might be successfully reproduced in other potential
or active crises in different regions of the world.
Romania looks forward to the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the Sudan that will be issued by the
end of the month. We also look forward, more
importantly, to seeing positive evolutions on the
ground.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Romania for his kind words
addressed to me.
I now call on the President of the Federal
Republic of Nigeria to respond to questions raised or to
add comments or observations to the statements made
by members of the Council.
President Obasanjo: I want to thank all the
members of the Council for their interest in and the
insight they have shown about the situation generally
in Africa and in Darfur in particular. While I cannot
address their questions one by one, I will probably deal
with most of them in a general way and take a few of
them specifically because they are specific.

15

S/PV.5043

Let us look at the question of what the Security
Council can do in Africa. As members have kindly
pointed out, 60 per cent of the time of the Council is
now being devoted to African issues. If that is the case,
how can we ensure that whatever time is thus devoted
is fruitfully devoted? If possible, can we also reduce
the amount of time of this body that is being devoted to
African issues?
What, really, are the African issues today? Let us
not go into what brought them about. The African
issues today are issues of conflict, issues of poverty,
issues of development and issues of employment. How
did those issues come about? Those issues came about
because, for too long, Africa was living in an unequal
world and Africa did not realize early enough that it
was living in an unequal world. To me, that is putting it
as it is. If that is the case, how can we make a little bit
more available to Africa to correct the situation in
Africa as it stands today?
When we look at the conflicts, what are the main
causes? One cause is governance and what I call, for
lack of a better way of describing it, hopelessness —
hopelessness in the political area, hopelessness in the
economic area, hopelessness in the social area. A group
of people may feel that, no matter what they do, they
will not be able to raise themselves up, so they give up
in desperation and say to themselves: “Well, if that is
the case, let us give it up and die”. I believe therefore
that we need to look at these problems, ask ourselves
where we can put our finger to make Africa do what it
needs to do for itself, then help Africa to do what it
needs to do for itself.
As was mentioned by one representative here, we
have started. The African Union (AU) itself is an
acknowledgement by us in Africa that the continental
organization that took us thus far could not lead us
beyond where it took us. We need, if you will, a
reformed organization or a new organization that has
greater teeth and a greater ability to take us beyond
where we reached with the Organization of African
Unity. Then we have a programme that took us time to
build up and which came up at about the same time as
the African Union: the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development (NEPAD). So we have a new continental
organization in the African Union and a continental
programme in NEPAD to bring us forward.
If we talk about a new Africa politically, what
reform do we need? Continentally, subregionally,

16

internally in our countries — what reform do we need
economically, continentally, subregionally? We need
regional economic communities and national economic
communities in our countries. We need to have a
package of desirable reforms that would lead us away
from where we are.
I see that we already have a number of measures
here at the United Nations. My belief is that the
Council should support those measures. For example,
an office of the Secretary-General is assigned to the
situation in Africa on a permanent basis. This office
needs to be equipped so that it can not only report, but
also be proactive. The point about early warning and
proactive measures was made earlier. We need early
warnings ourselves at the African Union level, at the
subregional level and at the national level. The Council
needs those early warnings here as well, to be able to
observe that it knows of one or two countries, for
example, where, if things continue to deteriorate, we
may have another Somalia on our hands. If we are
aware of such situations, then what must we do — at
our own level, at that of the AU and that of the
Council — to prevent a crisis? This is what I have to
say about what can be done.
As we know, the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development (NEPAD) was adopted by the United
Nations, by the G-8, by the World Bank, by the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and by the African
Development Bank (ADB). But adoption is not
enough. It must be actualized. NEPAD must be
embraced and brought to fruition under the auspices of
the AU socio-economic programme for development.
As for Sudan, what do we need there? The point
has been made that the negotiations that started on
resolving the conflict in the south have not been
completed. They must be completed. I believe that the
completion of those negotiations, which have been
halted — I hope they will start again early next
month — will have a salutary effect on Darfur. A
solution will also have a salutary effect on other areas
of Sudan. After more than 20 years, a solution is being
found for the south in a comprehensive form that will
make that country more united and, at the same time,
possibly better governed.
I see that, in one form or the other, there was also
a similar exercise in a defence context in the Nuba
mountains. Another similar exercise in a different form
has been achieved in the southern Blue Nile region.

S/PV.5043

Maybe, in whatever form, that sort of solution may
have to be applied in Darfur. Speaking generally, that
is the situation in Sudan. The political problem there
must be resolved. We must be ready to support that
country’s efforts to raise its living standard. We have to
help with the economic and social aspects of the lives
of the average Sudanese, because, as I said earlier on,
the cause of conflict may be, in a word, governance. It
might be poor or inadequate, sometimes tied up with an
inadequate availability of resources.
Having talked generally about actions in Sudan,
let me turn to specifics on Darfur. Council members
have rightly said that the immediate objective is to stop
the killing. There cannot be any further procrastination
or delay. We have to stop the killing by, first of all,
holding the Government of Sudan responsible to its
population. For the function of any Government is the
welfare and well-being of all its citizens. It should
provide security and protection to all its citizens. This
is a Government’s primary responsibility. And the
Sudanese Government cannot be exempt from that rule.
Whatever else we may do, as the AU or the United
Nations or the Security Council itself, it is up to us to
help the Sudanese Government in taking responsibility
for its people. The Sudanese Government must accept
that. It must see a role, in that sense, and then there is
no question of our being intruders. I do not see myself
as an intruder in Sudan. And, in any case, we in the AU
now have a Constitutive Act that does not regard an
African troop anywhere in Africa as a foreign troop.
This must, of course, be respected.

recommended about 5,000. Initially, we were talking
about 3,000. We definitely will require between 3,000
and 5,000. This will include soldiers and possibly some
form of fixed-wing aircraft or helicopters. There will
be some police, some observers and some civilian
personnel. All this will be under the auspices of the
AU.
For us, the number is not the issue. I hope that the
Government of Sudan will understand that the number
is not the issue. For us, there are two issues: first,
where we will get the numbers from, and, secondly, the
resources — the logistics — to back up those numbers.
We believe also that we cannot engage in an
interminable operation in the Sudan or in Darfur. We
should have these troops — or forces, or police — until
such time as a permanent political arrangement is
agreed
upon
and
implemented.
Once
the
implementation has started, the Government of the
Sudan must take responsibility for the welfare, wellbeing, protection and security of all its people.
That brings me to another issue. This is a
challenge for us in Africa and for the African Union.
We have never undertaken anything like this before,
and therefore we are not underestimating what it
involves: command and control. We have never done
this before — troops from four, five or six missions
operating together under a unified command in Africa.
We have never done this before, so it will tax all our
resources and capacities. It will require all our
experience to do this.

Having said this, we must make sure that we are
even-handed. A situation where some of us are seen as
backing the rebels and others backing the Government
is not acceptable. That erodes our credibility,
collectively or individually. I believe that we must be
able to tell them all, evenhandedly and collectively,
where they are wrong. We must say to them: “Where
you are wrong, you are wrong. And where you are
wrong, you will be punished, unless you change. You
will be encouraged to change. And where you fail to
change, you will be punished.” I believe that this is
very important.

We have been saying to the world: “Give us the
tools, and we will do the job”. Now you are putting us
to the test, saying, “We will give you the tools; you do
the job.” We have to make sure that that job is properly
done, because, otherwise, we will hear, “Well, we have
given you the tools, and you have made it a mess of it.”
We do not want to do that, so we want adequate tools
and the organization that will match the work we have
to do, and we want to be able to do that work smartly
and expeditiously, and then say to the world, “We have
done the job. Thank you for helping us to do the job
and to achieve what we have achieved.”

We, the African Union, have agreed to move in.
Now, you ask how many people we are. We are about
3,500 — maybe a few more. That number includes
what we call a protection force. This protection force
will include both military troops and police. Maybe it
will be a little larger, but I think Jan Pronk’s report was

As to what else can be done, I wish to thank
Brazil, who rightly noted that we must have early
warning and that we must be proactive. There must be
enhanced cooperation between the Council and the new
Africa. Should it be on a case-by-case basis? I will say
that we need both a structured relationship, and, where

17

S/PV.5043

necessary, a case-by-case approach. But there is
definitely a need for a structured relationship.
The question was asked if the Security Council
should visit Darfur. I do not see any reason why, and I
do not see any reason why not.
The idea of a joint meeting between our own
Peace and Security Council in Africa and this body has
been mentioned. I believe that it would be a useful
meeting, but it must have an agenda: what it aims to
achieve. If the goal is just for us to come here to have a
wonderful time in New York, I would say no. If the
goal is just for you to come to Addis Ababa and have a
wonderful time with us, I would say no. It must be well
prepared. What do we want to achieve? What areas do
we want to cover, and what is the objective at the end
of the day?
Concerning the time table for a political
settlement at the end of this exercise, I do not believe
that one can really set a time table and say, “This is
when it will be over”. I was talking to the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission yesterday, when we
were looking at the general programme and seeing
what we could do and so on, and I said — as I said
earlier in this meeting — that we cannot have a
prolonged presence of AU troops or an AU protection
force in Darfur.
Without wanting to be accused of mentioning
timing or a programme, I am looking at a period of six
months to get everything done, to be able to normalize
and to get the AU forces thinned out. We cannot afford
the usual — United Nations forces starting out for six
months and remaining for six decades. We just cannot
afford that. We do not have the means, and it is not in
our best interest in Africa.
As concerns the lifting of sanctions on timber and
diamonds in Liberia, I do not see why those sanctions
should not be lifted. I think that the reasons for which
the sanctions had been imposed have now been
overtaken. But if there are others reasons of which I am
not aware, I would like to know about them. But I
believe that the sanctions can be lifted.
I think that I have covered everything. If I have
left anything out, please forgive me. Council members
have said so much and they have asked so many
questions, all of which are very good and very useful. I
have taken such copious notes that I have even missed
some out.

18

Let me end on a light note. My friend from
Romania gave the meaning of my name in my
language, and it is almost correct. He said that I should
include the people of Darfur among my subjects — if
President Al-Bashir of the Sudan has no objection.
Normally we in Nigeria have no territorial ambitions,
but, if anyone wants to cede part of his country to us,
we will consider it.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish warmly
to thank the President of the Federal Republic of
Nigeria for his clarifications, for his sense of humour,
for his comments and his profound thoughts, and,
above all, his tremendous commitment to continue, on
behalf of his country and of the African Union, to work
to find a solution to the grave problems facing Africa
and Darfur in particular.
I believe that this meeting has been useful to all
members of the Council in clarifying the situation. The
comments, reflections and responses will undoubtedly
be instructive and useful to Council members as we
continue our consideration of the item on our agenda
we are considering as well as in general, as we
continue to consider issues of peace and security in
Africa which are on the Council’s agenda.
I am certain that, under the leadership of the
President of Nigeria, and with his commitment and his
vision, today we can conclude our meeting with a
greater feeling of hope that the cooperation between
the Council and the African Union and the general
endeavours of the international community will enable
us in the next few weeks to work with somewhat more
optimism to find a solution to this grave humanitarian
crisis. There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
On behalf of the Council, I wish, once again, very
particularly to thank the President of the Federal
Republic of Nigeria, His Excellency Mr. Olusegun
Obasanjo, for having taken the time to meet with the
Security Council.
I express the wish to see continued and
strengthened collaboration between the United Nations
and the African Union in all matters relating to peace
and security on the Africa continent.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.
