A /74/PV.14

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fourth session

14th plenary meeting

Thursday, 10 October 2019, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Muhammad-Bande  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nigeria)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Fialho Rocha
(Cabo Verde), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Agenda item 115
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(a) Appointment of members of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/74/482)
The Acting President: The positions of delegations
regarding the recommendations of the Fifth Committee
have been made clear in the Committee and are reflected
in the relevant official records. Therefore, if there is no
proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, may I
take it that the General Assembly decides not to discuss
the reports of the Fifth Committee that are before the
Assembly today?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote or position. I would
like to remind delegations that explanations are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats. Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I would like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee.

In paragraph 4 of its report, the Fifth Committee
recommends that the General Assembly appoint
Ms. Donna-Marie Chiurazzi-Maxfield of the United
States of America as a member of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
for a term of office beginning on 14 October 2019 and
ending on 31 December 2020.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint Ms. Donna-Marie Chiurazzi-Maxfield as a
member of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions for a term of office beginning
on 14 October 2019 and ending on 31 December 2020?
It was so decided (decision 74/402).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 115.
Agenda item 139
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/74/483)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The
Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution, entitled
“Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations: requests under Article
19 of the Charter”, without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-30972 (E)

*1930972*

A/74/PV.14

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 74/1).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 139.
Agenda items 14, 117, 123 and 124
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Notes by the Secretary-General (A/74/134 and
A/74/199)
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium
Summit
Strengthening of the United Nations system
United Nations reform: measures and proposals
Mr. Dapkiunas (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
creation of the United Nations embodied the natural
aspiration of the peoples of our planet to live in peace,
good-neighbourliness and prosperity. The Preamble to
the Charter calls for all “to practice tolerance and live
together in peace with one another as good neighbours”,
but we cannot say that States have faithfully abided by
that precept since the inception of the United Nations.
We know that the history of the United Nations is one of
successes and failures, expectations met or unfulfilled,
and a dedication to the ideals and principles of the
Organization that is not always matched by consistency
in their realization. There can be no doubt, however, that
the United Nations has contributed to ensuring a timely
response to many, if not all, of the global challenges
that humankind has had to confront.
Next year the United Nations will celebrate
its seventy-fifth anniversary, and that longevity
confirms that the Organization is still needed. There
is no alternative to it. Nor is there any alternative to
multilateralism and dialogue, which are capable of
changing the general perception of conflicts today and
of the pathways to emerging from them. In that regard,
we believe that the main direction we should take to
strengthen the United Nations should be through the
creation of a genuinely multilateral format aimed at
seeking a consensus based on the principles of common
sense and mutual compromise. The Member States
decided through their adoption of resolution 73/299 that
the theme of the high-level meeting commemorating
2/15

10/10/2019

the anniversary in 2020 will be “The future we want,
the United Nations we need: reaffirming our collective
commitment to multilateralism”. The forthcoming
anniversary should be an excellent opportunity to recall
the reasons — not just victory in the Second World
War, but also the importance of preserving peace and
security — that led our predecessors to establish the
United Nations in that far-off year of 1945.
International Delegate’s Day was established this
year (resolution 73/286) on the initiative of Belarus and
will be celebrated on 25 April, the day that the United
Nations Conference on International Organization
began in San Francisco in 1945, the Conference that
ended with the signing of the Charter. That day is a
reminder of the history of the creation of the United
Nations and of the fact that it is the human factor that
is the most important guarantee of the success of any
dialogue and of our ability to strengthen multilateralism
and trust. We invite anyone interested to consider what
the format of its celebration at the United Nations
might be.
Throughout its existence the United Nations has
tried not only to deal with challenges and threats that have
emerged but also to improve its institutional structure
in order to react effectively to conflict situations. It
was the late former Secretary-General Kofi Annan who
first called for large-scale reform of the United Nations,
and we believe that our current Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres, is successfully continuing that
legacy. He has achieved a great deal, especially with
regard to the reorganization of the United Nations
development system. We hope that the reoriented
development system will become a driving force for the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals and
will end the fragmentation of the Organization’s efforts
on the ground. The Funding Compact (A/74/73/Add.1)
for the reorganization of financing, which Belarus
helped to develop, is an important tool for supporting
States in their implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s initiatives
developing reforms designed to help the Organization
cope with the crisis it is facing in dealing with the
prevention of international conflicts. The steps taken
to reorganize the peace and security components of the
Secretariat and revitalize the peacekeeping system as
a whole have had broad support from States. However,
if we are to add further success to these beginnings,
we call for a considered and balanced interpretation
19-30972

10/10/2019

of those initiatives, especially when they involve the
imposition of issues that are not central to peacekeeping,
such as the protection of human rights, interference in
political processes and the involvement of civil society
in peacekeeping activities. They are the prerogative of
the States themselves.
Belarus has repeatedly raised the issue of ending
duplication in the work of the General Assembly and
its Main Committees and the Economic and Social
Council. The time has come to review the agendas
of the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council and to remove duplicative items. For
example, the Economic and Social Council segment
on operational activities for development is virtually a
duplicate of the agenda of the Second Committee, and
its humanitarian affairs segment of that of the Third
Committee. Nor are we convinced of the necessity of
fully aligning those agendas with the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, which is intrinsically
temporary, and we have to look at it with the future
in mind.
We cannot strengthen the United Nations without
supporting the effective functioning of the Security
Council and its subsidiary bodies. The Sanctions
Committees of the Security Council unquestionably
play an important role in ensuring compliance with
its decisions. The reports of its groups of experts are
designed to provide an objective, impartial picture of
the implementation and monitoring of compliance with
Security Council’s restrictive measures. We believe
that the practice whereby one or another conclusion
in the reports of the expert groups on sanctions is
based on an arbitrary interpretation of the facts and
on entirely unsupported assumptions about violations
of the sanction regime undermines the effectiveness
of the work of the Council’s subsidiary bodies. In our
opinion, attempts to focus unnecessarily on issues that
are not relevant to the subject of restrictive measures
are counterproductive, wasteful and detrimental to the
real tasks of the Sanctions Committees.
Life goes on, and the United Nations, too, will
need strengthening and renewal in future. However,
we believe that we should always remember that the
steps taken to strengthen should be reasonable and
useful, and that renewal should not become reform for
reform’s sake.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in the debate on this item.

A/74/PV.14

The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda items 14, 117, 123 and 124.
Agenda item 117 (continued)
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium
Summit
Specific meeting focused on development
(resolution 60/265)
The Acting President: I have been informed that
no Member State has requested to take the floor under
this item. The General Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 117.
The President took the Chair.
Agenda item 126
Global health and foreign policy
Draft resolution (A/74/L.4)
The President: I would like to remind members
that the debate on agenda item 126 is scheduled to be
held on Wednesday, 11 December, as announced on the
General Assembly website.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/73/L.4.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): This oral statement
is made in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of paragraphs 82 and 83 of the
political declaration contained in draft resolution
A/74/L.4, the General Assembly requests the SecretaryGeneral to provide, in consultation with the World Health
Organization and other relevant agencies, a progress
report during the seventy-fifth session of the General
Assembly, and a report, including recommendations
on the implementation of the political declaration
towards achieving universal health coverage, during
the seventy-seventh session of the General Assembly,
which will serve to inform the high-level meeting to be
convened in 2023.
The Secretary-General is also requested to convene
a high-level meeting on universal health coverage in 2023
in New York, aimed at undertaking a comprehensive

19-309723/15

A/74/PV.14

review of the implementation of the political declaration
in order to identify gaps and solutions to accelerate
progress towards the achievement of universal health
coverage by 2030, the scope and modalities of which
shall be decided no later than the seventy-fifth session
of the General Assembly, taking into consideration the
outcomes of other existing health-related processes and
the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.
Pursuant to the request contained in paragraph 82
of the draft resolution, the request for documentation
would constitute an addition to the documentation
workload of the Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management of one pre-session document
with a total word-count of 8,500 words, in all six
languages, in 2020, and one pre-session document
of with a total word-count of 8,500 words, in all six
languages, in 2022. Those would constitute an addition
to the documentation workload for the Department
for General Assembly and Conference Management
in 2020 and 2022. The additional requirements for
documentation would arise in 2022 in the amount of
$27,200, while the additional requirements for 2020
in the amount of $27,200 would be met within the
programme budget proposed for approval for 2020.
With regard to paragraph 83, it is understood that
issues related to the high-level meeting to be convened
in 2023, including the scope and modalities, are yet to be
determined. Accordingly, in the absence of modalities
for the meeting, it is not possible at the present time
to estimate the potential cost implications of meetings
and documentation requirements. Upon the decision on
the modalities of the meeting, the Secretary-General
would submit the relevant costs of such requirements
in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly. Furthermore, the dates of the
meetings would have to be determined in consultation
with the Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly
adopt draft resolution A/74/L.4, additional resource
requirements currently estimated in the amount of
$27,200 would be included in the proposed programme
budget for 2022 under section 2, General Assembly
and Economic and Social Council Affairs and
Conference Management.
The statement that I have just read out has been
made available on the PaperSmart portal.
4/15

10/10/2019

The President: The Assembly will now take
action on draft resolution A/74/L.4, entitled “Political
declaration of the high-level meeting on universal
health coverage”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/74/L.4?
Draft resolution
(resolution 74/2).

A/74/L.4

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Bonilla Alarcón (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Guatemala welcomes resolution 74/2, by
which the General Assembly has adopted the political
declaration approved by the high-level meeting on
universal health coverage on 23 September, and
appreciates the efforts of the co-facilitators of the
process, Ambassadors Kaha Imnadze of Georgia and
Vitavas Srivihok of Thailand.
Our Magna Carta, the Constitution of the World
Health Organization, states that
“the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard
of health is one of the fundamental rights of every
human being without distinction of race, religion,
political belief, economic or social condition.”
As a State that values multilateralism, we therefore
recognize the relevance of the political declaration
and reaffirm Guatemala’s commitment to the physical,
social and mental well-being of its citizens and commit
to joining efforts to make universal health coverage
a reality for all in accordance with the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, particularly Sustainable
Development Goal 3, which reads “Ensure healthy lives
and promote well-being for all at all ages”.
With regard to the integral approach to health,
Guatemala would like to express a reservation
concerning paragraph 68 of the political declaration,
which relates to references and interpretations of
universal access to sexual and reproductive health-care
services. We reaffirm before the General Assembly
that article 3 of our Constitution establishes that the
Guatemalan State guarantees and protects human life
from its conception, as well as the integrity and safety
of the person.
19-30972

10/10/2019

Mr. Hoshino (Japan): I am personally thrilled
to be here in the Hall of the General Assembly as we
formally adopt the political declaration on universal
health coverage (resolution 74/2). As Chair of the Group
of Friends of Universal Health Coverage and Global
Health, I would like to express my heartfelt appreciation
and deep respect for everyone who contributed to
the political declaration of the high-level meeting on
universal health coverage. I would particularly like to
thank the co-facilitators, Ambassadors Kaha Imnadze
and Vitavas Srivihok, the Permanent Representatives
of Georgia and Thailand, for their dedicated and skilful
facilitation of the efforts to achieve this truly historic
consensus. I am grateful that the Group of Friends
was able to contribute to the process by building
momentum and deepening understanding of universal
health coverage as a fundamental enabler of the
Sustainable Development Goals, as well as building on
multi-stakeholder engagement, including the key task
of ensuring universal health coverage by 2030.
As Prime Minister Abe stated in his closing
remarks at the high-level meeting, Japan emphasizes
the importance of achieving universal health coverage
at the global level while using its own experience
of managing universal health coverage as key to
socioeconomic development and to an ageing society
that is a healthy one. With the conviction that universal
health coverage embodies the notion of human security,
which is to leave no one behind, we have sought to
promote universal health coverage both bilaterally
and through global forums, including international
organizations, the Group of Seven and, most recently,
through our presidency of the Group of Twenty.
Those efforts culminated in the political declaration
on universal health coverage, which, in the words of
the Secretary-General, is “the most comprehensive
agreement ever reached on global health”. It represents
the highest commitment of world leaders to achieving
universal health coverage by 2030, which includes
coverage for all people through quality essential health
services, and to eliminating the possibility of being
impoverished by excessive health-related expenses, to
name only a few objectives. Those commitments cut
across all health challenges, including communicable
and non-communicable diseases, and even go beyond
health to include human rights and financing, which
all necessitate intense political commitment and
multi-stakeholder engagement.

A/74/PV.14

It is now time for us Member States to deliver our
on commitments. Japan stands ready to accelerate its
efforts while leveraging relevant forums, including the
second Universal Health Coverage Forum, to be held in
Bangkok, and the Tokyo Nutrition for Growth Summit
in 2020, as well as the high-level review meeting on
universal health coverage here in New York in 2023,
with a view to achieving universal health coverage by
the year 2030.
Mrs. Bogyay (Hungary): From Hungary’s
perspective, universal health coverage was seen as
a good initiative because its fundamental objective
is to provide a high level of health care to those in
need in developing countries. We therefore assumed
that the initiative would be supported. And yet it is
with regret that we have seen such a well-intentioned
political initiative draw heavily on the Global Compact
for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, which one
fifth of Member States have not supported. During the
negotiations of the political declaration of the highlevel meeting on universal health coverage (resolution
74/2), Hungary had several reservations and repeatedly
expressed its doubts. However, in a spirit of compromise
and constructiveness, the Hungarian Government
decided to support the adoption of the Declaration, as
stated by Péter Szijjártó, Minister of Foreign Affairs
and Trade of Hungary, at the recent high-level event
on universal health coverage. Hungary is of the view
that the political declaration, like any other similar
document, should respect national competencies and
the principle of sovereignty, as every State has the right
to formulate and decide the structure of its national
health policy.
We do not agree with an approach based on the
notion that all are entitled to enjoy the same quality of
health care regardless of their status. We cannot adopt
any legislation that would discriminate against our own
citizens. That is why Hungary expressed reservations
with regard to paragraphs 70 and 71. Regarding
paragraphs 68 and 69, Hungary remains dedicated to
its human rights commitments, including the protection
and promotion of women’s rights and equality between
men and women. Hungary is deeply committed to
the implementation of the Programme of Action
of the International Conference on Population and
Development and the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action, as well as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, which also serve as basic references in
the area of sexual and reproductive health and rights.

19-309725/15

A/74/PV.14

Hungary notes that the term “sexual and reproductive
health and rights” and related issues, such as sexual
rights, comprehensive sexual education, modern
methods of contraception and emergency contraception,
lack consensus definitions at the international level,
including within the European Union. Those issues
are interpreted and promoted by Hungary in the
context of the 2030 Agenda, the Programme of Action
of the International Conference on Population and
Development and the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action and in line with its national legislation. That
is why Hungary joined the initiative of the United States
and is committed to further cooperation to promote
those values.
Mr. Salah (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation
would like to express its appreciation and thanks for
the efforts of the co-facilitators, the Ambassadors of
Georgia and Thailand, who helped us reach consensus
on the political declaration of the high-level meeting on
universal health coverage (resolution 74/2).
The declaration includes highly important objectives
aimed at enabling us to truly tackle the challenges
that many peoples and societies face in aspiring to
affordable and quality health care. Achieving those
goals would constitute a further step towards realizing
the Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.
International cooperation based on genuine political
will and determination is essential if we are to ensure
solidarity with the health-care sector in poor countries
and countries dealing with instability and conflict.
That is the best means of implementing the declaration.
Following up and monitoring its implementation,
while addressing the problems and difficulties facing
it, would help with its implementation on the ground,
including its noble humanitarian goals for the benefit
of humankind. That is why my delegation joined the
consensus on the declaration.
We had hoped that other delegations would not
include any controversial concepts in the declaration,
especially since we are all aware that the Third
Committee is often a scene of serious controversies
in discussions of issues of sexual and reproductive
health. Those two concepts are broad and not clearly
defined. They run counter to the constitutions, national
legislation, religious teachings and social specificities
of many countries. Consequently, while my delegation
would like to join the consensus on the political
6/15

10/10/2019

declaration related to comprehensive health care, that
does not mean that we agree with any reference to
sexual and reproductive health or sex education, as set
out in paragraphs 29, 68 and 69. We have reservations
regarding any paragraphs that run counter to our
national legislation and the teachings of Islam, as well
as the values and ethics of Libyan society.
Ms. Nemroff (United States of America): The
United States supports efforts to expand access to
universal health coverage and believes that we should
view them in the light of the ultimate goal towards
which we as nations have been working at the United
Nations and the World Health Organization for more
than half a century, that is, achieving the highest
attainable standard of mental and physical health for
every person.
Key to the goal of access to universal health
coverage is health care where patients are in control
and have access to high-quality, people-centred
care. To achieve better health, we must draw on the
strengths and resources of both the public and private
sectors by promoting partnerships that include civil
society and non-governmental organizations, as well
as faith- and community-based organizations. This
multifaceted approach to universal health coverage
stands the best chance of delivering high-quality care
that is focused on patients and on improving their
health. We also understand the important role that the
health-related Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
play in assisting countries towards realizing their own
pathways to universal health coverage in accordance
with their national policies and legislation.
The United States, as the world’s largest bilateral
funder of global health programmes, remains firmly
committed to expanding efforts to improve health
around the world. In fiscal year 2019, the United
States Government invested $19 billion in global
health programmes. Through our investments, we
collaborate with Member States and engage with the
United Nations to advance global health and achieve
our shared goals. The United States firmly believes
that we can do more for people by coming together on
those broad areas of agreement where we can achieve
genuine progress, rather than pursuing divisive policies
that promote abortion, diminish the role of the family
and compromise the sovereignty of nations by focusing
on sensitive issues where we know consensus is
not possible.
19-30972

10/10/2019

It was in that spirit that the United States delivered
a joint statement at the high-level meeting on universal
health coverage, where 1.3 billion people from 21
Member States were represented, to make it clear
that we support a positive, consensus-based vision for
universal health coverage that promotes better health
and the preservation of human life and dignity. Our
vision includes strong support for advancing gender
equality and the empowerment of women and girls,
accelerating programmes to end maternal mortality,
improving education opportunities for girls and
ensuring that the health sector is responding effectively
to gender-based violence.
The United States recognizes that each nation has
its own needs and also shares our common goal of
ensuring better health. However, we deplore the fact
that some countries are politicizing the negotiation of
the holitical declaration on universal health coverage
(resolution 74/2) by including language that has been
used to promote abortion as health care and support
sex education, which diminishes the protective role
of the family in improving health. While the United
States joins the consensus on the political declaration
in recognition of the importance of better health for all,
we firmly dissociate ourselves from paragraph 68 of
the declaration.
Despite the months of good-faith efforts to find
common ground and consensus that were prominently
displayed when we reluctantly agreed to the language
in target 3.7 of SDG 3, our efforts were largely
unreciprocated when we were met with a refusal
to delete unacceptable language from target 5.6 of
SDG 5, which is outside the scope of the declaration
under discussion. Furthermore, we note that only
documents approved by the General Assembly
may inform understanding and implementation in
multilateral forums. We do not accept references to
ambiguous terms and expressions such as “sexual and
reproductive health and reproductive rights”, which can
undermine the critical role of the family and promote
practices such as abortion in circumstances that do
not enjoy international consensus, and which can be
misinterpreted by United Nations agencies. There is no
international right to abortion.
We remain deeply concerned about the possibility
that comprehensive sexuality education programmes
can undermine the protective role of the family in such
education and condone harmful sexual risks for young
people. We continue to be a stalwart defender of all

A/74/PV.14

women, men, children and families, and we support
programmes to improve their health, life, dignity and
well-being. As President Trump said in his address to
the General Assembly,
“Americans will also never tire of defending
innocent life. We are aware that many United
Nations projects have attempted to assert a global
right to taxpayer-funded abortion on demand
right up until the moment of delivery. Global
bureaucrats have absolutely no business attacking
the sovereignty of nations that wish to protect
innocent life. Like many nations here today, we in
America believe that every child, born and unborn,
is a sacred gift from God.” (A/74/PV.3, p.15)
Furthermore, the United States wishes to express
solidarity with Hungary on the issue of migration as
it is captured in the political declaration. The United
States shares Hungary’s concerns about the document’s
treatment of the issue of migration. The term “migrant”
is not well defined in international law and not all
migrants are inherently vulnerable, as is suggested
in paragraphs 70 and 71. Furthermore, with regard to
those paragraphs and paragraph 9, the United States
does not have any international obligations pertaining
to the provision of social services to aliens. As a matter
of policy and under its domestic law, the United States
supports access to emergency health care for everyone
on its territory, regardless of immigration status, but
does not recognize any right to access to health care
beyond emergency services. As a former United States
Attorney General has noted, “No great and prosperous
nation can have both a generous welfare system and
open borders.”
Finally, the United States looks forward to working
with all Member States to forge an international
consensus that takes varying national and cultural
contexts into account and promotes families and
communities as a vital part of the solution. By
working together and focusing on the important work
of expanding health and opportunities for all people,
especially those in situations of risk or vulnerability,
we can successfully accelerate health for all and achieve
the goal of universal health coverage.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position. We will now hear statements
after the adoption of the resolution.
I give the floor to the observer of the European Union.

19-309727/15

A/74/PV.14

Mr. Casal Rodríguez (European Union): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its member States. The candidate countries
North Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova, align
themselves with this statement.
At the outset, I would like to express my appreciation
for the leadership of the United Nations in the global
challenges we face and to commend the work of the
co-facilitators of the political declaration of the highlevel meeting on universal health coverage (resolution
74/2), Mr. Kaha Imnadze and Mr. Vitavas Srivihok, the
Permanent Representatives of Georgia and Thailand,
as well as their teams, for their passion and energy in
reaching consensus on the political declaration.
We in the European Union are firmly committed to
delivering on the Sustainable Development Goals, which
are our guiding policy framework. The EU is committed
to protecting and promoting the right of everyone to
enjoy the highest attainable standard of physical and
mental health, in line with national regulations, and to
promoting human dignity, well-being and prosperity
as essential investments in achieving stable and
prosperous societies, economic and social well-being
and security. We follow a rights-based approach, in
accordance with the values that health systems within
the EU are built on and that are also enshrined in the
European Consensus on Development.
The EU remains committed to promoting,
protecting and fulfilling all human rights and to the full
and effective implementation of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action, as well as the Programme of
Action of the International Conference on Population
and Development and the outcomes of its review
conferences. We also remain committed to sexual and
reproductive health and rights. In that context, the EU
reaffirms its commitment to promoting, protecting
and fulfilling the right of every individual to have full
control over and decide freely and responsibly matters
related to their sexuality and sexual and reproductive
health, free from discrimination, coercion or violence.
The EU further stresses the need for universal
access to quality, affordable, comprehensive sexual
and reproductive health information and education,
including comprehensive sexual education and healthcare services.
8/15

10/10/2019

The EU will also continue to support its partner
countries in their efforts to build strong, good-quality
and resilient health systems by promoting equitable
access to medical services and universal health
coverage. Eradicating poverty, tackling discrimination
and inequalities and leaving no one behind will remain
at the heart of the EU development cooperation policy.
The EU promotes a health-in-all-policies approach
to ensure that the underlying determinants of health
are addressed beyond the health sector, in areas such
as gender equality, water and sanitation, education,
food and nutrition security, decent work and social
protection, environment and security.
We need a comprehensive outlook, one where we
work to have more qualified health workers, access to
vaccinations and affordable medicines, and where we
make sure that the health sector gets the financing it
needs. Together we must face demographic challenges,
the increasing prevalence of non-communicable
diseases, particularly cancer, the growing threat of
antimicrobial resistance and vaccine hesitancy. In
conclusion, I want to assure the General Assembly of
our ongoing and unwavering action aimed at addressing
the issue of universal health coverage at home and
globally in order to achieve universal health coverage
by 2030.
Mr. Varganov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Russia supports the General Assembly’s
adoption, in resolution 74/2, of the political declaration
of the high-level meeting on universal health coverage.
We welcome its affirmation of universal health
coverage as an important factor in fostering healthy
lifestyles and sustainable development in general. We
are pleased that the declaration positions primary health
care as the foundation for achieving universal health
coverage that addresses the tasks of preventing disease
and promoting health. We greatly appreciate the fact
that it reflects aspects such as combating the spread of
non-infectious diseases, tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS and
antimicrobial resistance, as well as the leading role of
Governments in ensuring universal health coverage,
taking into account their national contexts.
With regard to paragraph 68 of the political
declaration, on sexual and reproductive health, we
want to once again point out that in this area we are
guided only by documents that we have agreed on
in an intergovernmental format and that correspond
to our national priorities. We urge all delegations to
19-30972

10/10/2019

engage in a constructive dialogue on a unifying healthcare agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the Observer State of the Holy See.
Monsignor Hansen (Holy See): My delegation
would like to thank the co-facilitators, the Permanent
Representatives of Georgia and Thailand, for their
leadership and efforts during the negotiations leading to
today’s adoption of the political declaration of the highlevel meeting on universal health coverage (resolution
74/2).
The Holy See welcomes the fact that the political
declaration sets out important commitments to
supporting the most vulnerable and engaging all
relevant stakeholders in designing better health systems.
As such, it represents a significant step forward in our
common efforts to provide every man, woman and child
with health care. Greater efforts are clearly needed. We
should focus attention on the health-care needs of the
poorest and of all those who are most at risk of being
left behind. Besides being a question of responding to a
right denied, taking care of the basic health-care needs
of the poorest is key in breaking the vicious cycle of
poverty from one generation to the next.
As for the specific issues covered in the political
declaration, the Holy See commends the emphasis
placed on policies responding to the food and nutrition
needs of all people, with special emphasis on the
nutrition needs of pregnant and lactating women,
women of reproductive age, adolescent girls and infants
and young children, especially during the first 1,000
days of life. Good nutrition in the first 1,000 days
provides a foundation for lifelong health for both women
and children from conception, and investing in costeffective nutrition interventions in the first 1,000 days
can therefore lead to lower child and maternal mortality
and healthier mothers and babies. My delegation is also
pleased to see the recognition of the importance of the
engagement of families and communities as one of the
core components of health-system governance, as well
as the emphasis placed on antimicrobial resistance,
mental health and non-communicable diseases.
While affirming the intention and purpose of the
declaration before us as I have outlined, my delegation
wishes to express reservations about various concepts
in it. First, in line with its reservations already
expressed at the international conferences in Beijing
and Cairo, the Holy See reiterates that it considers the

A/74/PV.14

phrase “reproductive health” and related terms to apply
to a holistic concept of health that embraces the person
in the entirety of his or her personality, mind and body.
In particular, the Holy See rejects an interpretation that
considers abortion, or access to abortion, sex-selective
abortion, the abortion of foetuses diagnosed with
health challenges, maternal surrogacy and sterilization
as dimensions of these terms or of universal health
coverage. Secondly, the Holy See emphasizes that any
reference to gender and related terms are understood
according to the ordinary, generally accepted usage of
the word “gender” based on biological identity that is
male and female.
Mr. Pasquier (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland welcomes the commitment and the efforts
of the international community to guarantee that all
should benefit from the health care they need without
encountering financial difficulties. It is crucial to
ensure that essential health services are of high quality.
In that regard, Switzerland emphasizes three specific
requirements. The first is high-quality health-care
systems that strengthen patient security and focus on
patients’ well-being. The second is health-care systems
that implement universal health coverage while
remaining financially viable in the long term. The third
is universal health coverage that guarantees access to
high-quality care in emergency situations.
We welcome the fact that these elements are included
in the political declaration of the high-level meeting on
universal health coverage (resolution 74/2), and that all
the gains that have been made in the framework of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development on sexual
and reproductive health and rights have been preserved.
Switzerland is also committed to a system that
encourages research and development in the area of
innovative medicine and treatment, building on the
capacities of both the private and public sectors. Lastly,
in order to strengthen the universal coverage of our
health-care systems and fulfil our obligations in that
regard, it is essential to take an approach that includes a
constructive dialogue with all the relevant stakeholders
at the regional, national and international levels.
The President: We have heard the last speaker on
this item.
I would like to express my sincere thanks to
Ambassadors Kaha Imnadze of Georgia and Vitavas
Srivihok of Thailand, the co-facilitators of the
informal consultations, who demonstrated great skill

19-309729/15

A/74/PV.14

10/10/2019

and patience in their conduct of the discussion and
complex negotiations on the draft resolution. I also
thank Member States for their valuable contributions to
reaching an agreement on resolution 74/2.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 126.
Agenda item 19
Sustainable development
(b) Follow-up to and implementation of the SIDS
Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA)
Pathway and the Mauritius Strategy for the
Further Implementation of the Programme
of Action for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States
Draft resolution (A/74/L.3)
The President: Members will recall that the General
Assembly, at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 20 September
2019, decided to allocate sub-item (b) of agenda item
19 also to the plenary meeting for the purpose of the
adoption of the draft political declaration of the highlevel meeting to review progress made in addressing
the priorities of small island developing States (SIDS)
through the implementation of the SIDS Accelerated
Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/74/L.3, entitled “Political declaration of the highlevel meeting to review progress made in addressing
the priorities of small island developing States through
the implementation of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities
of Action (SAMOA) Pathway”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/74/L.3?
Draft resolution
(resolution 74/3).

A/74/L.3

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Juárez Argueta (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to begin by reiterating the
Guatemalan Government’s solidarity with the
Commonwealth of the Bahamas and the other countries
affected by the recent passage of Hurricane Dorian. We
wish them a speedy recovery.
10/15

Guatemala welcomes the recent successful
midterm review of the Small Island Developing States
Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway
and the unanimous adoption of the political declaration
today (resolution 74/3), which we see as a sign that the
world is waking up to climate change and its adverse
effects. We are pleased that the political declaration
highlights the importance not only of partnerships for
development but also of family remittances, which, as
established in resolution 72/281, on the International
Day of Family Remittances, have a transformative
effect on the communities to which they are sent.
We also welcome the Economic Commission
for Latin America and the Caribbean’s debt relief
initiative, which takes into account the needs of
Caribbean nations and recommends an approach that
encompasses the financing for development principles
and the Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, and among
other things proposes a Caribbean resilience fund for
countries that benefit from debt reduction. The initiative
demonstrates the value of regional commissions as
drivers of technical research-based solutions tailored
to local realities and as promoters of cooperation and
support among nearby countries.
We also stress the importance of the transfer
of appropriate, reliable, affordable, modern and
environmentally friendly technology, as well as
the advancement of traditional knowledge and
women’s empowerment.
With that in mind, we would like to take this
opportunity to extend our solidarity and support to
small island developing States (SIDS), in view of
their extreme vulnerability to the effects of climate
change. Although we are all facing those effects,
SIDS are likely to be their primary victims, and
any solution will therefore require a comprehensive
approach to improving their adaptation and resilience.
While Guatemala is not an island State, it is located
in the Central American isthmus, in the same highly
vulnerable geographic area as the Caribbean, and as
such the lives, financial stability, basic infrastructure
and livelihoods of our citizens are under threat.
As a middle-income country, we continue to face
particular challenges. That is why we also urge the
United Nations to draw up a comprehensive, longterm strategy aimed at facilitating cooperation for
sustainable development and coordinating support for
19-30972

10/10/2019

a more appropriate and refined classification of the
middle-income country category, based on criteria
beyond the simple one of per capita income.
I would like to conclude by congratulating the small
island developing States on a successful meeting and
on today’s adoption of the political declaration, which
will enable us to make progress with the revision of an
instrument that has been crucial to recognition by the
United Nations of the special circumstances that those
countries face and to concerted efforts to ensure that,
as the 2030 Agenda says, no one is left behind.
Ms. Nemroff (United States of America): On behalf
of the United States Government, I would like to extend
our thanks to the co-facilitators, Ambassadors Prasad
and Byrne Nason, the Permanent Representatives of
Fiji and Ireland, for their excellent facilitation of the
Small Island Developing States Accelerated Modalities
of Action (SAMOA) Pathway midterm review.
The United States appreciated the opportunity to
participate in the important discussions on 27 September
during the high-level week of the General Assembly.
Furthermore, we understand the unique circumstances
facing small island developing States and are committed
to working with them to tackle global and regional
challenges, including promoting regional security and
stability, advancing sustainable growth, addressing
environmental challenges, responding to natural
disasters and strengthening our people-to-people ties.
We particularly stand with the people of the
Commonwealth of the Bahamas in their efforts to
recover from Hurricane Dorian, and we are proud to
have provided approximately $34 million in immediate
relief after the storm.
The United States has a long history of working
with small island developing States and looks forward to
continuing our fruitful cooperation in the years to come.
The United States supports nearly every United Nationsdesignated small island developing State that is eligible
to receive official development assistance (ODA). Over
the past five years, net United States bilateral ODA to
small island developing States has amounted to a total
of $3.2 billion. Notably, on the margins of the General
Assembly high-level week, Secretary of State Pompeo
announced that the United States would be providing
more than $100 million in new support to the Pacific
island countries, in addition to the $350 million that
United States departments and agencies already invest

A/74/PV.14

annually to promote self-reliance and humanitarian
response in the Pacific region.
We want to take this opportunity to make important
clarifications regarding language in the political
declaration that we adopted today (resolution 74/3).
We underscore that many of the outcome documents
referenced in the declaration, including the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Addis
Ababa Action Agenda, are non-binding documents that
do not create rights or obligations under international
law or any new financial commitments.
The United States recognizes the 2030 Agenda
as a global framework for sustainable development
that can help countries work towards global peace and
prosperity. We applaud the call for shared responsibility,
including national responsibility, in the 2030 Agenda,
and emphasize that all countries have a role to play
in achieving its vision. The 2030 Agenda recognizes
that each country must work towards implementation
in accordance with its own national policies and
priorities. The United States underscores paragraph
18 of the 2030 Agenda, which calls on countries to
implement it in a manner that is consistent with the
rights and obligations of States under international law.
We also highlight our mutual recognition, in paragraph
58, that the implementation of the 2030 Agenda must
respect and be without prejudice to the independent
mandates of other processes and institutions, including
negotiations, and does not prejudge or serve as a
precedent for decisions and actions under way in
other forums. For example, the 2030 Agenda does not
represent a commitment to providing new market access
for goods or services. Neither does it interpret or alter
any World Trade Organization agreement or decision,
including the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property.
Furthermore, regarding the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda reference, we note that much of the trade-related
language in the Addis Ababa outcome document
(resolution 69/313, annex) has been overtaken by events
since July 2015. It is therefore immaterial, and our
reaffirmation of the outcome document has no standing
for ongoing work and negotiations that involve trade.
With respect to the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change and the climate-change language referenced
in the outcome document, the United States reaffirms
its intention to withdraw from the Paris Agreement
at the earliest opportunity. The Paris Agreement and

19-3097211/15

A/74/PV.14

climate-change language is therefore without prejudice
to United States positions. We affirm our support for
promoting economic growth and improving energy
security while protecting the environment.
With respect to the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change (IPCC) special report, Global
Warming of 1.5°C, referenced in the declaration, we
note that, as the United States has already conveyed to
the IPCC, acceptance of the report and approval of its
summary for policymakers by the IPPC does not imply
endorsement of the specific findings or underlying
contents of the report by the United States. The United
States therefore does not concur with the references to
the IPCC in the resolution, and that language is without
prejudice to United States positions.
The United States reiterates its views on the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030
from the United States explanation of position delivered
at that document’s adoption in 2015 (see A/69/PV.92).
We strongly support disaster risk reduction initiatives
designed to decrease the loss of life and the social and
economic impacts of disasters. Such assistance helps
increase preparedness and promote greater resilience
for everyone.
With respect to the New Urban Agenda referenced
in the political declaration, the United States notes that
each Member State has the sovereign right to determine
how it conducts trade with other countries and that this
includes restricting trade in certain circumstances.
Economic sanctions, whether unilateral or multilateral,
can be a successful means of achieving foreign-policy
objectives. In cases where the United States has applied
sanctions, we have used them with specific objectives
in mind, including as a means to promote a return to
the rule of law or democratic systems, to insist on the
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
or to prevent threats to international security.
We are within our rights to deploy our trade and
commercial policy as tools to achieve our objectives.
Targeted economic sanctions can be an appropriate,
effective and legitimate alternative to the use of force.
The United States enjoys strong and growing trade
relationships across the globe. We welcome efforts
to bolster those relationships, increase economic
cooperation and drive prosperity for all of our peoples
through free, fair and reciprocal trade. However, as
President Trump stated in his address to the General

12/15

10/10/2019

Assembly at its seventy-third session, on 25 September
2018 (see A/73/PV.6), the United States will act in its
sovereign interest, including on trade matters. The
United States does not take its trade policy direction
from the United Nations.
It is our view that the United Nations must respect
the independent mandates of other processes and
institutions, including trade negotiations, and must
not involve itself in decisions and actions in other
forums, including at the World Trade Organization.
The United Nations is not an appropriate venue for
those discussions, and there should be no expectation or
misconception that the United States would understand
recommendations made by the General Assembly or
the Economic and Social Council on such issues to be
binding. That includes calls that undermine incentives
for innovation, such as technology transfer that is not
both voluntary and on mutually agreed terms.
Regarding paragraphs 22 and 30 (g), according
to publicly available data, we have seen a rise
in correspondent bank payment volumes and in
remittances, with access to correspondent services
for most regions remaining stable. However, we have
also seen some countries contend with a narrowing
of their opportunities to access the international
payments system.
We would like to take this opportunity to stress
the importance of strengthening controls countering
money-laundering and financing for terrorism for small
island developing States. Such improvements will not
only contribute to an environment in which access
to correspondent services is less difficult to procure
but also mitigate the risk that any funds derived from
remittances might erode good governance and security.
With regard to paragraphs 19, 20, 30 (e) and 30
(f), regarding official development assistance, the
proper forums for discussing eligibility measures
are the boards of the multilateral development banks
and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development. We do not accept the United Nations as
the appropriate forum for determining eligibility for
these resources or their allocation.
On paragraphs 30 (k) and 30 (o), the United States
believes that women should have equal access to health
care. We remain committed to the principles laid out in
the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the
Programme of Action of the International Conference

19-30972

10/10/2019

on Population and Development and their reports,
as agreed on by the General Assembly. As has been
made clear over many years, there was international
consensus that these documents do not create new
international rights, including any right to abortion.
The United States fully supports ensuring maternal
and child health and informed and voluntary access
to family planning. We do not recognize abortion as a
method of family planning, nor do we support abortion
in our global health assistance.
Finally, regarding paragraphs 30 (n), 30 (s) and 30
(t), disaster-related funds have been proposed under
the loss and damage negotiation at the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change. The United
States has opposed these proposals, as they imply
liability for the impact of disasters allegedly caused by
greenhouse-gas emissions in developing countries. The
United States does not support the creation of a new
financial instrument with unproven effectiveness that
developed countries would subsequently be called on
to fund.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position.
We will now hear statements after the adoption of
the resolution.
I give the floor to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Parenti (European Union): I have the honour to
deliver a shortened statement on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States.
The European Union and its member States gladly
join the consensus on the adoption by the General
Assembly of the political declaration of the highlevel meeting to review progress made in addressing
the priorities of small island developing States (SIDS)
through the implementation of the SIDS Accelerated
Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway (resolution
74/3). We would like to take this opportunity to thank
Ireland and Fiji for their efforts as co-facilitators of the
negotiations on the document and the Secretariat for its
support throughout the process and for the organization
of the successful high-level midterm review.
We believe that the midterm review, which was held
on 27 September in the context of the General Assembly
high-level week, proved the importance of the full and
effective implementation of the 2014 SAMOA Pathway,

A/74/PV.14

a comprehensive programme of action for small island
developing States that cannot be seen in isolation from
other groundbreaking documents containing provisions
of importance to small island developing States, such
as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda, the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction and the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change.
The EU and its member States welcomed and
engaged actively in the midterm review and related
events. The statement delivered on that occasion by EU
commissioner Julian King described in detail the broad
scope of our cooperation with SIDS. The midterm
review highlighted a number of challenges faced by
SIDS and their specific vulnerabilities, with climate
change described as the single biggest existential threat
to island nations. This is very clearly reflected in the
political declaration that we have just adopted.
However, as the EU, we would have wished for
stronger language around such topics as climate
change, renewable energy, environmental protection,
the oceans and social issues, including gender equality.
After all, these issues are extensively and progressively
treated in the SAMOA Pathway, whose review was the
main objective of the September meeting.
As announced in the context of informal
consultations on the document, the EU and its member
States would like to register with the General Assembly
its position on paragraph 30 of the political declaration.
We recognize the particular importance of efficient
disaster risk management to island nations. We
acknowledge the growing frequency and strength of the
disasters face by island States, which are unquestionably
a negative consequence of climate change. For that
reason, disaster risk management should be, and in fact
already is, the subject of special focus on the part of
SIDS themselves and their development partners.
There are a vast number of disaster-related funds,
financial mechanisms and other instruments in which
SIDS are prioritized in terms of access to funds and
their replenishment. Any deliberation on the disasterrelated funding environment must take into account the
mandate of the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change and other relevant processes and
bodies where these issues have been extensively
discussed and where the examination of the disasterrelated funding and support environment takes place.

19-3097213/15

A/74/PV.14

Let me conclude by saying that we see the
implementation of the provisions of resolution 74/3 as
a collective effort, with important parts to be played
by the countries concerned and the international
community, and action undertaken at the national,
regional and global levels.
The EU and its member States would like to
reassure their SIDS partners that we heard their voices
loud and clear during the September meeting. We
remain committed to their goals, and we will continue
to show our engagement and support, including for the
implementation of the SAMOA Pathway.
Mrs. Coye-Felson (Belize): Let me thank all
members for the decision to adopt the political
declaration today (resolution 74/3).
At the outset, on behalf of the members of the
Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS), I want to
extend our appreciation to the co-facilitators, the
Ambassadors of Fiji and Ireland, for their hard work
and for steering us towards an outcome that garnered
the full support of the States Members of the United
Nations. We would also like to express our appreciation
for the constructive engagement of all our partners
and the very strong solidarity of our fellow developing
countries throughout the negotiations and during the
high-level midterm review itself.

10/10/2019

States. There are many processes involved in different
ways in addressing these responses, but we should look
at them through a cross-cutting lens.
We now need to issue an unequivocal call for urgent
integrated action in order to slow the loss of biodiversity
and rapidly reduce greenhouse-gas emissions globally
through investments in low-emission, climate-resilient
pathways with the goal of limiting our planet’s warming
to 1.5°C. We must also revisit the terms of access to
grants and concessionary financing for SIDS. We should
reduce gaps in data capacity and develop a monitoring
and evaluation framework to support evidence-based
decision-making. And we need to retrofit multi-country
offices and orient the relevant regional commissions so
that we see greater gains on the ground, with the steady
support of the United Nations system. Those early steps
are critical, as the window of opportunity for SIDS to
achieve sustainable development is rapidly closing. We
would even say that those measures represent the bare
minimum of what this institution can do to ensure it
makes good on its commitment to SIDS.
AOSIS will continue to advocate for ambitious
action on sustainable development and climate change,
and we will do so in a truly multilateral spirit. We will
do so as a responsibility to our own people, but equally,
as responsible members of the United Nations.

The political declaration signals a step forward for
a more targeted approach to the implementation of the
Small Island Developing States (SIDS) Accelerated
Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway, so as to speed
up its progress. But it is now incumbent on all of us to
turn those words into actions and thoughts into deeds.
As a first step, we look forward to seeing the SecretaryGeneral transmit the declaration system-wide as soon
as possible and ensure its dissemination well beyond
the United Nations so that we can begin effectively
implementing and following up the SAMOA Pathway
with urgency.

The President: I would like to express my sincere
thanks to Ambassador Satyendra Prasad of Fiji and
Ambassador Geraldine Byrne Nason of Ireland,
the co-facilitators of the informal consultations,
who demonstrated great skill and patience in their
conducting of the discussions and complex negotiations
on resolution 74/3. I also want to thank Member
States for their valuable contributions to reaching an
agreement on the draft resolution.

Another important step forward during this session
is operationalizing through the work of the General
Assembly the provisions agreed to in the declaration.
We now need to fashion an appropriate response — or
multiple responses, as the case may demand — in order
to drive a wedge between the cycle of extreme events
and attendant high debt so that small island developing
States can sustain socioeconomic gains and build the
resilience of our fledgling islands and low-lying coastal

Announcement by the President

14/15

The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 19.

The President: Before concluding, I wish to make
an announcement concerning the membership of the
General Committee of the General Assembly at its
seventy-fourth session.
Members will recall that for the seventy-fourth
session, the President, the 21 Vice-Presidents and
the Chairs of five of the six Main Committees were

19-30972

10/10/2019

elected during the previous session. I would like to
inform members that subsequently, on 7 October, His
Excellency Mr. Andreas Mavroyiannis of Cyprus was
elected Chair of the Administrative and Budgetary
Committee (Fifth Committee) of the General Assembly

A/74/PV.14

at its seventy-fourth session and is accordingly a
member of the General Committee for this session.
I congratulate the Chair of the Fifth Committee on
his election.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

19-3097215/15
