A /69/PV.100

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

100th plenary meeting

Thursday, 30 July 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa

In the absence of the President, Mr. Antoine
(Grenada), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 13 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/69/L.80)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly held a debate on agenda item 13 and its
sub-item (a) jointly with agenda item 115 at its 51st
plenary meeting, on 14 November 2014. Members will
also recall that under agenda item 13, the Assembly
adopted resolution 69/288 at its 81st plenary meeting,
on 5 March 2015.
I have the honour to make the following statement
on behalf of His Excellency Sam Kutesa, President of
the General Assembly:
“I would like to commend the delegations of
Gabon and Germany and the many sponsors of draft
resolution A/69/L.80 for this important initiative and
step forward in addressing the serious implications
of illicit trafficking in wildlife. The draft resolution
calls for effective measures to prevent and counter
the serious problem of crimes that have an impact
on the environment, particularly illicit trafficking
in wildlife and wildlife products.

(Uganda)
“It is essential to take decisive steps at the
national level to prevent, combat and eradicate
the illegal trade in wildlife, on both the supply
and demand sides, including by strengthening the
legislation necessary for preventing, investigating
and prosecuting such illegal trade. We also need
to further strengthen regional and international
cooperation to effectively deal with that challenge.
“Illegal wildlife trafficking not only threatens
species and ecosystems, it affects the livelihoods
of local communities and diminishes tourism
attractions. It compromises efforts to eradicate
poverty and achieve sustainable development.
Given the role of organized criminal networks,
armed groups and even terrorist groups in illegal
wildlife trafficking, this scourge also carries with
it serious security implications for many countries
and regions. The adoption of today’s draft resolution
and its effective implementation will be crucial to
our collective efforts to combat illicit trafficking in
wildlife worldwide.”
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Emmanuel Issoze-Ngondet, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Francophonie and Regional Integration of
Gabon, to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.80.
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to say how glad I am to be in
the General Assembly today for this plenary meeting,
and especially since the subject of draft resolution
A/69/L.80, under consideration today, combating the
poaching and illicit trafficking of wild fauna and flora,

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-23794 (E)

*1523794*

A/69/PV.100

is one of my country’s top priorities. I would therefore
like to convey to the President, on behalf of Mr. Ali
Bongo Ondimba, the President and Head of State of
the Republic of Gabon, our thanks for organizing this
important meeting. I am deeply grateful to Germany, in
its capacity as co-author of the draft resolution, as well
as to the group of friends who have worked tirelessly
throughout the negotiations. And of course my thanks
also go to all delegations for the constant support they
have shown during the process.
It was in 2013, here at the United Nations, that we
launched this initiative against the poaching and illicit
trafficking in wildlife. On that occasion, addressing
himself to the entire world, President Ali Bongo
Ondimba drew attention to the extremely destructive
effects of poaching and the importance of acting quickly
and cooperatively in order to combat the problem. He
took care to point out that wildlife poaching is at once
an environmental, economic and security threat. He
then proposed that the Secretary-General consider
appointing a special envoy to coordinate the various
efforts required to fight this illicit trade. At that
point it was already a very profitable enterprise and
highly attractive activity whose dividends drive the
perpetrators to brave all the risks it carries.
Take, for example, the situation of elephants,
symbols of the ravages of poaching in Africa. In 2006,
their population consisted of about 550,000 individuals.
Today they are estimated at about 470,000 throughout
the African continent. Over the years, the devastation
has reached extreme proportions, with between 20,000
and 30,000 elephants killed each year. Gabon, which
is home to more than half of the elephants in Africa’s
forests, has also been heavily hit by this scourge. Since
2004, nearly 20,000 elephants have been killed in our
country’s national parks. Today the threat of poaching
continues to grow. Illicit trafficking in wildlife is
estimated at $19 billion a year and is the fourth-highest
type of illegal trafficking in the world. It damages the
environment, it represents a genuine health risk and it is
a drag on our economies. And, ultimately, it is a threat
to security, particularly in some regions of Africa.
The impact of illicit wildlife trafficking on
the environment is well established. It contributes
significantly to ecological imbalances in our forests.
The pressure it places on fauna has undermined the
ability of many species to survive. If we do not act now,
their extinction could become a strong probability.

2/8

30/07/2015

Trafficking is a health risk. In fact, the clandestine
nature of poaching increases the risk of the spread of
illnesses. Many species cross borders and thereby avoid
the monitoring of health-care services. According to
studies by the World Wildlife Fund, such trafficking
represents at least one quarter of all animals sold
worldwide. For its part, the World Health Organization
estimates that nearly 75 per cent of emerging diseases
are transmitted to humans by wild animals.
Trafficking hinders the economic development
of our countries. Poachers and other traffickers
disrupt the stability of businesses in remote areas.
The instability caused by the regular attacks by these
traffickers is likely to deter investment and undermines
the implementation of sustainable development
programmes. The ecotourism industry is significantly
affected, although it is obviously one of the most
reliable sources of income and employment for local
populations.
Illicit trafficking in wildlife is a source of
national and regional instability. As a manifestation of
transnational organized crime, trafficking generates
roaming armed groups that are well structured and often
better armed than regular armies. It has been noted in
recent years that armed terrorist groups, operating in
Africa in particular, are using poaching and illegal
trafficking of wildlife to increase their incomes. Such
trafficking generates illicit funds that allow the groups
to acquire the most sophisticated weapons. Their
methods are inspired from drug traffickers, which
contributes to the proliferation of arms in Africa.
In tackling illicit trafficking in wildlife, we have
no choice but to cooperate. No State can overcome
this phenomenon on its own. As with drug trafficking
and human trafficking, we are dealing with wellorganized international criminal networks that are
greedy for profit. A concerted effort on the part of the
international community seems to me to be essential.
The countries of origin, transit and destination must
work together. No lasting results can be achieved if this
chain is not strong. In that chain, the countries that are
most concerned are not on one side, with those that are
less concerned on the other. The glaring truth is that a
lack of involvement on the part of some will undermine
the effectiveness of our approaches and thereby
contribute to the entrenchment and perpetuation of the
phenomenon. Only with solidarity and cooperation can
we be effective. That is the principle that has guided
Gabon, Germany and the Group of Friends.

15-23794

30/07/2015

A/69/PV.100

The President of the Republic, Mr. Ali Bongo
Ondimba, has long been personally and continuously
committed to calling on the international community
whenever he has had the opportunity to do so. In
Marrakesh in May 2013, alongside some of his African
peers, he stressed the need to raise such trafficking to
the level of a serious crime. In Paris in December 2013,
he denounced the activities of poachers and highlighted
the link between poaching and national instability. In
London in February 2014, he reiterated the importance
of immediate and significant international action. In
Kasane in March 2015, he called for strengthening
measures against the illegal trade in wildlife.

good governance. The draft resolution therefore calls
for proactive cooperation and more significant regional
coordination. It calls on the United Nations, especially
its specialized agencies, to continue its support to
Member States, notably through capacity-building.
It provides for the possibility for the SecretaryGeneral to appoint a special envoy mandated with
mobilizing interest and significant support against this
phenomenon. The Secretary-General is also invited to
present an annual report. I cannot thus but recommend
its adoption, being convinced that the draft resolution is
in form and in content a synthesis of the different views
of Member States on this subject.

At the national level, the Head of State has
undertaken symbolic actions of great significance from
the outset. For example, in June 2012 he ordered the
incineration of Gabon’s entire ivory stock in the name of
protecting elephants. At this initiative, the Government
has with the utmost resolve strengthened the legal
regime of sanctions against traffickers in order to make
it more deterrent. Moreover, programmes to strengthen
the capacities of the environmental rangers who oversee
national parks have been developed with the support of
friendly countries and international friends. Gabon has
thus demonstrated a strong and obvious determination
to eradicate illicit wildlife trafficking.

In conclusion, I thank all delegations that
participated in the negotiations. They demonstrated a
willingness to compromise that allowed us to conclude
our debates on a positive note. I would also like to
thank all agencies of the United Nations and the
non-governmental organizations that have played an
active part throughout the process.

Draft resolution A/69/L.80 before us today is
sponsored by more than 70 States and certainly presents
an opportunity to coordinate our actions. It would
allow us to implement a comprehensive mechanism that
would take all the dimensions of this issue into account.
We believe that the General Assembly is an important
political platform for achieving this goal. I welcome
the fact that the draft resolution takes into account and
highlights the dimensions of the phenomenon, including
the damage caused by trafficking on ecosystems.
It underlines the importance of strengthening
international cooperation so that effective action can be
undertaken to mitigate both the supply and the demand.
It takes into account the impact of trafficking on the
living conditions of populations, especially those whose
livelihoods depend on ecotourism. It encourages States
to strengthen sustainable development policies and
to find alternative livelihoods for rural communities
affected by illicit trafficking and poaching.

In connection with draft resolution A/69/L.80, I now
give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.

Furthermore, the draft resolution recognizes that
the phenomenon is a form of organized transnational
crime and hence a direct threat not only to wildlife,
but also to the security of States, the rule of law and

Finally, I commend all States that have agreed to
sponsor this draft resolution and hope that it will be
adopted by consensus.
The Acting President: We will now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/69/L.80.

Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): In connection
with draft resolution A/69/L.80, entitled “Tackling
illicit trafficking in wildlife”, I wish to put on record the
following statement of financial implications on behalf
of the Secretary-General, in accordance with rule 153
of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
By operative paragraph 14 of draft resolution
A/69/L.80, the General Assembly would call on the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, within its
mandate and resources and in line with Economic and
Social Council resolution 2013/40, in close cooperation
and collaboration with Member States, to continue
to collect information on patterns and flows of illicit
trafficking in wildlife and to report thereon.
With regard to the request contained in operative
paragraph 14, it is estimated that additional extrabudgetary resources in the amount of $504,300 would
be required for the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime to report on patterns and flows of illicit

15-237943/8

A/69/PV.100

trafficking in wildlife, including collection of data and
conducting case studies on trafficking in protected
species of wild flora and fauna.
The activities related to the aforementioned
requests would be carried out provided that the
additional extra-budgetary resources mentioned are
made available. Should the General Assembly adopt
the draft resolution, no additional provisions would be
required under the programme budget for the biennium
2014-2015 or the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2016-2017.
The Acting President: The Assembly will take
note of draft resolution A/69/L.80, entitled “Tackling
illicit trafficking in wildlife”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of draft resolution A/69/L.80: Azerbaijan,
Belize, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brunei Darussalam, Cameroon, Chad, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, Grenada, Kenya, Madagascar,
Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Namibia, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Serbia, Sri Lanka, Swaziland, Thailand,
Turkmenistan, Ukraine and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/69/L.80?
Draft resolution A/69/L.80 was adopted (resolution
69/314).
The Acting President: I shall now give the floor
to those representatives wishing to make statements
following the adoption of the draft resolution.
Mr. Braun (Germany): Germany is very grateful
for the support that we have received in the preparation
of resolution 69/314. Today is a good day for the
protection of wildlife and the fight against crime.
But despite this fact, I have to start with a piece of
sad news. On Monday, the first elephant was poached in
the famous Kruger National Park in South Africa. Every
day in Africa around 100 elephants die at the hands of
poachers. Almost all of the killing has occurred beyond

4/8

30/07/2015

the borders of South Africa, but the ivory poachers are
now moving south. Record numbers of elephants and
rhinos were poached last year. The Foreign Minister
of Gabon just reminded us of the disturbing figures,
to which I would like to add the following: Tanzania
recently announced a drastic 60 per cent drop in
its elephant populations in the past five years due to
poaching for ivory. In addition, 1,200 rhinos were
killed in South Africa for their horns in 2014 alone, and
700 have already been slaughtered this year.
Clearly wildlife is in more danger than ever,
despite all of the efforts undertaken at the regional,
national and international levels. It is our joint task,
therefore, to protect wild fauna and flora in their many
beautiful and varied forms for this generation and for
generations to come. The time for action is now. If we
fail, rhinos, elephants and other species will face local
and, potentially, global extinction.
Equally disturbing, as we have just heard, are the
negative political, economic, social and environmental
effects of the illicit traffic in wildlife. The scale and
nature of wildlife crime has become a pressing global
problem that requires shared solutions at all levels. No
one country, region or agency working alone will be
able to succeed. The need for an enhanced collective
effort within and among States, regions and agencies is
obvious. This includes working across source, transit
and destination States and tackling both demand and
supply. The fight against wildlife crime is our common,
shared responsibility.
With this in mind, the Foreign Minister of Germany
and the President of Gabon co-chaired high-level
meetings on poaching and illicit wildlife trafficking
in the margins of the General Assembly’s general
debate in 2013 and 2014. I commend the President of
the General Assembly for having personally attended
the meeting in September 2014 and having called for
the redoubling of United Nations efforts to put a halt
to wildlife crime. As one outcome of those meetings,
Gabon and Germany have established a United Nations
Group of Friends on Poaching and Illicit Wildlife
Trafficking. Its aim is to raise awareness among all
Member States of the alarming trends in wildlife crime
and the urgent need to step up our efforts to fight this
scourge. The Group also discusses and prepares joint
initiatives. The Group of Friends the resolution we have
just adopted. It is action-oriented and aims at fighting
illicit wildlife trafficking more effectively, thereby

15-23794

30/07/2015

taking up a respective call from the United Nations
Environmental Assembly.
I sincerely thank all members that have supported
our joint initiative, be it as members of the Group of
Friends, as sponsors of the resolution, or by joining
the consensus in the adoption. Together, we can stop
the current trend and protect our flora and fauna. It is
important that all stakeholders, citizens, civil society,
the private sector, Governments and international
organizations unite in this endeavour, which is so
important for us, the people, and for the planet. By
adopting the first resolution on tackling illicit wildlife
trafficking, the General Assembly sends a strong signal
that the world is determined to put an end to wildlife
crime and that the United Nations is ready to take a
leading role in that fight.
Our next step on this road will be the adoption of
the post-2015 agenda, which contains dedicated targets
to protect wildlife. We look forward to reviewing the
information provided by the Secretary-General at the
seventieth session of the General Assembly about the
global status of illicit trafficking in wildlife and his
proposals for possible future actions. I am convinced
that the resolution that we all have adopted by consensus
today will make our common efforts against illicit
wildlife trafficking stronger and more effective.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Beviglia Zampetti (European Union): The
European Union (EU) and its member States would
like to warmly thank Gabon and Germany for their
hard work in helping us to reach agreement on the
important resolution 69/314, of which all 28 States
members of the Union are proud to be co-sponsors. The
high number of sponsors from all parts of the world
shows that the international community is aware that
wildlife trafficking is an urgent and serious problem
that requires global and comprehensive action far
beyond the pure conservation approach or the necessary
measures to protect iconic species. Indeed, wildlife
trafficking exemplifies how criminal activities, taking
advantage of every governing weakness, can cause
serious environmental damage, have a disastrous
impact on sustainable development and, in some cases,
fuel conflicts and threaten the stability of entire regions.
Building on important previous resolutions and
declarations of the United Nations Environmental
Assembly, the United Nations Economic and Social

A/69/PV.100

Council, the thirteenth United Nations Congress
on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, held in
Doha, and the United Nations Commission on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice, today for the first time
the General Assembly has adopted a comprehensive
resolution on the issue, connecting the dots between
the various interlinked aspects of wildlife trafficking.
This is an essential step in demonstrating the political
commitment to fighting wildlife trafficking nationally,
regionally and globally, but it is also only a first step.
In that regard, we very much welcome the fact that the
General Assembly will consider the topic annually,
and we look forward to hearing the proposal of the
Secretary-General. On that basis, we hope to discuss
next year an even more action-oriented resolution. We
must be serious about implementing the commitments
we have made today as well as those we will make in
the future.
We are glad to note that in the European Union,
we are currently developing an action plan against
wildlife trafficking to further step up our efforts, both
domestically and in support of developing countries.
We will review the existing policies and measures
at the EU level to react even more effectively to the
current situation. In the European Union, we have
recently taken an important step to fight the illegal
wildlife trade by adopting stricter measures to ensure
that the imports of hunting trophies are sustainable.
On that basis, we have already agreed on a ban on the
import of hunting trophies of African elephants from
Tanzania and Mozambique into the EU in order to stop
the decline of the population of African elephants in
those countries.
On the operational side, over the past 30 years
the European Union has funded many conservation
projects in developing countries, including €500 million
invested in protected-area management in Africa. The
European Union is also supporting specific initiatives
against wildlife crime with specialized agencies,
such as the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, for a
total of €17 million. Moreover, the eleventh European
Development Fund will increase the resources for those
purposes, especially in sub-Saharan Africa, up to an
estimated amount of €35 to €40 million specifically
earmarked for wildlife crimes out of a total of
€500 million aimed at wildlife issues in general.

15-237945/8

A/69/PV.100

New activities on African wildlife conservation
have been defined in detail in a recent study endorsed
by major conservation stakeholders worldwide. We
must not relent until we end poaching and wildlife
trafficking, as we have committed to do as one of
the targets of the post-2015 agenda, which we expect
to adopt in a few weeks. The resolution serves as an
important political signal and a critical step towards
bringing us closer to the desired goal and beyond.
Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): I thank the President of the
General Assembly for allowing us to share experiences,
lessons and ideas on this very important subject.
At the outset, let me commend the Governments of
Gabon and the Federal Republic of Germany for their
leadership and contribution to bringing to the attention
of the international community the plight of millions
of endangered species as well as the challenges facing
both humankind and animal-kind.
Botswana wholeheartedly welcomes the adoption
by the General Assembly of resolution 69/314, entitled
“Tackling illicit trafficking in wildlife”. We believe that
the resolution not only reaffirms our commitment to
paying respect to our natural capital, but also serves to
reaffirm the intrinsic value of our biological diversity, as
well as its contribution to sustainable development. As
a country known for its abundance of flora and fauna,
we place a very high premium on strong conservation
policies in order to safeguard those natural resources
for future generations.
In recent times, the world has witnessed rising
tides in the illicit trafficking of wildlife — fauna and
flora — by organized criminal gangs and groups. Every
day, thousands of rhinos, elephants and members of
other precious species are killed, maimed and stolen
from their natural habitats by brutal gangs that are
driven solely by profit and greed. Even as we speak
today, we remain concerned and saddened by the latest
headlines bringing to us reports of a rhino, elephant or
other animal killed or maimed, its horn or tusk hacked
off while the animal is left for dead.
In an endeavour to contribute to international
efforts to stamp out the illicit transfer and trafficking
in endangered species, we have developed framework
agreements with our regional neighbours to coordinate
the protection of rhinos and elephants. We recently
collaborated with the Governments of South Africa,
Namibia and Zimbabwe to repatriate a few hundred
rhinos to Botswana, where they can enjoy the peace and

6/8

30/07/2015

tranquillity so cherished by our people. We would like
to thank those Governments for their cooperation and
collaboration in understanding these animals’ plight.
Like violent extremism and terrorism, illegal
wildlife trafficking has been on the rise, with criminal
gangs and cartels harvesting tons of elephant tusks and
rhino horns for profit. Armed poachers have infiltrated
our national parks and animal sanctuaries, claiming
thousands of these majestic animals’ lives while causing
communities untold damage and robbing them of their
livelihoods. For most of our countries, fighting this
scourge without help has strained our resources in both
material and human terms. It is not easy to suppress
animal-trafficking gangs, which puts a strain on our
economies.
As we look ahead to the coming weeks and
months, we must forge resilient partnerships and stand
our ground even in the face of the armed gangs and
criminals who rake in millions of dollars through their
greedy activities. Together we must prevent, combat
and eradicate this illegal trade in wildlife at both the
supply and demand levels. We are confident that we
will win this war.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I am pleased to take the floor following the
adoption of this important resolution (resolution 69/314),
not only to speak in explanation of position but also to
say how pleased my Government and I personally are
with the General Assembly’s adoption of a resolution
on tackling illicit trafficking in wildlife.
Illicit trafficking in wildlife is on a level with illicit
trafficking in drugs, which is why it is vital that we
strengthen the fight against poaching in order to end, or
at least attempt to eradicate, an activity that has a tragic
impact on the fauna, the environment and the economy
of the countries involved. For protected species, it is a
hellish cycle. The smaller the population of a particular
species, the worse it is affected and the faster it is
rendered extinct. Between 3,000 and 6,000 great apes
are killed every year. Rhinoceros horn costs more per
kilogram than cocaine. More than 12,000 elephants
are massacred each year. The trade in elephant tusks
has become a branch of global organized crime. More
than 60 tons of bushmeat illegally enter even European
countries every year. Those numbers make it clear that
this activity is extremely lucrative, although highly
detrimental to the continued existence of the species
affected.

15-23794

30/07/2015

The adoption of today’s resolution by consensus
and its huge number of sponsors compel us to express
our sincere thanks to its promoters, the Republic of
Gabon and Germany. The presence here of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Gabon, Mr. Issoze-Ngondet,
demonstrates how important Central Africa as a whole,
and Gabon in particular, consider this issue to be.
As President of the Central African Protected Areas
Network (RAPAC), based in Libreville, I would like
to say on behalf of the Network how pleased we are,
and to ask Governments and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to strengthen their
support for the fight against this scourge, so that we
ensure today’s resolution is implemented effectively.
In conclusion, I would like to acknowledge, thank
and pay tribute to the European Union for the decisive
support it has given to RAPAC and other Central
African organizations fighting to preserve biodiversity
in general and forest ecosystems and wildlife in
particular. We say, enough of this illicit traffic. We
must act firmly through global partnerships to combat
the illicit poaching and trafficking of wildlife.
Mr. Oyarzábal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina joined the consensus on today’s resolution
69/314, as we believe that illegal trafficking in
endangered species of fauna and flora demands that
we respect norms and that we need States’ cooperation
if we are to eliminate it. We would like it noted and
understood for the record that this resolution refers to
the term “trafficking in wildlife”, meaning trafficking
in endangered species of wild fauna and flora. Its makes
references to Economic and Social Council resolution
2013/40 in order to reinforce that. Accordingly, the
provisions of the resolution, including references to
specialized agencies, funds and programmes of the
United Nations or entities of the Secretariat, should
be aligned with the mandates approved by those
instruments and as set out in resolution 2013/40.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom is proud to be a sponsor of today’s important
resolution 69/314, on tackling illicit trafficking in
wildlife. We align ourselves with the statement
delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union, and
we would like to thank and congratulate Gabon and
Germany. Over the past two years, their dedication
and hard work has been vital in rallying support and
guiding this process towards agreement.
Today’s resolution demonstrates a powerful and
growing consensus that the illegal wildlife trade is an

A/69/PV.100

issue worthy of global attention at the highest levels
of Government. That illicit trade is much more than
an environmental issue. It drives corruption, damages
economic growth and hinders sustainable development.
It undermines good governance and the rule of law. The
iconic animals the resolution will help to protect hold a
special place in our hearts and those of our children. The
outrage over the killing of Cecil the lion in Zimbabwe
shows how strongly people feel about the issue. Today’s
resolution recognizes the huge efforts that are being
made across the world to tackle the scourge of the
illegal wildlife trade, and the important steps that
have been taken to secure international commitment.
Having the issues recognized at the highest level of the
United Nations is an essential step. We cannot lose the
momentum that we have worked so hard to build. An
annual review by the General Assembly will ensure
that it stays on the agenda, and we look forward to the
recommendations of the Secretary-General coming out
of this review next year.
As host of the London Conference on the Illegal
Wildlife Trade, held 18 months ago, the United
Kingdom remains strongly committed to working with
its international partners to turn the tide against this
abhorrent trade. We supported Botswana in holding the
Kasane Conference in March, and we look forward to
working closely with Viet Nam, which will hold a third
high-level conference in 2016. We will also shortly
launch a further round of funding for projects around
the world which will help to tackle the trade on the
ground.
By working together we have made progress, but
there is much more to do. This resolution signals our
collective determination and strikes a resounding blow
against this destructive trade. It is a fight we can win.
We will not relent until we do.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker on this item.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 13.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: Member States will recall
that at its 75th plenary meeting, on 19 December 2014,
the General Assembly concluded its consideration of
agenda item 16. In order for the Assembly to consider

15-237947/8

A/69/PV.100

agenda item 16, it will be necessary to reopen its
consideration. May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to reopen consideration of agenda
item 16?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Members will further
recall that at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 19 September
2014, the General Assembly decided to allocate agenda
item 16 to the Second Committee. In order to enable
the General Assembly to take action expeditiously on
the document, may I take it that the Assembly wishes
to consider agenda item 16 directly in this plenary
meeting and proceed immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 16 (continued)
Information and communications technologies for
development
Draft decision (A/69/L.83)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take on draft decision A/69/L. 83, entitled “Overall
review of the General Assembly of the implementation
of the outcomes of the implementation of the World
Summit on the Information Society”. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to adopt draft decision A/69/L.83?
Draft decision A/69/L.83 was adopted (decision
69/559).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 16.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly concluded its consideration
of sub-item (a) of agenda item 113 at its 55th plenary
meeting, on 18 November 2014. In order for the
Assembly to consider the item, it will be necessary to
reopen consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 113.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly
to reopen consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item
113?
It was so decided.

8/8

30/07/2015

The Acting President: Representatives will also
recall that at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 19 September
2014, the General Assembly decided to allocate this
sub-item to the Fifth Committee. In order to enable the
Assembly to proceed expeditiously on this sub-item,
may I also take it that the Assembly wishes to consider
sub-item (a) of agenda item 113 directly in plenary
meeting and proceed immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 113 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(a) Appointment of members of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions
Note by the Secretary-General (A/69/101/Add.1)
The Acting President: As indicated in document
A/69/101/Add.1, the Secretary-General has received
notification of the resignation of Mr. Toshihiro Aiki of
Japan from the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions, effective 15 August 2015.
The Assembly will therefore be required to appoint
at its current session a person to fill the vacancy for
the remaining period of the term of office of Mr. Aki,
which expires on 31 December 2016. As also indicated
in document A/69/101/Add.1, the Government of Japan
has nominated Mr. Takeshi Akamatsu to fill the vacancy
arising from the resignation of Mr. Aiki. The Secretariat
was informed by the Chair of the Group of Asia-Pacific
States that the candidature of Mr. Akamatsu has been
endorsed by the Group.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint to appoint Mr. Takeshi Akamatsu of
Japan as the member of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions for the
term effective beginning 15 August 2015 and ending
31 December 2016?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 113?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

15-23794
