S/2021/1091

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 December 2021
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel

I. Introduction
1.
The present report covers the period from 18 June to 21 December 2021 and
contains an overview of developments and trends in West Africa and the Sahel and
the activities of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS),
including with regard to progress made in the implementation of the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel. In addition, it includes an update on the situation in
the Lake Chad basin, pursuant to Security Council resolution 2349 (2017).

II. Developments and trends in West Africa and the Sahel
2.
Following the conclusion of the 2020–2021 electoral cycles, democratic
consolidation in the region remained inconsistent. A coup d’état took place in Guinea
in the wake of a second coup in Mali. In contrast, a peaceful and credible presidential
election was held in Cabo Verde, setting a positive example for democracy.
3.
Dialogue processes continued in Burkina Faso, Senegal and Togo to build
consensus on political and security matters. Conciliatory gestures by the Presidents
of Benin and Côte d’Ivoire lowered political tensions in the two countries.
Constitutional reform processes in the Gambia and Guinea-Bissau failed to move
forward in polarized political climates. Transitional justice processes in Liberia and
the Gambia prompted national conversations on justice, accountability and
reconciliation. Against that background, the commitment expressed by the Heads of
State of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to review and
update Protocol A/SP1/12/01 on Democracy and Good Governance Supplementary to
the Protocol relating to the Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management,
Resolution, Peacekeeping and Security appears to signal the intention of EC OWAS
to address underlying grievances related to governance deficits, non -respect of
presidential term limits and unconstitutional changes of government.
4.
On the security front, large-scale coordinated attacks by terrorist and extremist
armed groups against military and civilian targets continued. The third meeting of the
Lake Chad Basin Governors’ Forum for Regional Cooperation on Stabilization,
Peacebuilding and Sustainable Development and the third meeting of the governors
of the Liptako-Gourma border regions enabled stakeholders to exchange views on
cross-regional and intercommunal cooperation with a view to responding to and
addressing the root causes of insecurity, which continued to cause massive loss of

21-18980 (E)

060122

*2118980*

S/2021/1091

lives, displacements and infringements of children’s right to education. Meanwhile,
there was increased focus and attention on the potential impact on neighbouring
countries, including those in the Sahel, of the withdrawal of foreign forces, foreign
fighters and mercenaries from Libya and elsewhere.
5.
Despite resumed growth in the economies in the subregion, lack of access to
essential services and socioeconomic inequality, compounded by the effects of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, sparked protests in many countries.

A.

Politics and governance
6.
In Benin, the President, Patrice Athanase Guillaume Talon, met the former
President, Thomas Boni Yayi, on 22 September, an encounter that was reportedly
appreciated by national stakeholders. Mr. Boni Yayi called for the holding of an
inclusive consultative forum, the release of detained political leaders and the return
of opposition figures from exile.
7.
In Burkina Faso, the President, Roch Marc Christian Kaboré, appointed new
Ministers of Defence and Security on 1 July in a consensus-building gesture. Political
dialogue between opposition parties and the Government resumed on 27 September
following three months of deadlock over the opposition’s demands related among
other things, to persistent insecurity. The talks resulted in cross-party consensus on a
strategy to tackle insecurity and strengthen the resilience of affected populations. On
9 December, the Prime Minister, Christophe Joseph Marie Dabire, resigned. He was
replaced by Lassina Zerbo, who formed a new government of 2 5 ministers on
13 December.
8.
In Cabo Verde, presidential elections were conducted, in a peaceful
environment, on 17 October. The former Prime Minister, José Maria Pereira Neves,
who was supported by the African Party for the Independence of Cabo Verde, obtained
51.5 per cent of the vote, with 42.6 per cent going to Carlos Alberto Wahnon de
Carvalho Veiga, who was supported by the ruling Movement for Democracy.
Electoral observation missions from the African Union and ECOWAS positively
appraised the process, and Mr. Neves was sworn in on 9 November.
9.
In Côte d’Ivoire, on 27 July, the President, Alassane Ouattara met with the
former President, Laurent Gbagbo, who had returned to the country in June following
a 10-year absence owing to his indictment and subsequent acquittal by the
International Criminal Court with regard to the post-election violence of 2010. Both
men emphasized their commitment to promoting national reconciliation and fostering
a new generation of political leaders. On 7 August, the Presi dent announced the
release and pardon of 78 persons who had been detained in the aftermath of the post electoral crisis of 2020. On 16 October, Mr. Gbagbo launched a new political party,
the Parti des peuples africains-Côte d’Ivoire.
10. In the Gambia, the country’s first presidential elections since its return to
democratic rule were conducted in a peaceful manner on 4 December. Domestic and
international observation missions deemed the poll to be inclusive and transparent.
Of the 962,157 Gambians registered to vote, 57 per cent were women and 58 per cent
were young men and women under 35 years of age. Voter turnout was 89.3 per cent,
demonstrating high interest among Gambians in deciding the country’s leadership.
On 5 December, the Independent Electoral Commission declared the incumbent,
Adama Barrow, of the National People’s Party, the winner with 53 per cent of the
vote, followed by Ousainou Darboe of the United Democratic Party with 28 per cent,
followed by four other candidates: Mama Kandeh of the Gambi a Democratic
Congress (12 per cent); Halifa Sallah of the People’s Democratic Organisation for
Independence and Socialism (4 per cent); Essa Faal, independent (2 per cent); and

2/17

21-18980

S/2021/1091

Abdoulie Ebrima Jallow of the National Unity Party (1 per cent). While Mr. Darb oe
and Mr. Kandeh both rejected the results, only Mr. Darboe filed a complaint with the
Supreme Court. Meanwhile, on 25 November, the Truth, Reconciliation and
Reparations Commission submitted its final report to the President, who has 30 days
to make the report public. The Government has six months from the date of the
submission of the report to produce a white paper outlining its position with regard
to the recommendations made by the Commission.
11. In Ghana, in August, the main opposition party, the Na tional Democratic
Congress, unveiled its demands for electoral reform, following proposals made by the
Electoral Commission in May. Among other things, it called for the
institutionalization of the Inter-Party Advisory Committee and the creation of a
separate office for the regulation of political parties. On 5 August, Kissi Agyebeng
was sworn in by the President, Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo, as the country’s
special prosecutor to investigate and prosecute corruption cases, following the
previous office holder’s resignation in 2020.
12. In Guinea, on 5 September, a coup d’état led to the overthrow of the President,
Alpha Condé, and his Government and the suspension of the Constitution of 2020.
Subsequently, the African Union and ECOWAS suspended the membersh ip of
Guinea, while the coup leaders, who established the Comité national du
rassemblement pour le développement (National Committee for Reconciliation and
Development, CNRD), appeared to enjoy the support of national stakeholders.
ECOWAS also set a six-month deadline for the transition and imposed sanctions on
the members of CNRD and their families. On 27 September, following consultations
with multiple national stakeholders, CNRD issued a transition charter providing for
a civilian government and an 81-member national transitional council. Once
established, the council will be tasked with drafting a new Constitution and devising
a transition calendar. The charter barred all members of the transitional institutions
from running in national and local elections, which have yet to be scheduled. The
coup leader, Colonel Mamadi Doumbouya, was sworn in as transitional President on
1 October, and Mohamed Beavogui was appointed as Prime Minister on 6 October.
13. In Guinea-Bissau, against the backdrop of continuing strikes in the public sector,
the Government made efforts to address issues of economic governance in
cooperation with international financial institutions. Meanwhile, tensions between the
President, Úmaro Sissoco Embaló, and the parliament continued with regard to
parallel and competing constitutional reform processes. Relations between the
President and the Prime Minister, Nuno Gomes Nabiam, have been further strained
over the arrival in October of an aeroplane without the Government’s knowledge and
the reported signing of an oil exploration agreement with Senegal without either the
Government’s or the parliament’s knowledge, prompting the latter to declare the
agreement null and void.
14. In Liberia, the Senate submitted a report to the President, George Manneh Weah,
advising against the establishment of a special war and economic crimes court, which
had been recommended in the final report of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission in 2009. Instead, it proposed the creation of a transitional justice
commission to review the findings of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. The
proposal was criticized by human rights groups, who argued that a new commission
would subvert the recommendations of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission and
duplicate the role of the Independent National Commission on Human Rights. During
the reporting period, repeated protests driven by socioeconomic grievances occurred.
15. In Mali, the political situation remained fragile. Following a second military
coup on 24 May, the coup leader, Colonel Assimi Goita, assumed the transitional
presidency. The development added to the uncertainty surrounding the agreed 18 -month
21-18980

3/17

S/2021/1091

transition, which was initially planned to be concluded in February 2022 with the
holding of presidential and legislative elections. However, preparations for the polls
ground to a halt as authorities turned their focus to the holding of a wide -ranging
national dialogue on reform (Assises nationales de la refondation) scheduled to
conclude on 30 December. The forum is set to determine the modalities of key
political and institutional reforms, as well as a new date for the polls. On 7 November,
ECOWAS leaders imposed targeted sanctions on individual members of the
transitional authorities and their families.
16. In Mauritania, against the backdrop of increasing public expectations for
concrete outcomes, the President, Mohamed Ould Cheikh Ghazouani, continued to
hold bilateral discussions with opposition leaders on issues related to social cohesion
and socioeconomic challenges. Opposition parties, for their part, reiterated their call
for an institutionalized political dialogue. The judicial process against the former
President, Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz, and other members of his Government in
relation to a corruption probe led to the arrest and detention of the former President
on 22 June.
17. In the Niger, the new Government focused on addressing the deteriorating
security and humanitarian situation in the country’s volatile regions and on increasing
literacy rates and access to education, especially for girls. Meanwhile, the defeated
presidential candidate, Mahamane Ousmane, continued to reject the outcome of the
presidential elections of 21 February and, on 21 June, appealed to the ECOWAS Court
of Justice. Against that background, there was little progress on political dialogue,
although the Government reiterated its willingness to engage with all political parties.
Efforts continued between Mali and the Niger to mend their relations after the
President of the Niger, Mohamed Bazoum, made remarks on 9 July strongly
condemning the second coup of 24 May in Mali.
18. In Nigeria, on 1 October – the country’s independence day – the President,
Muhammadu Buhari, reaffirmed the Government’s commitment to national unity and
called for dialogue. On 12 October, the parliament passed a bill amending the
Electoral Act which, inter alia, requires that the transmission of electoral results
would be carried out electronically and that political party primaries would be
organized by the Independent National Electoral Commission. At its national
convention, held on 30 and 31 October, the main opposition People’s Democratic
Party elected the members of its National Working Committee to lead the party, with
the former Senate President, Iyorchia Ayu, as its National Chairman. On 6 November,
gubernatorial elections were held in Anambra State in a relatively peaceful
environment.
19. In Senegal, the Political Commission for National Dialogue, reached a
consensus on most issues tabled, including on the direct election of mayors and heads
of municipal councils. However, a new electoral code adopted by the National
Assembly on 12 July was contested by opposition parties, and amendments to the
Penal Code, adopted on 25 June, were criticized as adversely affecting free
expression. Ahead of the local elections being held on 23 January 2022, two new
opposition alliances emerged, clustered around Pastef-Les patriotes, led by Ousmane
Sonko, and the Parti démocratique sénégalais, led by Abdoulaye Wade. In Novembe r,
following the postponement of the trial of Barthélémy Dias, an opposition candidate
of the Yewwi Askan Wi coalition in the Dakar mayoral elections scheduled for
January 2022, clashes occurred between the police and Yewwi Askan Wi supporters.
20. In Sierra Leone, on 13 September, the Consortium of Progressive Political
Parties, comprising 10 opposition parties including the All People’s Congress, signed
a memorandum of understanding to work together to promote national reconciliation
in the context of the presidential and parliamentary elections of 2023.
4/17

21-18980

S/2021/1091

21. In Togo, national consultations between political parties concluded with a series
of recommendations on constitutional and electoral reforms. Most political parties
participated in the dialogue, which was established in February, but the opposition
party Alliance nationale pour le changement subsequently withdrew, citing doubts
over the credibility of the process. Laws relating to elections, decentralization and
public liberties were adopted by the parliament on 1 October.
22. On 5 October, at an extraordinary ministerial meeting in Accra, ECOWAS
member States agreed on a new structure of the ECOWAS Commission and related
bodies to enhance the organization’s efficacy. Côte d’Ivoire, the Gambia, Ghana, th e
Niger, Nigeria and Togo each obtained a position in the new seven -member
Commission, with the Gambia holding the next presidency of the Commission. At its
sixtieth ordinary session, held in Abuja on 12 December, the Authority of Heads of
State and Government of ECOWAS decided to pursue further consultations with a
view to finalizing the allocation of the statutory appointees to the ECOWAS
Commission and extended the tenure of the current postholders by six months to June
2022.

B.

Security situation
23. Despite national, regional and international efforts, the security situation
remained complex and challenging. Violent extremist groups continued expanding
their scope of operations in the Sahel, notably in the Liptako -Gourma tri-border area
between Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger, targeting both civilians and security
forces.
24. In Burkina Faso, civilian defence groups and military targets suffered several
attacks during the reporting period, including on 11 July, when at least seven civilian
defence elements were killed in an attack on the Niha-Mossi village, Centre-Nord
region; on 8 August, when 14 soldiers were killed in the village of Dounkoun, Toéni
department, near the border with Mali; and on 4 October, when a military detachment
was ambushed in Yirgou, Centre-Nord region, leaving 14 soldiers dead. A major
attack occurred on 18 August, when a convoy of 80 vehicles was ambushed on the
Aribinda-Gorgadji road, Sahel region, causing at least 86 fatalities, including 65
civilians. The Sud-Ouest region of Burkina Faso emerged as a hotspot, with extremist
cells intimidating the population and local authorities. Improvised explosive devices
were used in Comoé province bordering Côte d’Ivoire, causing fatalities among the
military. An attack on a gendarmerie post, on 14 November in Inata, Sahel region,
killing more than 50 gendarmes, triggered popular demonstrations against the
growing insecurity, following which the leadership of the country’s security apparatus
was reshuffled. Following an increase in security incidents since early November,
over 80,000 internally displaced persons have been reported.
25. In Mali, the reporting period was marked by persistent attacks, largely involving
improvised explosive devices and indirect fire on security forces and civilians.
Repeated attacks with improvised explosive devices were carried out on convoys of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali,
particularly in the northern axis of Kidal, Aguelhok and Tessalit. There were also
frequent attacks against Mission camps, including on 15 July, when three attacks
occurred on camps in Tessalit, Ménaka and Gao. Malian defence forces also suffered
repeated assaults, such as those carried out on 19 August and 6 October between Boni
and Douentza and in Bandiagara, respectively. Civilians bore the brunt of extremist
blockades, intimidation and attacks, particularly in central Mali, including against the
population in Niono cercle. Attacks on trucks on the main road linking Bamako to
Senegal were also a cause for concern.

21-18980

5/17

S/2021/1091

26. In the Niger, despite an overall decrease in the number of terrorist attacks, raids
against civilians and assassinations of traditional leaders caused new displacements
of persons, especially in the Tillabéri region, where multiple attacks caused numerous
civilian fatalities in July and August alone. The military was also targeted. On
25 August, Boko Haram militants attacked an army post in Baroua on the border with
Chad, killing at least 16 soldiers. Reprisal actions by th e security forces neutralized
about 50 militants in Diffa region.
27. Clashes between Islamic State in the Greater Sahara and Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam
wa al-Muslimin were reported in the border regions between Burkina Faso and Mali.
However, both groups were severely impacted by international forces in large-scale
operations conducted by Burkina Faso, Mali and Operation Barkhane forces,
including the killing, on 16 August, of the leader of Islamic State in the Greater
Sahara, Adnan Abu Walid al-Sahrawi. Islamic State in the Greater Sahara continued
to actively challenge Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin.
28. The situation in Nigeria remained concerning, with multifaceted security
challenges in addition to the Boko Haram and the Islamic State West Africa Province
insurgency. On 23 October, militants belonging to the Lake Chad faction of Islamic
State West Africa Province ambushed Boko Haram fighters in the Abadam local
government area of Borno State, killing two high-ranking commanders and several
Jama’atu Ahlis Sunna Lidda’Awati Wal-Jihad militants. Clashes between the two
groups during the reporting period left dozens of militants dead. Islamic State West
Africa Province fighters also clashed with the Nigerian military forces in Borno and
Yobe States. On 30 October, the convoy of the governor of Borno State came under
attack by suspected Islamist militants in Mallam Fatori near the border with the Niger.
Violence perpetrated by criminal gangs in the north-west escalated, including
kidnappings for ransom of secondary school students and community leaders. On
17 August and 1 September, armed gangs invaded schools in Sakkai, Katsina State,
and in Maradun, Zamfara State, abducting dozens of students. On 4 July, 10 people
were abducted from a hospital in Kaduna. Intercommunal clashes and reprisal attacks,
often involving farmers and herders, continued to be reported, including in the central
States of Benue and Plateau. In the south-east, following the arrest of Indigenous
People of Biafra leader Nnamdi Kanu, the situation remained tense. Military
installations were also targeted, with attacks on the Nigerian Defence Academy in
Kaduna State on 24 August and on a military base in Zamfara State on 11 September.
For its part, the military staged robust operations against Boko Haram factions.
According to military sources, 13,000 former Boko Haram associates and family
members have surrendered, reportedly as a result of fighting between extremist
groups and pressure from security forces. On 3 October, Islamic State West Africa
Province-affiliated militants attacked a camp housing surrendered Boko Haram
elements, but were pushed back by security forces. In the same month, military
leaders announced the death of Abu Musab al-Barnawi, head of Islamic State West
Africa Province, and, subsequently, of his successor, Malam Bako.
29. As part of a regional response, Burkina Faso and Côte d’Ivoire intensified joint
counter-terrorism operations along their common border following attacks on security
positions in Tougbo and Téhini, in northern Côte d’Ivoire, in June. Meanwhile, Mali
and Burkina Faso, as well as the Niger and Burkina Faso, announced enhanced joint
military operations. In an extraordinary meeting held on 31 August in Niamey, the
Defence and Security Committee of the Group of Five for the Sahel discussed the
development of a new concept of operations, taking into account the reconfiguration
of Operation Barkhane and the partial withdrawal of Chadian troops.
30. Incidents of maritime insecurity decreased but continued causing disruptions
and imposing additional costs on trade. According to a report released by the
International Maritime Bureau in October, there were 28 incidents of piracy and
6/17

21-18980

S/2021/1091

related insecurity in the first nine months of 2021, compared with 46 for the same
period in 2020. The reduction was due, inter alia, to efforts made by Nigeria through
the Integrated National Security and Waterways Protection Infrastructure. During the
reporting period, Denmark and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland deployed vessels to conduct anti-piracy security operations in the Gulf of
Guinea.

C.

Socioeconomic context
31. The World Bank regional economic outlook for October 2021 projected a
growth rate of 3.2 per cent in 2021 for West and Central Africa, up from -0.8 per cent
in 2020. West African economies are recovering from the COVID-19 shocks of 2020
but have so far not reached the growth path of the pre -crisis period. The West Africa
subregion is estimated to grow by 3.6 per cent in 2022. The largest economy in the
region, Nigeria, is projected to grow from -1.8 per cent in 2020 to 2.4 per cent in 2021
as a result of the better performance of the oil and non -oil sectors. Excluding Nigeria,
the subregion is projected to recover from a poor rate of growth (0.7 per cent) in 2020
to 4.5 per cent in 2021 and 5.3 per cent in 2022. The West African Economic and
Monetary Union is projected to achieve faster economic recovery with a growth rate
of 5.6 per cent in 2021 and 6.1 per cent in 2022, catching up to its pre -crisis
performance rate. Governments continued applying measures to strengthen resilience
against the COVID-19 fallout, thereby driving up debt levels that restrict the fiscal
space. According to a joint regional analysis (excluding Nigeria) by the World Bank
and the International Monetary Fund, seven countries of the region had reached
“high” risk levels of debt distress by 30 June. Higher debt ratios, coupled with
increased reliance on more expensive financing sources, have pushed up interest
payments for the region. Countries such as Ghana and Nigeria issued Eurobonds in
dollars to raise $3 billion and $4 billion respectively in 2021 to support growth oriented expenditures. Several Governments had to raise the price of utilities,
increasing the strain on citizens already affected by the pandemic. Pro tests over
socioeconomic conditions erupted in several countries.

D.

Humanitarian context
32. The humanitarian situation across the subregion continued to be of grave
concern, as violence, general insecurity, forced displacement, malnutrition and
disease exacerbated high levels of vulnerability, notably in the Sahel region.
According to an analysis by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
based on the INFORM Risk Index, the Sahel is in a humanitarian high -risk zone
compared with 2020, and a deterioration was observed in Burkina Faso, Mali, the
Niger and Nigeria. In the Niger, the classification was raised from high risk to very
high risk in the Maradi region and, In Burkina Faso, in the Boucle de Mouhoun, Est,
Sahel and Nord regions.
33. Across the Sahel, the population of internally displaced persons rose by 200,000
to 5.5 million, mostly driven by insecurity in northern Burkina Faso and Mali,
whereas in the Niger, the number of internally displaced persons remained stable. In
Mali, the number of internally displaced persons had risen to slightly over 400,000
by the end of October.
34. The level of food insecurity remained alarmingly high. Across the Sahel region,
close to 20 million people are facing severe food insecurity. Although the number of
children under 5 years of age facing acute malnutrition in the Sahel has decreased by

21-18980

7/17

S/2021/1091

500,000 to 5.8 million, overall malnutrition rates among children remain deeply
concerning.
35. In the central Sahel, owing to insecurity, 195 health centres were closed – up
from 136 in the previous reporting period – and most of those that were open were
not fully functional. Women and girls also faced increasing risks of abduction, forced
marriage and sexual assault. Education was also seriously affe cted. Across the Sahel,
5,400 schools were closed, up from 5,000 in the previous report, and about 13 million
children were out of school. School closures increased markedly in Niger’s Tillabéri
region.
36. Humanitarian access was constrained, depriving vulnerable people of critical
assistance and exposing humanitarian personnel to increased risks. In Nigeria, threats
to the Maiduguri-Damasak highway hindered the delivery of humanitarian supplies.
37. Heavy rains caused multiple fatalities and significant loss of property in several
countries, especially in the Sahel. Subsequently, outbreaks of cholera were registered
in the Niger and, to a lesser degree, in Nigeria.
38. As at early December, about 47 per cent of funding for humanitarian response
plans, developed by Burkina Faso, Mali, the Niger and Nigeria, which required about
$2.7 billion to reach 16.2 million people, had been secured, up from 16 per cent in
June.
39. As at early October, West Africa and the Sahel had registered an additional
192,000 COVID-19 cases and approximately 2,000 more deaths. Through the
COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility and other channels, vaccination
campaigns were intensified across the region, but rates remained low, with around 1
per cent of the population fully vaccinated in Burkina Faso and the Niger, compared
with 36 per cent in Cabo Verde.

E.

Human rights
40. During the reporting period, there were a number of developments, including
the abolition of the death penalty as well as the establishment of sexual offe nces
courts in Sierra Leone. In Burkina Faso, the trial of the former President, Blaise
Compaoré, the former Chief of Defence Staff, General Gilbert Diendéré, and 12
others charged with the assassination of the former President, Thomas Sankara, in
1987, commenced in Ouagadougou.
41. Delays were noted in the transitional justice processes under way in the Gambia
and Liberia. In the Gambia, 17 human rights organizations backed a call made by the
Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearance for the prosecution of
perpetrators of human rights violations committed during the era under the former
President, Yahya Jammeh.
42. In Benin, human rights actors continued denouncing instances of the alleged
instrumentalization of the judiciary and decried the c ontinued detention and
prosecution of prominent political figures on charges including terrorism.
43. The reporting period was marked by concerns about freedom of assembly. On
28 September, clashes between members of the Islamic Movement in Nigeria and
security forces led to the arrest of 57 persons and several alleged casualties, which
were denied by the police. In Liberia, the use of excessive force by the police during
peaceful protests was also reported. Meanwhile, in Guinea, civil society organization s
urged the transitional authorities to address past and recent human rights violations.
44. In Ghana, activists and independent experts of the Human Rights Council raised
concerns about a bill on the promotion of proper human sexual rights and Ghanaian

8/17

21-18980

S/2021/1091

family values, under discussion in the parliament, which could have implications for
the country’s compliance with its international human rights obligations. On
5 August, 21 lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender activists, who had been arrested
on 20 May and charged with unlawful assembly, were acquitted.
45. The prevailing security situation in the subregion raised new concerns over the
respect of international humanitarian and human rights law within the context of
preventing and countering violent extremism. On 15 September, approximately 10
civilians were reportedly killed during an air strike by the Nigerian Air Force on
Buhari village in Yobe State.

F.

Gender issues
46. Developments regarding women’s participation and representation in politic s
produced mixed results. In Burkina Faso, the government reshuffle of 1 July led to
the achievement of the 30 per cent quota for women for the first time; by contrast,
only one woman was among the 15 new commissioners appointed to the country’s
Independent National Electoral Commission on 7 July, and the number of women
ministers was reduced from nine to seven in the new cabinet announced on
13 December. In Liberia, several women were appointed as assistant and deputy
ministers. Decentralized national action plan structures for the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, were put
in place in several countries. However, there were no women candidates in the
presidential elections held in Cabo Verde and the Gambia. In terms of institutional
frameworks, on 15 October, ECOWAS adopted a strategy on combating sexual
violence and a policy on addressing sexual harassment in the workplace and in
educational institutions. At the national level, Burkina Faso established an
information mechanism on gender-based violence and adopted guidelines on genderresponsive budgeting.

G.

Youth issues
47. In Mali, on 17 September, members of the National Youth Council met with the
Prime Minister, Choguel Kokalla Maïga, to discuss youth participation in a planned
national conference and the youth contribution to the transition process. The fourth
General Assembly of the West African Network of Young Women Leaders was held
in Senegal from 2 to 5 August, bringing together representatives from all ECOWAS
countries to discuss ways to restructure and revitalize the Network. In Togo, dialogue
sessions started on 2 July, involving local authorities and youth groups, with a view
to promoting youth participation in decision-making processes. On 23 and
24 September, a national youth dialogue on Sustainable Development Goal 16 was
held in Accra, in collaboration with the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), to discuss youth-led initiatives towards the realization of the Goal.

III. Activities of the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel
A.

Good offices and special assignments of the Special Representative
48. In close collaboration with regional organizations and international and
development partners, as well as resident coordinators and United Nations country
teams, with the support of the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, the
Special Representative for West Africa and the Sahel and Head of the United Nations

21-18980

9/17

S/2021/1091

Office for West Africa and the Sahel supported efforts to prevent conflict and sustain
peace, while advocating for institutional reform and inclusive approaches to
constitutional, electoral and security reform processes.
49. Following the coup d’état in Guinea, the Special Representative conducted a
mission to Conakry, on 13 September, during which he met with the then leader of
CNRD, Colonel Mamadi Doumbouya, and relevant national and international actors.
The Special Representative stressed the need for a peaceful and inclusive transition
based on a consensual transition calendar and a swift return to full constitutional
order. He assured interlocutors of the commitment of the United Nations to
accompanying Guinea through the transition process and working closely with
ECOWAS and the African Union. The Special Representative attended the
extraordinary sessions of the Authority of Heads of State and Government of
ECOWAS, held on 8 and 16 September and on 7 November. On 9 No vember, he
travelled once again to Guinea, where he launched a grass-roots social cohesion
initiative spearheaded by the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs in
cooperation with UNOWAS and the United Nations country team in Guinea. He
launched a similar initiative in the Niger, on 12 November, in support of national
efforts to strengthen social cohesion and dialogue through the establishment of a
community volunteer mediation system.
50. On 9 September, the Special Representative met with the President of the
ECOWAS Commission, Jean-Claude Kassi Brou. They discussed stalled dialogue and
constitutional processes, upcoming elections, and maritime security in the Gulf of
Guinea, among other issues. Mr. Brou agreed to expedite the deployment to Guin eaBissau of constitutional experts, who were eventually deployed in October.
51. Following his introductory visit in June, the Special Representative returned to
Guinea-Bissau from 28 to 30 September. In meetings with the President, Úmaro
Sissoco Embaló, and other national actors, he urged the majority and opposition
parties to resume dialogue. As a result, consultations are ongoing with a view to
setting up a dialogue framework to build consensus among political stakeholders
ahead of the legislative elections of 2023.
52. On 6 September, the Special Representative travelled to Freetown, where he
held consultations with the President, Julius Maada Bio, and national stakeholders to
promote dialogue between the ruling Sierra Leone People’s Party and the mai n
opposition All People’s Congress. On 11 October, he returned to Sierra Leone for
discussions with the President and with the former President, Ernest Bai Koroma, on
the need for concrete conciliatory gestures to ease prevailing tensions ahead of
elections in 2023.
53. On 26 October, the Special Representative visited the Gambia, jointly with the
President of the ECOWAS Commission and the Executive Secretary to the African
Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights, to support a national stakeholders’ forum
ahead of the presidential elections being held on 4 December. At the event, which was
jointly organized by the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, UNOWAS
and the Interparty Committee of the Gambia, political parties made a public pledge
for a peaceful election free of hate speech. Earlier in October, the Special
Representative had conducted a mission to the Gambia, during which he had called
for the depoliticization of the transitional justice process following the postponement
of the report of the Truth, Reconciliation and Reparations Commission. On
3 December, he returned to the Gambia, together with the Assistant Secretary -General
for Africa, Martha Ama Akyaa Pobee of the Departments of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations, and interacted with national and
international stakeholders ahead of the presidential election.

10/17

21-18980

S/2021/1091

54. As part of ongoing efforts to resolve the situation of Ivorian refugees and
support national reconciliation in Côte d’Ivoire, on 7 September, the Specia l
Representative attended a regional conference, at the request of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. At the event, Côte d’Ivoire signed
an agreement with neighbouring countries and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees on ending the refugee status of Ivorian refugees in those
countries by 30 June 2022 in the light of the progress that had been made in Côte
d’Ivoire.

B.

Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission
55. Despite residual restrictions to mitigate the COVID-19 pandemic, demarcation
and related activities were fully resumed during the reporting period. A total of 329
boundary pillars were constructed, leaving 1,023 still to be built out of an expected
total of 2,696. High-level meetings between the Special Representative and the United
Nations Resident Coordinators in Cameroon and Nigeria initiated new confidence building efforts in support of affected communities, while final mapping and other
processes continued through remote collaboration.
56. At a meeting in Yaoundé from 20 to 25 September, the Subcommission on
Demarcation resolved two of the eight outstanding points of disagreement. Chaired
by the Special Representative, the thirty-third session of the Mixed Commission, held
in Yaoundé from 17 to 19 November, resolved two more areas of disagreement and
decided to proceed with the construction of 327 pillars starting in January 2022.

C.

Enhancing regional and subregional partnerships to address
cross-border and cross-cutting threats to peace and security
57. UNOWAS maintained its close collaboration with regional partners. On 1 July,
the Office deployed staff to its ECOWAS Liaison Cell in Abuja. On 12 and 13 July,
UNOWAS held consultations in Abuja with ECOWAS focal points and civil society
organizations on the ongoing evaluation of the ECOWAS Conflict Prevention
Framework. The deliberations were part of a Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs project aimed at strengthening regional confl ict-prevention
capacities by enhancing civil society collaboration with regional organizations. The
initiative built on the outcome of a consultative meeting with civil society
organizations, held in Accra in June and jointly organized by the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, UNOWAS, ECOWAS and the West Africa
Network for Peacebuilding. Among the key recommendations of the two meetings
was to establish a coordination platform and to operationalize the ECOWAS
Economic and Social Commission with a view to enabling civil society organizations
to interact regularly with ECOWAS.
58. UNOWAS continued cooperating closely with the Group of Five for the Sahel
and supporting its presidency, including through the establishment of a mechanism
for collecting data on school closures. On 23 September, UNOWAS co -facilitated the
first meeting of the Steering Committee of the Group’s Sahelian Threat Analysis and
Early Warning Centre in Ouagadougou. The meeting assessed operational challenges,
drawing on a workshop organized by UNOWAS and the Group of Five for the Sahel,
held in Ouagadougou on 21 and 22 August, which focused, among other things, on
the mainstreaming of gender perspectives into the Centre’s activities.
59. From 27 to 30 September, UNOWAS conducted a joint technical assessment
mission with ECOWAS to Cabo Verde ahead of presidential elections on 17 October.

21-18980

11/17

S/2021/1091

The mission identified best practices with regard to confidence-building among
political actors in the context of elections.
60. UNOWAS continued its participation in an ongoing fragility and resilience
assessment with regard to the Mano River Union, jointly with the African
Development Bank, the Mano River Union secretariat, ECOWAS, the Peacebuilding
Support Office and other United Nations entities.
61. UNOWAS took part in the virtual components of the hybrid assessment visits
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee to Benin and Nigeria, held from 6 to 23 July and
from 11 to 27 October respectively. The assessments were conducted within the
framework of the Committee’s work to monitor, facilitate and promote the
implementation by Member States of relevant Security Council resolutions relating
to countering terrorism and violent extremism.
1.

Dynamics between farmers and herders
62. UNOWAS continued to convene the regional working group on pastoralism and
conflict prevention, which agreed a number of activities to address analytical gaps,
including on gender, youth, extractive industries and climate change. Moreover,
UNOWAS contributed to discussions on the prevention of farmer-herder conflicts,
held by ECOWAS, the Economic Community of Central African States, UNDP and
others, focusing attention on cross-border solutions.

2.

Lake Chad basin
63. On 4 and 5 October, the Special Representative for West Africa and the Sahel
participated in the third meeting of the Lake Chad Basin Governors’ Forum for
Regional Cooperation on Stabilization, Peacebuilding and Sustainable Development,
in Yaoundé. The Special Representative for Central Africa and Head of the United
Nations Office for Central Africa, the UNDP Regional Director for Africa, the
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and other United Nations entities
were also in attendance. The meeting assessed civil-military-humanitarian
cooperation, the rehabilitation of persons associated with Boko Haram, cross -border
collaboration and the revitalization of Lake Chad. The Special Representative for
West Africa and the Sahel called for the rapid implementation of the Regional
Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience Strategy for Areas Affected by Boko Haram
in the Lake Chad Basin Region and urged that linkages with the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel be strengthened. In addition, the Special
Representative underscored the need to promote the participation of women and
youth, to strengthen national ownership and leadership, and to enhance the respect
for human rights and the rule of law.
64. From 18 to 22 October and from 29 October to 2 November, the Special
Representative for West Africa and the Sahel, jointly with the Special Representative
for Central Africa, undertook a high-level mission to the Boko Haram-affected
countries of Cameroon, Chad and Nigeria. Interacting with national and local
authorities, as well as affected communities, the Special Representatives underlined
the need for sustained political will in order to accelerate the implementation of the
Regional Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience Strategy and advocated that a more
holistic approach be taken that integrated the peace-development nexus.
65. With the support of the UNDP-led Regional Stabilization Facility for Lake
Chad, cross-border trade along the Banki-Am Chidé corridor between Nigeria and
Cameroon resumed. In the Niger, the Facility enabled the voluntary retu rn of over
40,000 internally displaced persons to their places of origin in 22 villages in Diffa
region, between 20 June and 31 July.

12/17

21-18980

S/2021/1091

3.

Cross-border security strategy in the Mano River Union
66. In follow-up to a high-level meeting in January and a meeting with the Chiefs
of Defence and Security Forces in May, the Special Representative met with the
Secretary-General of the Mano River Union in Dakar on 12 September. After
reviewing the challenges affecting the region, he offered support, including through
the provision of technical expertise with regard to civil registration, to assist the
Union’s efforts to promote free movement.

4.

Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
67. No discernible progress was made during the reporting period with regard to the
operationalization of an interregional maritime security architecture. On
21 September, United Nations entities launched a consultative mechanism to support
regional efforts aimed at addressing maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea. The
launch was the outcome of joint technical preparations by UNOWAS and ECOWAS
and was based on the conclusions of the meeting of the Special Representative for
Central Africa, the Special Representative for West Africa and the Sahel, the
Presidents of the Commissions of ECOWAS and of the Economic Community of
Central African States, and the Executive Secretary of the Gulf of Guinea
Commission, held on 18 March.

5.

Adverse implications of climate change
68. In cooperation with the Governments of Ireland and the Niger and with
ECOWAS, UNOWAS started preparations for a regional conference on climate
change, peace and security in West Africa and the Sahel, set to be held in the first
quarter of 2022.

6.

Security sector reform, drug trafficking and transnational organized crime
69. On 25 November, UNOWAS and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
organized a conference to strengthen collaboration between defence attachés with
regard to cross-border and cross-cutting challenges to peace and security in the
region.

7.

Intercommunal violence in the Liptako-Gourma area
70. In collaboration with relevant United Nations entities, UNOWAS started
implementing the recommendations contained in the annex to my previous report on
the activities of UNOWAS (S/2021/612). On 30 July, the Special Representative
attended the launch of the Liptako-Gourma Stabilization Facility – spearheaded by
the Liptako-Gourma Integrated Development Authority with UNDP support – and the
first meeting of the Facility’s Regional Steering Co mmittee. On 11 and 12 August, he
participated in the third meeting of the governors of the Liptako -Gourma border
regions in Ouagadougou. The governors expressed concern about an increase in
kidnappings and in attacks on schools, among other security and go vernance
challenges. They called for an acceleration of stabilization programmes and agreed
on measures to institutionalize cooperation. At a meeting on 30 July, the Special
Representative assured the President of Burkina Faso of the full support of the Un ited
Nations with regard to regional stabilization efforts.
71. In November, UNOWAS, UNDP and the Group of Five for the Sahel held
consultations aimed at launching a joint community dialogue initiative in the Sahel
for border communities affected by conflict, including farmers and herders. The
consultations led to the identification of conflicts along religious lines in the border
areas of Chad and the Niger, farmer-herder conflicts in the border areas of Burkina

21-18980

13/17

S/2021/1091

Faso and the Niger, and conflicts linked to violent extremism and ethnic tensions in
Mali and the Niger. Three non-governmental organizations have been identified to
lead the implementation of the initiatives.

D.

Implementation of the United Nations integrated strategy for
the Sahel
72. The implementation of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel
advanced at the institutional and programmatic levels. At the meeting of the steering
committee, held on 3 and 4 November in Dakar, United Nations entities discussed the
repositioning of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel within the
region’s evolving geostrategic context; the progress made in the implementation of the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel road map for the period 2021 –2022,
including resource mobilization; the development of a common chapter to enhance
national ownership of the strategy by anchoring it in country frameworks, as well as
in the work of Governments, civil society, regional institutions and other development
partners; and the delivery of comprehensive multi-country initiatives.
73. On 30 October, the Ministers of Justice of the Group of Five for the Sahel met
in N’Djamena to discuss the harmonization of judicial cooperation protocols. The
meeting concluded with a signed agreement between the Judicial Regional Platform
of Sahel countries and the Group of Five for the Sahel to improve judicial cooperation
in the region.
74. With regard to the security pillar of the United Nations integrated strategy for
the Sahel, several capacity-building events on disarmament and the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons were held in the Liptako -Gourma region, attended by
security forces and civil society organizations. The events were aimed, among other
things, at enhancing women’s participation in peace and security advocacy efforts.
75. In relation to the resilience pillar, United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes stepped up their climate-resilient programming with a view to mitigating
related risks. In line with the pillar’s priority area on renewable energy, partners set
up a solar-energy support hub and launched studies to identify power needs and find
technical solutions to providing social infrastructures with access to energy.
76. On 1 and 2 July, UNOWAS co-chaired the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime Sahel Programme Steering Committee, which was attended by the secretariat
of the Group of Five for the Sahel and representatives of the ministries of justice,
security and foreign affairs of the Group’s member States. Particip ants expressed
concern about a marked increase in drug trafficking and called for a response to the
documented linkages between terrorism and organized crime.

E.

Promoting good governance, respect for the rule of law, human
rights and gender mainstreaming
77. The Special Representative continued to advocate the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda. On 9 November, in Bissau, he co -chaired,
alongside the President of Guinea-Bissau, the twelfth regional open day on Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000). Furthermore, UNOWAS continued to provide its
regular support to the Working Group on Women, Youth, Peace and Security in West
Africa and the Sahel and facilitated its bimonthly th ematic exchange sessions,
including with ECOWAS. From 26 June to 2 July, the Working Group, which is
coordinated by UNOWAS, the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and
the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women

14/17

21-18980

S/2021/1091

(UN-Women), conducted a visit to N’Djamena to advocate the meaningful
participation of women and youth in the transition following the death of the former
President, Idriss Déby Itno. UNOWAS organized a workshop for 50 trainers from
Benin, Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia, Sierra Leone and Togo on the political participation of
women and youth, held from 31 August to 6 September. As part of efforts to promote
the implementation of the youth, peace and security agenda, in line with resolution
2250 (2015), UNOWAS supported awareness-raising programmes in schools and
social media campaigns in several countries.
78. In follow-up to regional consultations in April on the instrumentalization of the
justice system, and in collaboration with ECOWAS and other United Nations entities,
UNOWAS held an expert meeting in Accra, on 8 and 9 December, to discuss the
establishment of a regional platform of Ministers of Justice.
79. On 31 August, UNOWAS, in cooperation with ECOWAS and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, organized a virtual regional
consultation for media practitioners and human rights defenders on enhancing
freedom of expression towards democratic consolidation in West Africa and the Sahel.
Participants agreed to strengthen the exchange of information and knowledge and
called for stronger United Nations advocacy on the protection of fundamental
freedoms.

IV. Observations and recommendations
80. I welcome the progress being made towards the consolidation of democratic
culture in many countries of West Africa and the Sahel. I commend the people of
Cabo Verde for maintaining that standard in the country’s most recent presidential
elections, and the people of the Gambia for the peaceful holding of the presidential
elections of 4 December. The impressive voter turnout is testament to the continued
commitment of the Gambian people to preserve and advance democracy.
81. I am, however, concerned by instances of the unconstitutional extension of
presidential mandates and coups d’état in parts of the subregion and across Africa.
The coup d’état in Guinea – and its causes – was yet another warning sign of a
democratic retreat across parts of the subregion. I commend ECOWAS for its efforts
to review its foundational protocols, including the Protocol on Democracy and Good
Governance, and to consider adopting other measures to counter the phenomenon.
The United Nations is ready to accompany and support this initiative. I likewise
welcome the efforts made by ECOWAS to set up a platform of Ministers of Justice.
82. Regarding countries in transition, the United Nations is committed to
accompanying regional and national efforts for peaceful and inclusive transitions
culminating in a swift return to full constitutional order with the holding of peaceful,
credible and inclusive elections.
83. It will be equally important for stakeholders in the subregion to review the
2020–2021 electoral cycles to identify lessons learned and best practices and to ensure
the timely adoption of recommendations made by electoral observation missions and
other relevant stakeholders ahead of the next electoral cycle starting in 2023.
84. The progress made through dialogue processes in several countries of the region
helped to build consensus on matters of national interest and strengthen social
cohesion in often polarized environments. It is essential to pursue these efforts, while
ensuring the full participation of civil society, including women and youth. It is also
important to conclude ongoing transitional justice processes to promote reconciliation
and strengthen national cohesion.

21-18980

15/17

S/2021/1091

85. The implementation of pending institutional reforms outlined in the Conakry
Agreement on the Implementation of the Economic Communit y of West African
States Road Map for the Resolution of the Political Crisis in Guinea -Bissau of 2016
and the ECOWAS six-point road map entitled “Agreement on the resolution of the
political crisis in Guinea-Bissau”, in particular the completion of a consensual
constitutional reform, remains essential for the country’s political stabilization
process.
86. The volatile security situation in the subregion, especially in the Sahel, remains
a major concern. Armed groups have again demonstrated their capacity t o mount
large-scale attacks, putting civilian populations at risk, driving displacement and
depriving children of education. Notably, the closure of schools is a violation of
individual human rights on a massive scale and risks hindering development in the
region. I urge all parties to respect the humanitarian principles of impartiality and
neutrality and to facilitate the delivery of emergency assistance to populations in
need.
87. While there have been no major militant attacks in coastal States, the scen ario
of a southward expansion of a latent climate of insecurity remains a threat. I therefore
welcome the steps taken by some countries in the subregion to enhance their cross border cooperation and information-sharing.
88. Security challenges in the Sahel are also an existential global threat. I therefore
commend efforts by the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel and the
Multinational Joint Task Force to stem the tide of terrorism and violent extremism in
the subregion. It remains vital for countries of the region to further enhance
coordination and to put human rights at the heart of their operations. I urgently call
on international partners to scale up support to these initiatives, often undertaken at
the expense of economic and social interventions. I also urge partners to increase their
contributions to the Liptako-Gourma Stabilization Facility and to support the
implementation of the Regional Strategy for the Stabilization, Recovery and
Resilience for Areas Affected by Boko Haram in the Lak e Chad Basin Region. For its
part, ECOWAS should accelerate resource mobilization for its action plan for the
eradication of terrorism for the period 2020–2024.
89. Despite notable efforts at the national level, the lack of progress towards the
operationalization of the Gulf of Guinea maritime security architecture is regrettable.
Member States should collaborate urgently to address this issue.
90. Cognizant of the limitations of a security-focused approach, it is essential that
States in the region intensify efforts to address the root causes of instability through
a comprehensive approach by integrating humanitarian, development, governance,
human rights and sustaining peace responses and promoting community -based
dispute resolution mechanisms. I call upon States of the region and international
partners to support holistic approaches, including through the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel and the Priority Investment Plan of the Group of Five
for the Sahel.
91. Human rights institutions should continue playing their crucial roles in the
protection and promotion of human rights and in ensuring accountability for human
rights violations.
92. I commend the Group of Five for the Sahel for adopting a concrete plan of action
to advance gender equality in the security sector and reiterate my call that countries
in the region take all measures necessary to comply with their national and regional
commitments on gender equality, including by ensuring adequate budgetary
allocations for the meaningful implementation of national action plans for the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and related resolutions.
16/17

21-18980

S/2021/1091

93. I welcome the convening – for the first time since 2014 – of the CameroonNigeria Mixed Commission. I commend the Governments of the two countries for
their steadfast commitment and encourage them to persevere to resolve residual areas
of disagreement, in accordance with the mandate of the Commission.
94. While it is encouraging that the economies of West Africa and the Sahel have
resumed a trajectory of growth after the contraction and concomitant hardships and
the exacerbation of inequalities spurred by the COVID -19 pandemic, I reiterate my
call to all parties concerned to ensure equitable access to vaccines to avoid new waves
of infection and enable societies to emerge from the crisis with greater resilience.
95. I wish to express my appreciation to the Governments of the ECOWAS region,
the African Union, the Group of Five for the Sahel, the Mano River Union, the Gulf
of Guinea Commission and the Lake Chad Basin Commission for their continued
cooperation with UNOWAS. Effective partnerships between UNOWAS, the United
Nations entities in West Africa and the Sahel, civil soci ety organizations and other
institutions are essential to create synergies to support the region. I would like to
express special appreciation to my Special Representative, Annadif Khatir Mahamat
Saleh, as well as the staff of UNOWAS and the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed
Commission, and the Resident Coordinators, for their unrelenting efforts to advance
peace and security in West Africa and the Sahel.

21-18980

17/17
