VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

ordinary session devoted to the question of Western
Sahara, 11
Taking note of the decision of the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity at its fifteenth ordinary session, held at
Khartoum from 18 to 22 July 1978, to establish an
ad hoe committee of Heads of State to consider all
the data on the question of Western Sahara, including
the exercise of the right of the people of that Territory
to self-determination, 12
Reiterating its fervent hope that, by the time of the
thirty-fourth session of the General Assembly, the
Organization of African Unity will have found, pursuant to the resolutions and decisions which it adopted
at its thirteenth, 11 fourteenth 13 and fifteenth 12 ordinary
sessions on the question of Western Sahara, a solution
to this problem in accordance with the right of peoples
to self-determination set forth in resolution 1514
(XV),

Welcoming the unilateral cease-fire decision taken
on 12 July 1978 by the Frente Popular para la Liberaci6n de Saguia el-Hamra y de Rio de Oro, with a view
to promoting a drive towards peace in Western Sahara,
1. Reaffirms its commitment to the principle of
self-determination of peoples in accordance with the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people
of Western Sahara to self-determination and independence;
3. Reaffirms the responsibility of the United Nations with regard to the decolonization of Western
Sahara, in accordance with the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and of the Declaration;
4. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to continue to keep developments in this matter under active review with a view
to the full and speedy implementation of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and to report thereon
to the Assembly at its thirty-fourth session;
5. Requests the Administrative Secretary-General
of the Organization of African Unity to keep the
Secretary-General of the United Nations informed of
the progress achieved with regard to the implementation of the decisions of the Organization of African
Unity concerning Western Sahara;
6. Invites the Secretary-General to submit a report on the question of Westem Sahara to the General
Assembly at its thirty-fourth session.
8 I st plenary meeting
13 December 1978
B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 and 1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960,
11 See A/31/136-S/12141, annex II, resolution AHG/Res.81
(XIII). For the printed text, see Official Records of the
Security Council, Thirty-first Year, Supplement for July,
August and September 1976.
12 A/33/235 and Corr.I, annex II, resolution AHG/Res.92

(XV).
13 A/32/310, annex II, AHG/Dec.110 (XIV).

173

Recalling its relevant resolutions and those of the
Organization of African Unity concerning the question
of Western Sahara,
Considering the decision of the Assembly of Heads
of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its thirteenth ordinary session, held at
Port Louis from 2 to 6 July 1976, to hold an extraordinary session devoted to the question of Western
Sahara,14
Considering also the decision of the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity at its fifteenth ordinary session, held at
Khartoum from 18 to 22 July 1978, to establish an
ad hoe committee of Heads of State to consider all
the data on the question of Western Sahara,1 5
Recalling the part of the Political Declaration
adopted by the Fifth Conference of Heads of State
and Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
Colombo from 16 to 19 August 1976, relating to
Western Sahara, 16
Taking note of the appeal addressed to States Members of the United Nations by the current Chairman
of the Organization of African Unity, 17
Recalling its resolution 32/19 of 11 November
l 977, regarding co-operation between the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity,
l. Takes note of the decision of the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization
of African Unity at its fifteenth ordinary session to
establish an ad hoe committee of Heads of State;
2. Expresses its confidence that the ad hoe committee will consider all the data on the question of
Western Sahara with a view to convening an extraordinary summit meeting of the Organization of African
Unity;
3. Invites the Organization of African Unity to
take prompt action to find a just and equitable settlement of the question of Western Sahara;
4. Appeals to all States in the region to refrain
from any action that might impede the efforts of the
Organization of African Unity to arrive at a just and
peaceful solution of the problem;
5. Requests the Administrative Secretary-General
of the Organization of African Unity to inform the
Secretary-General of the United Nations of the results
achieved by the ad hoe committee and invites the
Secretary-General of the United Nations to report
thereon to the General Assembly.
81 st plenary meeting
13 December 1978
33/32.

Question of American Samoa

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
14 See A/31/136-S/12141,
annex II, resolution AHO/
Res.81 (XIII). For the printed text, see Official Records of the
Security Council, Thirty-first Year, Supplement for July, August
and September 1976.
15 A/33/235 and Corr.1, annex II, resolution AHG/Res.92

(XV).
16 A/31/197, annex I, para. 35.
17 See the letter dated 7 November 1978 from the Permanent

Representative of the Sudan (A/33/364).

174

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 18
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United
Nations relating to American Samoa,
Taking into account the statement of the administering Power relating to developments in American
Samoa,19
Conscious of the need to promote progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration with respect
to American Samoa,
Bearing in mind the constructive results achieved
as a consequence of previous visiting missions to
Non-Self-Governing Territories and reiterating its conviction that the dispatch of such missions is essential
for securing adequate and first-hand information in
regard to the conditions prevailing in those Territories
and to the views, wishes and aspirations of the peoples
therein with respect to their future status,
Welcoming the positive attitude of the administering
Power with respect to the receiving of United Nations
visiting missions,
~ ware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of American
Samoa, and stressing the necessity of diversifying the
Territory's economy as a matter of priority, in order
to reduce its dependence on fluctuating economic
activities,
. 1. App~oves the chap~er o~ the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to American Samoa;20
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
American Samoa to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources should .in n~ way delay the implementation
of the Declaration with respect to American Samoa;
4. Calls upon the Government of the United States
of America, as the administering Power, in consultation with the freely elected representatives of the people, to continue to take all the necessary steps to
ensure the full and speedy attainment of the goals set
forth in the Declaration with respect to the Territory;
5. Urges the administering Power to continue its
efforts to ensure t~at the c~lture and identity of the
people of the Terntory continue to be reflected in the
Government and administration of the Territory and
preserved to the fullest extent;
6. Welcomes the holding of the first gubernatorial
elections in the Territory on 8 November 1977,
18_Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/33i23/Rev.1), vol. I, chap. III,
and vol. III, chap. XIX.
• 19 lbid., Thirty-third Session, Fourth Committee, 26th meetmg, paras. 1-9.
2o Ibid., Thirty-third Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/33/23/
Rev.1), vol. Ill, chap. XIX.

• whereby the people of the Territory elected two
American Samoans as Governor and Lieutenant Governor respectively;
7. Calls upon the administering Power to take all
possible steps to strengthen and diversify the economy
of American Samoa and to work out concrete programmes of assistance and economic development for
the Territory;
8. Requests the administering Power to continue
to enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and
?ther organ~zations withi!-1 the United Nations system
in acceleratmg progress in all sectors of the national
life of American Samoa;
9. Urges the administering Power, with the cooperation of the freely elected authorities and representatives of the people of American Samoa, to safeg_uard the inalie~able right of the people of the Ternt~ry to th~ enJoyment of t~eir natural resources by
takmg effective measures which guarantee the right of
the people to own and dispose of those natural resources and to establish and maintain control of their
future development;
10. Urges the administering Power to continue to
foster close relations and co-operation with neighbouring island communities;
11. Requests the Special Committee to continue
t? seek the best ways and means for the implementation of .the J?eclaration with respect to American
Samoa, including the dispatch of a visiting mission
to the Territory in consultation with the administering
P<?wer, and to report to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fourth session on the implementation of the
present resolution.
81 st plenary meeting
13 December 1978

33/33.

Question of Guam

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Guam,
Having e~amined t~e relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 21
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to ~olonial Co~~tries and Peoples,
and all other resolut10ns and decis10ns of the United
Nations relating to Guam,
Cons~ious of the 1;1eed to accelerate progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration with respect
to Guam,
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power, 22
Noting that the administering Power continues to
maintain military installations in the Territory,
Consider~ng that. the J?Olicy of maintaining military
ba~es an~ in~tal_la~ions i~ Non-Self-Governing Territones which inhibit the nght of self-determination of
.

21 lb~d., vol: I, ch_aps. Ill and V, and vol. IV, chap. XXVII.
22 Ibid., Th1Tty-th1rd Session, Fourth Committee, 26th meet-

mg, paras. 1-9.
