88

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

3149 (XXVIII). ·Human rights and scientific and
technological developments

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Proclamation of Teheran 67 and resolution XI adopted by the International Conference
on Human Rights on 12 May 1968, 68
Recalling further its resolution 2450 (XXIII) of 19
December 1968 and subsequent resolutions on human
rights and scientific and technological developments,
Regretting that the Commission on Human Rights
was unable to consider this item at its twenty-ninth
session,
Requests the Commission on Human Rights, through
the Economic and Social Council, to give high priority
to the consideration of the item in conformity with
its decision of 3 April 1973.Gn
2201 st plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3150 (XXVIII). Use of scientific and technological developments in the interests of peace
and social development

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 3026 B (XXVII) of 18
December 1972 and recalling its previous resolutions
on this subject,
Noting the reports of the Secretary-General on this
subject, 70
Noting the positive role of scientific and technological achievements in the development of human society
and the unprecedented acceleration of the rate of scientific and technological developments,
Convinced that scientific and technological developments effect important changes in many areas of the
life of society and should be used to exert a beneficial
influence on human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Bearing in mind that, while scientific and technological developments provide ever increasing opportunities to better the human condition, in a number of instances they can give rise to social problems and may
be accompanied by an increase in social and material
inequality and a deterioration of the social situation
of broad sectors of the population,
Noting the urgent need to make full use of scientific
and technological developments for the welfare of man
and to neutralize their present and possible future
liarmful consequences,
Noting with concern that scientific and technological
developments are used by the forces of imperialism
and colonialism to intensify the arms race, suppress
national liberation movements and deprive the peoples
of their fundamental rights,
Reaffirming the right of peoples to self-determination and the need to respect human rights ,and funda67 Final Art vf the International Conference on Human
Ri;;hts ( United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2),
r• 3.
6H [bid., p. 12.
tlll See OfJicia/ Records of the Economic and Social Council,
17.'ftv-fourth Se.nion, Supplement No. 6 (E/5265), chap. XII.
10 See A/9075.

mental freedoms and the dignity of the human personality in the light of scientific and technological
developments,
l. Calls upon all States to develop further international co-operation to ensure that the results of
scientific and technological developments are used in
the interests of strengthening international peace and
security, the realization of the peoples' right to selfdetermination and respect for national sovereignty,
freedom and independ0nce and for the purpose of economic and social development and improving the quality of life for the entire population;
2. Believes that the efiects of scientific and technological developments have been generally beneficial
and hold out great potential for the future;
3. Recommends ;ill St;ites to pursue a policy of utilizing all scientific and technological achievements to
satisfy the material and spiritual needs of al! sectors
of the population;
4. Recognizes that, where it exists the use of scientific and technological achievements' for the purpose
of violating the sovereignty of States, interfering in
their internal affairs, waging aggressive wars, supressing na_tion~I li?e~ation movements_ or pursuing a policy
of racial chscnmmat1on not only 1s a flagrant violation
of the Charter of the United Nations and other principles of international law, but constitutes an inadmissible distortion of the purposes that should guide scientific and technological developments for the benefit
of mankind;
5. Invites the Secretary-General, the International
Labour Organisation, the United Nations Educational
Scientific and Cultural Organization, the World Health
Organization and other specialized agencies concerned
to l?ay particular attention to the problem of the protection of broad sectors of the population against social
and material inequalities, as well as other harmful effects which might arise from the use of scientific and
technologi~al developm~nts, and requests the SecretaryGeneral, m co-operation with the above-mentioned
agencies, to submit a report on this subject to the
Grneral Assembly at its thirtieth session;
6. Urges all_ Sta~es to take acti_on whenever necessary
to develop leg1slat10n _guaranteemg human rights and
fundamental freedoms m the light of scientific and technological developments.
2201 st plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3152 (XXVIII). Assistance in cases of natural
disaster and other disaster situations

The General Assembly,
Recalling previous resolutions of the General Assemb_ly and th~ Ec?nornic. and Social Council relating
to disaster relief, m particular Assembly resolutions
2816 (XXVI) of 14 December 1971 and 2959
(XXVII) of 12 December 1972,
Noting with appr~ci~tion the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the activities of the Office of the United
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator71 and his report
on preventive measures. disaster contingency planning
and preparedness, 72
11 A/9063.
1
7? /\ 92: 1.

89

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator 74 and
of the relevant part of the report of the Economic and
Social Council, 75
Noting with concern the observation by the representative of the Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations drawing
attention to the fact that the state of emergency resulting from the drought will continue in 1974 and
that donors should therefore give serious consideration to renewed requests for outside assistance and to
the timely dispatch of relief aid,
Taking note also of the joint appeal made on 26
November 1973 by the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the Director-General of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations for aid
to the countries affected by the drought in the SudanoSahelian region,

Having heard with satisfaction the introductory statement made in the Third Committee by the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator, 73 in particular his
reference to the need for concerted global action to
combat natural disasters,
Noting with satisfaction the action taken by the
United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator during the
past year,
l. Authorizes the Secretary-General, as an interim
measure, to draw on the Working Capital Fund in the
amount of $45,000 for 1974 and $60,000 for 1975 for
assistance to Governments, at their request, in cooperation with the organizations of the United Nations
system and the League of Red Cross Societies, where
appropriate, in the elaboration of national preparations
to meet natural disasters;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
explore various means, including support from the
United Nations Development Programme, of making
adequate provision for this purpose in the future;
3. Calls upon all Member States and all organizations concerned with disaster-related matters to continue to give the United Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator their full co-operation and support.

1. Expresses its deep sympathy to the peoples and
Governments of the Sudano-Sahelian region;
2. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the Director-General of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to
continue to take all necessary steps to provide the
most effective possible material and financial assistance,
in co-operation with the organs and agencies concerned,
to those countries in the Sudano-Sahclian region which
request such assistance;

2202nd plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3. Appeals once again to the Governments of Member States, to United Nations organs and programmes
and to the specialized agencies, calling upon them, inter
alia, to continue and consider increasing their assistance to the Sudano-Sahclian countries within the frame-work of the emergency relief operations, with specific
reference to the joint appeal for emergency assistance
made on 26 November 1973 by the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and the Director-General of the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;

3153 (XXVIII). Aid to the Sudano-Sahelian
populations threatenecl with famine
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2816 (XXVI) of 14 December 1971, 2959 (XXVII) of 12 December 1972 and
3054 (XXVIII) of 17 October 1973,
Further recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions 1759 (LIV) of 18 May 1973 and 1797 (L V)
of 11 July 1973,
Welcoming the spirit of solidarity shown both by
countries and regional agencies as well as by the organs
and agencies of the United Nations system,
Taking note with satisfaction of the report of the
Secretary-General on the activities of the Office of

4. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session on the
development of the situation.

2202nd plenary meeting
14 December 1973
74 A/9063.

7~ Official

Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-eight!1
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/9003 and Corr.I), chap. XXIV,
sect. D .

73 Of]icial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth
Session, Third Committee, 2040th meeting, paras. 29-36.

•

• •
Other decisions
Freedom of information
(Item 64)
At its 2201st plenary meeting, on 14 December 1973, the General Assemblv,
on the recommendation of the Third Committee, 76 decided to include in the pro~
visional agenda of its twenty-ninth session the item entitled "Freedom of information".
76 Ibid.,

Twenty-eighth Sessio,c, Annexes, agenda item 64, document A/9395, para. 6.
