United Nations

S/PV.6510

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6510th meeting
Wednesday, 6 April 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Santos Calderón/Ms. Holguín . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Colombia)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mr. Simões
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Messone
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Lidington
Mr. Dunn

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti
Haiti: A renewed commitment by the international community
Letter dated 31 March 2011 from the Permanent Representative of Colombia
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2011/218)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (S/2011/183*)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-29014 (E)

*1129014*

S/PV.6510

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
Haiti: A Renewed Commitment by the
International Community
Letter dated 31 March 2011 from the
Permanent Representative of Colombia
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2011/218)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (S/2011/183*)
The President (spoke in Spanish): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I wish
to invite the representatives of Argentina, Australia, the
Bahamas, Canada, Chile, Cuba, the Dominican
Republic, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Israel, Japan,
Mexico, Nicaragua, Norway, Peru, the Republic of
Korea, Spain, Uruguay and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome the
President of Haiti, His Excellency Mr. René Garcia
Préval, and request the Protocol Officer to escort him
to a seat at the Council table.
Mr. René Garcia Préval, President of Haiti, was
escorted to a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Spanish): Under rule 39
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
His Excellency Mr. William J. Clinton, United Nations
Special Envoy for Haiti, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I also invite His Excellency Mr. José
Miguel Insulza, Secretary General of the Organization
of American States; His Excellency Mr. Luis Alberto
Moreno Mejía, President of the Inter-American
Development Bank; and His Excellency Mr. Percival
Noel James Patterson, Special Representative of the
Caribbean Community for Haiti, as requested by the
Permanent Representatives of Chile, Colombia and the
Bahamas to the United Nations, respectively, in their
letters of 4 April 2011.

2

Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite the Acting Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, His Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, to
participate in this meeting.
I wish to welcome warmly the President of Haiti,
the Secretary-General, the Ministers and other
representatives participating in today’s meeting. Their
presence in the Chamber affirms the importance of the
topic under consideration.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/183*, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti.
I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2011/218, which contains a
letter dated 31 March 2011 from the Permanent
Representative of Colombia addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, transmitting a concept paper on the item
under consideration.
I shall now make a statement in my national
capacity.
“Men anpil chay pa lou”. Allow me to begin this
statement using a language that is not one of the
official languages of the United Nations but is part of
the lives of several million inhabitants of the
Caribbean. “Men anpil chay pa lou” is a Creole
proverb that means “Many hands make the load
lighter”. Today, before the body responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, in the
presence of such noteworthy guests, I wish to say that
the hands of the world can make Haiti’s load lighter. I
say it in Creole because our heart today speaks the
language of that island.
On assuming the presidency of the Security
Council, Colombia wishes to promote an open debate
on Haiti that renews the impetus towards the
stabilization and strengthening of the rule of law in that
country. This is not specifically to congratulate
ourselves for the good that we all have done. The
meagre results achieved require us to reflect on the
way in which we are carrying out our work.
Haiti’s social and economic problems and its
reconstruction problems are not new, although they

11-29014

S/PV.6510

were exacerbated by the tragic earthquake of
12 January last year. Haitians themselves say that it is
necessary to rebuild their country, physically and
institutionally, and the international community has the
moral duty to contribute to that end. However, we must
do so in a coordinated and coherent manner, seeking
concrete, sustainable and long-term achievements and
leaving aside the chaos of well-intentioned but shortterm cooperation without lasting outcomes. Today, the
proliferation of organizations acting on the island
without coordination among themselves or with the
Haitian authorities undermines any effort to strengthen
institutions and affects the ability to undertake longterm initiatives, preventing these efforts from yielding
concrete results. What is worse, the feeling of failure
feeds the vicious cycle of poverty and corruption.
During my visit to Haiti last year, I realized that if
we truly wish to help, we must do so in different manner.
Haitians yearn to be heard. An international community
that does not take Haitians’ views of their problems into
account does not serve Haiti. In this we must be clear.
We know that the primary responsibility — the central
responsibility for reconstruction — falls to the
Government of Haiti and to Haitian leaders. We also
know that the tragedy suffered by Haitians will not end if
local efforts are not complemented by foreign help.
Likewise, if Haitians accept renewed support
from the international community, we propose that it
be built on foundations that guarantee the effectiveness
of our joint action. These foundations would include
the development of concrete projects with transparency
measures that truly lead to an improvement in the
quality of life; the elaboration of a long-term
development strategy; a commitment to accountability;
and ownership by all Haitians of their common destiny.
It is necessary to combat the enemies of
development and stability, such as institutional
weakness, the absence of laws or the failure to comply
with them, and the fragile control and supply of basic
services by the State, including the provision of justice.
We have to believe in and think about Haiti in the long
term to contribute to solving these pressing problems,
which we must admit we have not achieved in the
current cooperation framework.
As I said in September last year before the
General Assembly (see A/65/PV.15), we must all
commit to a different vision for rebuilding Haiti. If we
use the available resources in a more efficient and

11-29014

effective manner, ensuring economic and social
welfare, we will be able to take more concrete and
coherent measures, including through resort to existing
structures such as the Interim Haiti Recovery
Commission.
I also believe that we should go beyond the
discussion about whether or not the mandate of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) should be modified. At some point we
will have to do so, as it is clear that Haiti’s peace and
security problem will be resolved only if that country
achieves
economic
and
social
development.
Meanwhile, the medium- and long-term development
goals set by Haiti should become the required point of
reference for coordinating the activities of MINUSTAH
and United Nations agencies — a task in which the
work of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral is essential. I take this opportunity to highlight
and recognize the good work of Mr. Edmond Mulet,
who assumed that position and the leadership of
MINUSTAH after the earthquake and has achieved
much in the midst of difficult conditions.
Now we believe that, even working within
MINUSTAH’s agreed mandate, we can contribute in
areas that are essential to the Haitian population. Let us
consider what could be achieved if, rather than having
a high percentage of military personnel, the Mission
had more civilian personnel and engineers who could
coordinate priority matters, such as debris removal — a
task in which, fortunately, significant progress can
already be seen thanks to the efforts of Haitian
authorities. On the one hand, the pre-earthquake
landscape would begin to re-emerge, restoring the
sense of normalcy that would lead Haitians to believe
that things can change; on the other, employment
opportunities would be generated, a vital goal for the
viability of our common efforts towards recovery. Let
us look at this matter from a practical standpoint. If we
already have a United Nations operation in Haiti, why
not use it to address immediate needs and begin to lay
the foundations for its transition towards development?
Another vital project that can be implemented by
the international community is the rebuilding of
housing, which we could undertake through bilateral
and multilateral projects, with the support from start to
finish of donors with their architects, engineers,
environmentalists and landscapers. In supporting the
construction of dignified and well-planned housing that
elevates the population’s quality of life, not only would

3

S/PV.6510

jobs be generated, but the situation of thousands of
people still living in tents would be resolved.
The one-plus-one framework, which involves
both the Government and the society of Haiti in their
own recovery, is the only viable one if we want to
strengthen its institutionalism. It is Haitians themselves
who can and should help us to prioritize the resources
which, within that framework, are aimed at the longterm recovery of Haiti. And this should be the same
framework that we apply to the other sectors that need
to be reorganized. Health, agriculture, education, and
the construction of roads and infrastructure, such as
aqueducts, must be a part of this comprehensive
support. Health and education, for example, cannot
remain in the hands of foreign charity organizations,
but must be progressively transferred to the leadership
and management of the Haitian State itself, with the
decisive cooperation and support of the international
community. We are talking about training a population
of which 60 per cent are young people, who cannot
depend on sporadic aid. When donor funds fail to
arrive and the organizations that provide these services
are gone, what will happen to Haitian children and
youth?
Ultimately, I also want to reiterate my country’s
resolute commitment to strengthening Haiti’s security
institutions. We understand that security is a necessary
condition for the rule of law, healthy democratic
institutions, and the achievement of sustainable
development, and that is why we are contributing to
strengthening the Haitian National Police. We have 31
Colombian police officers cooperating with the Haitian
police, and we renew our commitment to having them
fulfil their support mission.
I do not wish to conclude without acknowledging
President René Préval for the progress made in the
country, for his respect for liberties, and for ensuring a
peaceful and orderly electoral process, which,
according to the preliminary results reported by the
Organization of American States and the Caribbean
Community, have yielded Michel Martelly as the
winner. In the coming months, a new Government will
come into office on the island, and this is an ideal
opportunity to reorganize our cooperation with Haiti
and our contribution to its sustainable development,
because peace is not built by increasing dependency
and welfarism.

4

To paraphrase the Liberator Simon Bolivar,
whom Haitians helped in a very difficult — and
perhaps the most difficult — moment in his life,
providing him refuge and supporting him in his
military campaign, we could say that peace and the
development that makes it possible “will come about
not through divine providence but through sensible
planning and well-directed efforts”.
That is why today, as Colombia presides over the
Security Council, we call on the other countries that
make up the Council and the Organization to reflect on
what we have done so far in Haiti and on how we can
implement new methods and concepts in rebuilding the
country. Let us think about building a better Haiti, not
just today or tomorrow but for the next 25 years. We
must imagine the Haiti of the future and lay the
foundations so that it is Haitians themselves who
continue its reconstruction. I am sure that this task is
not beyond our capacities or the resources that we have
already committed and the ones we are willing to
commit in a more coordinated cooperation framework.
I would like to conclude with a central message.
Let us not give in. Let us not leave Haiti behind. Let us
not forget Haiti because we feel that no effort is
enough. Let us retake the course of our contribution
with clear, precise and executable goals. Today, I call
on the international community to look at Haiti in a
different way. I also call on Haiti to welcome a new
cooperation strategy that fulfils a basic precept,
namely, that cooperation through the United Nations
system is successful only as long as there are exit
strategies and progress is made towards a horizon
where the assisted country can live without that
cooperation and without the omnipresence of the
system.
It is time for Haiti to rise up, make progress and
take on the task of building its future — with
international cooperation and with the decisive efforts
of Haitians themselves. As I said at the beginning,
many hands make the load lighter.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I very warmly welcome His Excellency
Mr. William Jefferson Clinton, United Nations Special
Envoy for Haiti. We are very grateful for his
participation at today’s meeting.

11-29014

S/PV.6510

I now give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: First of all, I would like
to thank President Santos Calderón of Colombia for
convening this high-level debate during his country’s
presidency of the Security Council. At a time when the
world faces multiple crises, it is important that we
reaffirm our collective commitment to Haiti. I am
particularly grateful to the Group of Friends of Haiti
and the countries contributing troops and police for
their unwavering support. I also wish to express my
deep appreciation to my Special Representative,
Mr. Edmond Mulet, for his leadership and dedication,
as well as to President Clinton, United Nations Special
Envoy, for his contributions to Haiti’s reconstruction
and his inspiring advocacy on the country’s behalf.
We meet as Haitians and their international
partners look to consolidate progress following last
month’s presidential and legislative elections. We are
all very encouraged that the second round of polling
was peaceful. I commend the people of Haiti for that
important step towards the consolidation of democracy.
That achievement builds on the gains Haiti has
made, with the support of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti towards security, respect
for basic freedoms and an end to the State-sponsored
violence that was carried out with impunity for so long.
Today, the Haitian press enjoys greater freedom than at
any point in the country’s history. Urban slums are no
longer controlled by criminal gangs. The National
Police has become a capable and trusted institution.
I
commend
President
Préval
and
his
Administration for their role in those advances. As
President Préval will leave the presidency next month,
I would like to take this opportunity to express to him
my deepest appreciation for his leadership and valuable
contribution in building his country after many difficult
challenges, including last year’s earthquake. I urge the
next Government of Haiti to build on this legacy of
political tolerance and respect for human rights.
Recovery and reconstruction are slowly gathering
momentum. More than 20 per cent of the estimated
10 million cubic metres of rubble has been removed.
The number of earthquake-affected people living in
camps has decreased, from more than 1.5 million in
July of last year to 680,000 today. Unfortunately, some
of that reduction has not been entirely voluntary, and
many camp dwellers are at risk of forced eviction.

11-29014

The cholera epidemic appears to have stabilized.
The number of new cases has decreased, and the
nationwide mortality rate stands at 1.8 per cent.
However, only large-scale investments in Haiti’s water
and sanitation system will protect against another
outbreak, and the withdrawal of some humanitarian
agencies from cholera-treatment centres and camps
risks creating a shortage in the provision of services.
The cholera appeal is 45 per cent funded, with the
overall Haiti appeal having received only 10 per cent
of the funds requested. Additional financial support is
urgently needed. Strong coordination between United
Nations agencies, the Interim Haiti Recovery
Commission and the new Government will also be
crucial.
While important progress has indeed been
achieved, Haiti continues to face daunting challenges.
The country’s economy is on its knees. Public
institutions are barely able to deliver essential services.
Millions of Haitians remain dependent on the
assistance of non-governmental organizations to meet
their most basic needs. Too many women and girls live
in fear of sexual violence. Without the rule of law,
lasting peace and prosperity will remain elusive.
Haiti’s judicial system is deeply dysfunctional. Its
prisons remain dangerously overcrowded. Property
records are unreliable or non-existent. Public
expenditures often lack transparency. As a result,
citizens have lost confidence in the State and investors
remain reluctant to do business in Haiti. Rule of law
reform must be a top priority for Haiti’s next President.
The people of Haiti are looking to the next
Government and Parliament to deliver. As a signal of
its commitment to change, the incoming Parliament
should complete the process of amending the
Constitution before the next President is inaugurated.
The international community must also seize this
opportunity to make a fresh start. Assistance should
empower Haitian actors and institutions, not prolong
their dependency. The United Nations will continue to
stand shoulder to shoulder with the Haitian
Government and people in the noble and necessary
work of building a more just and prosperous future.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I now give the
Mr. William J. Clinton.

floor

to

His

Excellency

5

S/PV.6510

Mr. Clinton: Let me first of all thank you,
Mr. President, for having brought this issue before the
Council and for Colombia’s genuine friendship with
the people of Haiti. You mentioned the police officers
from Colombia; they are part of a contingent of 49
nations providing police, and then there are the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
forces, about 18 nations. Your country has also
disbursed 100 per cent of its pledged aid and helped
the Haitian people to rebuild their economy,
particularly through the work you have done through
the coffee sector. For all that, we are very grateful.
I would also like to thank President Préval for
many things, but one I think is important. Every day
we pick up the newspaper with worry about what is
happening in Côte d’Ivoire, or whether more civilians
have been killed in Libya. Haiti, for all of its troubled
past, is overseeing now the peaceful transfer of power,
after a devastating earthquake which took out virtually
20 per cent of all the public employees of the entire
country and devastated more than half its gross
domestic product (GDP). Sometimes we focus so much
on the problems that we forget to acknowledge the
small miracles of human nature in concern for the
future of a country. I personally believe that this is a
remarkable thing, and I thank you, President Préval,
and the people of Haiti for undertaking this election
with hundreds of thousands of people living in tents
and under tarps, with the almost impossible task of
verifying where people live and getting their
identification up. It is a remarkable thing.
On most days, I have been grateful to the
Secretary-General for asking me to be the Special
Envoy to Haiti, although it has turned out to be a more
challenging task in the aftermath of the quake. I am
very grateful to President Préval for asking me to serve
as the co-Chair of the Reconstruction Commission,
with his Prime Minister, Jean-Max Bellerive. I will do
what I can if the new Government wishes me to
continue, but my position on this has always been that
the future of Haiti should be for the Haitian people to
determine.
Having said that, let me make a few observations
about the questions that have brought us here today.
We were making good progress on development
after the Secretary-General asked me to work in Haiti,
before the earthquake. Let me remind the Council that
before the earthquake, there had been a series of

6

hurricanes that had taken out about 15 per cent of
Haiti’s GDP, which occasioned the involvement of the
United Nations there and MINUSTAH before the
quake. The quake was a dramatic setback to daily life
and to development, but it also presented some new
opportunities.
In a little less than eight months, the
Reconstruction Commission established by the
President and the Parliament has taken a number of
important steps. First, for the members of the Security
Council who have not followed this, this is really a
unique body, because it is the only one, in my
experience, in which one half of the members of the
Commission represent every major element of Haitian
society, including local governments, the private
sector, the non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
and the legal sector, and one half of the Commission
represents the international community — the major
national donors and the multinational donors.
The Commission seeks to approve all substantial
projects that are a part of the reconstruction, including,
voluntarily, the projects undertaken by NGOs in Haiti.
There has never been any attempt before to coordinate
the work of the Government of Haiti with that of the
donors and the NGO community. We have approved
more than 87 projects that, when completed, will help
2 million Haitians.
The idea is to take the Haitian Government’s own
development plan and make sure that all the projects
approved are consistent with that, then to offer
transparency through a website that will show what
projects have been approved, who is funding them,
who got the money and what the progress of the project
is, and offering a performance audit at the end of that.
This is essentially modelled on what was done through
the Rehabilitation and Reconstruction Agency (BRR)
in Indonesia after the tsunami in South Asia. Because
the burden imposed by the earthquake on the capacity
of the Government of Haiti was so much greater, I
think that, with all of its frustrations, it has worked
pretty well.
The Commission does not have the authority to
implement projects, only to approve them. There are
several significant questions which, quite properly,
have been left to the Haitian Government, for example
how to resolve the land issues, which the SecretaryGeneral mentioned, necessary to do large-scale housing
construction outside the area impacted by the quake.

11-29014

S/PV.6510

Other questions include: what will be the basic
economic structures? What kind of energy sector will
they have, what kind of education sector will they
have, what kind of health-care sector will they have,
what kind of array of ports and airports will they have?
There are some other questions that I think are very
important, for example, the granting of dual citizenship
to the Haitian diaspora, which I believe would
dramatically increase the level of investment and
involvement in Haiti — something that President
Préval has supported but which requires a specific and
rather extended constitutional process.
I have worked on this through the office of
Special Envoy, through the staff resources of my
foundation, and through the fund I established at
President Obama’s request with former President Bush.
We have now, with the approval of the Haitian
Government, established the beginnings of a mortgage
process, which the Haitians have never had before, and
a systematic small-business loan process. Haiti has had
microcredit and big finance, but never really a vigorous
small-business loan system. So my goal and that of
President Bush is to make this work and then give it to
the people of Haiti — give it to a bank, or whoever the
Haitians determine after a couple of years.
Through the Global Initiative, we have a business
group there headed by Denis O’Brien, the head of
Digicel, who just funded the restoration of Haiti’s
remarkable Iron Market. It was restored to the
condition it was in in 1891, and there are now nearly
100 people who make a living there every day thanks
to the support of the Government. You may think these
are symbolic things, but it is quite a symbol. If you
have seen it, it is a stark contrast to the abject
difficulties people are facing.
We are also working with Partners in Health and
the Ministry of Health to help Haiti rebuild its health
system. I would say to all present that, notwithstanding
the cholera epidemic, that Haiti is probably further
along in building a sustainable health system than in
any other major challenges, in terms of modernizing
the educational system and making it universal and the
energy system and doing some other things that have to
be done. So I am very grateful for what has been done.
Mr. President, you wanted to talk about
peacekeeping today. That is not my purview. I do want
to say, however, that I think that MINUSTAH has done
a great job, under the leadership of Brazil and

11-29014

supported by the Argentines and so many other
countries. They have been great. I agree with you, Sir,
that one cannot have peace over the long run without
development. I leave it to others to decide how the
allocation of responsibilities should be done, but I will
say to Mr. Mulet and all the other people who work
there on a daily basis that I think they have done
remarkable things to try to help deal with the
emergency situation.
I would like to offer a few brief recommendations
before other speakers take the floor.
Once a new President is inaugurated and a new
Administration has responsibility for reconstruction, I
think it will be more important than ever that we keep
up the coordination that President Préval has endorsed
between
the
Haitian
Government,
donors,
non-governmental organizations and, increasingly,
when we begin building houses, the many people who
will have contracts to build them. It is very important
that all this be done in a way that builds the long-term
capacity of the Haitian Government and that includes
the transparency set up by the Commission, so that
donors have real confidence and the people of Haiti
can see the houses going up, the Haitians being hired
and the Haitian businesses being brought into
partnership. This is an enormous opportunity to rebuild
the Haitian economy even as we move people out of
tents. But I think that it is important that we do it in a
way that strengthens the capacity of the Government of
Haiti and the confidence of people in the process.
That means that we also will need some more
funding. As I have said, the Commission has approved
87 projects, which are valued at $3.26 billion. In
fairness to donors, our goal has always been to have
the Commission ahead of donors. Otherwise, we would
be failing. If we could not do that, we could not
coordinate, we could not give any direction to donors
and we could not follow the lead of the Haitian
economic plan. I am not being critical of the fact that
we have approved more money than has been
provided — that is what we are supposed to do. On the
other hand, once it happens, we need the funding.
Participants should have before them a one-page
document from the Office of the Special Envoy that
states that 37.2 per cent of the money pledged more
than a year ago here in New York has actually been
disbursed. Now that there has been an election and the
international community has accepted the results and

7

S/PV.6510

verified and participated in the oversight of it, I think
greater donor disbursements are important. I think they
go a long way towards speeding up the reconstruction
and delivering other improvements.
The Haitians have an education plan for the first
time that would put all their children in school and give
them one nutritious meal daily. In the past, no more
than half the kids have gone to school. Many of those
here today, and many Members of the United Nations,
have talked to me over the years about the so-called
restavec system, where Haitian children are in effect
sold into labour for other families, often just so that
poor families in Haiti can send the rest of their kids to
school and feed them. If Members implement and fund
this education programme, which the Haitian
Government has recommended, 90 per cent of the
restavec system will vanish in a matter of weeks. So
we have to begin this.
There are other things that everyone is concerned
about, such as housing. It always takes longer to
address housing than anything else, but the Haitian
Government has approved a process that includes a
housing exposition. We have already had one big
meeting on housing in Haiti. There will be an
exposition in a few weeks’ time that will include actual
demonstration homes, with priority on earthquake and
hurricane resistance. This is the first time we have ever
had a building code — ensuring energy efficiency;
providing sanitation; looking at alternatives to
centralized electricity and sanitation systems that work
and that are more cost-effective; and making maximal
use of recycled materials, including the rubble that is
now being crushed neighbourhood by neighbourhood
in Port-au-Prince.
All of this is going to be done. After the
exposition is over and people have made their
presentations according to the standards established by
the Commission and the Government of Haiti, it will
be very important that we begin to move. We can move
hundreds of thousands of people out of tents in a hurry
once the exposition is over and people are approved for
final consideration as contractors. I urge that this be
done.
Secondly, I would urge donors, insofar as they
possibly can and consistent with their own policies, not
to earmark the contributions that they make to the
reconstruction fund, but to allow the Haitian
Government to spend funds in support of the goals

8

established in coordination with the Reconstruction
Commission, which, as I said, includes all the major
donors.
For example, debris management is not a
particularly glamorous topic. This may be the first time
that the Security Council has ever discussed it. But if
one spends any time in Port-au-Prince, they will know
that Haiti cannot bring the country back until all the
rubble has been crushed and either used on site as a
base to rebuild streets or homes, recycled as building
material or carted away. We cannot build schools,
organize the energy system or decide on the most costeffective way to do good sanitation so that there will
never be another cholera outbreak unless we get the
rubble out of the way. As the Secretary-General has
said, 2 million cubic metres have been removed, but
we have a lot left to go. We can destroy it all much
quicker than anybody thinks, and use it in the
reconstruction process. But we have to have the
machinery to do it. Bringing rubble to rock crushers
also provides work for the people of Haiti, which we
are trying to do on a neighbourhood-by-neighbourhood
basis.
Thirdly, while most large non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) have been registering their
projects with the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission,
I once again ask all NGOs to do so. NGO involvement
in Haiti has been remarkable and a blessing in many
ways, but also occasionally a curse, because the
President has never had a comprehensive record of all
NGO activities in Haiti.
The great thing that happened after the tsunami in
Indonesia was that, for the first time, NGOs came
forward to say, “Okay, we want to be helpful here, but
we want it to be consistent with the Government’s
plan”. I think that it is really important that the
Commission is trying to leave the Haitian Government,
when we are all gone, with the capacity to coordinate
further NGO activities and adequately run the country
and have in place a transparency system that the whole
world accepts as not just adequate but good.
Finally, let me say that I think that donors, the
Government, NGOs and United Nations agencies will
have to continue to work together. I think we still do
not know exactly how we are going to resolve all these
questions. I am convinced, if one looks at the progress
that has been made — the hospitals that are being built,
the health networks that are being built out, the

11-29014

S/PV.6510

education plan that the Government has adopted and
the options that Haiti actually has to set a model for the
Caribbean when it comes to a mixed energy system
that will be largely self-sufficient and less
expensive — that these are really important things.
The Caribbean as a whole — and the members of
the Security Council may find this surprising — has
the highest electricity rates in the world, because it has
no indigenous energy sources. But most Caribbean
islands, including Puerto Rico, which is part of the
United States, where I have worked, and Anguilla,
where I have helped people, and others, could almost
all be energy self-sufficient. Haiti can lead the way. It
has sunshine, wind and the capacity for biomass, which
can all be employed.
I ask everyone here to think about this. We are
not just helping Haiti here if we support the plan; we
may be helping the developing countries of the world
to imagine a whole different way of building
sustainable economies. It could be relevant to Africa; it
could be relevant to South-East Asia; it could be
relevant to all kinds of places. And it is really
important that we do it in a way that empowers both
local communities as well as the national Government.
As I said, I think we are doing well with health
care. They have a really good education plan, but it is
not funded. They are doing much better with the
economy. President Préval announced recently, along
with the United States and a Korean company, the
biggest investment in Haitian history and the first ever
textile mill onsite in Haiti.
I think we can do much better with tourism and
other things, but a good beginning has been made.
None of this is going to happen unless we get rid of the
rubble and start building the homes and clean out the
tents. That will do more than anything else to empower
people and to make them believe that this whole thing
is real.
Again I say, the democratic transition of power,
for any one who understands the history of Haiti, is a
cause for celebration. And as we all see in Côte
d’Ivoire, the people who are leaving probably deserve
more credit than the people who are coming in.
I think that this Commission will work, but only
if it is funded. If anyone has any suggestions for how
we can do better, I would be glad to have them.

11-29014

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank His
Excellency Mr. Clinton for his briefing.
I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. René
Garcia Préval, President of Haiti.
President Préval (spoke in French): I thank you
wholeheartedly, President Santos Calderón, for giving
me the opportunity to speak one final time to a United
Nations body as President of Haiti, in particular since
this meeting has been specially dedicated to the
situation in my country.
The 25 years of Haiti’s political life following the
1986 departure of the Duvalier dictatorship have been
characterized by so much instability that, I am sad to
note, in one-quarter of a century I am the only
President to have completed a first and then a second
constitutional term and the only one in 25 years to
never have been jailed or exiled.
My first term was inaugurated in 1996 with the
presence of the United Nations Support Mission in
Haiti; in 2000, with security and stability apparently
restored, United Nations troops left Haiti. These events
qualify me, I think, to make a modest contribution to
the discussion this morning with respect both to my
compatriots and to the United Nations, which it is my
pleasure once again to thank for assisting Haiti during
our difficult moments past and present.
To my compatriots who are living with the
legitimate pain of the presence of foreign soldiers on
our soil, I say that the United Nations peacekeeping
operations were made necessary each time by
instability created by the citizens themselves. Foreign
interventions on our soil have always been preceded,
for example in 1993, by a military coup d’état, or in
2004, by internal fighting that led to the breakdown of
the democratic process resulting from the toppling of
the constitutional President.
I therefore call on Haiti’s future executive and
legislative leaders emerging from the recent elections
to govern in a spirit of peace, openness, inclusion,
dialogue and respect for the rights of association and
expression. I also call on the opposition to adopt a
positive attitude of cooperation, even in its role as
Government critic. I call on all Haitian civil society
organizations, and in particular our press, to make
better use of a freedom that has cost so much, yet
remains incompletely mastered.

9

S/PV.6510

Allow me to commemorate within this forum the
memory of a courageous journalist, Mr. Jean
Dominique, who was assassinated on 3 April 2000 in a
cowardly manner. Eleven long years later, we still
await the conclusion of the judicial investigation of
that crime.
Finally, I say to the people that stability also
requires a realistic understanding of the serious
challenges to be addressed by the new entering
Government, especially following the disaster of
12 January 2010.
On 31 March 2010 here at United Nations
Headquarters, the international community promised to
provide significant resources for Haiti’s reconstruction.
The Interim Haiti Recovery Commission referred to by
President Clinton has made progress. I call on donors
to hasten disbursements because, in spite of the
courage and patience of the Haitian people, patience
has its limits.
To the United Nations system, and particularly to
the Security Council, I would suggest some reflection
on the effectiveness of interventions that have led to
nearly 11 years of military presence in a country where
no war is being fought. Since 1993, Haiti has seen
successively the United Nations Mission in Haiti, the
United Nations Support Mission in Haiti, the United
Nations Transition Mission in Haiti, United Nations
Civilian Police Mission in Haiti, the International
Civilian Support Mission in Haiti, and, since 2004, the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). Apart from MICIVIH, established in
1993 pursuant to General Assembly resolution 47/20 B
with the mandate of observing and promoting human
rights, all the other missions were established by the
Security Council with a peacekeeping objective.
While it is true that in 1993 the first
peacekeeping mission risked clashing with the Haitian
armed forces that had carried out the bloody coup of
1991; and that in 2004 another had to contend with
heavily armed organized groups, then that possibility
justified a significant military presence. But once the
danger of violent confrontation had passed, the
peacekeeping operations did not adapt quickly enough
to the new situation.
Instability in Haiti is, as President Santos
Calderón
stressed,
fundamentally
due
to
underdevelopment — in other words, unsatisfied
elementary socio-economic rights. Tanks, armoured

10

vehicles and soldiers should have given way to
bulldozers, engineers, and more police instructors and
experts in support of the judicial and penal systems.
On 14 May 2006, at my swearing-in ceremony, I
emphasized that need, but unfortunately my words
went unheard. I hope that after 11 years we will be able
to draw the conclusions that can help strengthen
stability in Haiti in the way that I have just noted.
Clearly, reorienting peacekeeping missions does
not exclude the work of other specialized institutions,
such as the World Bank, or United Nations funds and
programmes, such as the World Health Organization,
UNESCO, the Food and Agriculture Organization, the
World Food Programme, UNICEF, the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations
Development Fund for Women, and so forth. Let me
repeat that military deterrence is only one aspect of the
quest for stability and should not be mistaken for the
whole. Stability will be achieved only by Haitians
themselves, with, of course, the solidarity of the
international community, which can assist them in
building those institutions essential to the rule of law.
The drug problem remains another source of
political instability in Haiti. Haiti neither produces nor
consumes drugs. As long as there is a demand for drugs
in northern nations, the producers and traffickers will
continue to use weaker countries for their manufacture
and transit, and will strive to weaken those countries
further by fostering corruption, destabilization and
violence. Haiti is thus a victim of countries that
consume drugs, as are the producer and other transit
countries. The consumer nations should therefore
institute a policy of reducing demand, at the same time
as or even before combating drug trafficking, whether
in Haiti or the producer and transit countries.
No demand means no production and no supply.
It is time that the drug problem was tackled globally
and that drug reports no longer merely stigmatize the
producer and transit countries that are victims of the
demand. I cannot say how many times I have appealed
to the United States authorities, particularly the Drug
Enforcement
Administration,
for
strengthened
cooperation in the fight against drug trafficking. In this
regard, I am a firm supporter of resolution 1892
(2009), which, in paragraph 11, invites “Member
States, including neighbouring and regional States, to
strengthen their engagement with the Government of

11-29014

S/PV.6510

Haiti” to address cross-border trafficking, not only of
drugs but also of arms.

to participate in this meeting, presided by His
Excellency President Juan Manuel Santos Calderón.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
Haiti’s psyche has been drastically affected by the
enormous number of crimes against individuals that
our people have suffered during the past 50 years
without receiving justice, from the establishment of the
Duvalier dictatorship to the present day. That impunity
is still intolerable and continues to present an obstacle
to the quest for social pacification. There is no question
that justice must take its course, and it is urgent that
the Haitian State work to strengthen the judicial system
so that independent authority can accomplish its
constitutional mission. It is also extremely important
that the truth be revealed in all its nuances. To that end,
civil society should be mobilized, I suggest, through a
memory, truth and justice commission to be set up and
implemented by an independent organization — a
national office for the protection of citizens.

It is also a pleasure to see here high-level
representatives from Latin America and the Caribbean,
as well as representatives from various quarters of the
globe who have lent their best efforts to support Haiti’s
struggle for a better future. Let me acknowledge in
particular the presence of President René Préval, who
is leading his country through times of great historic
significance with an unwavering commitment to
democracy.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
noting in his report of 24 March that:
“It will also be incumbent upon the incoming
Administration to build on the achievements of
the Préval presidency, which put an end to Statesponsored political violence and allowed Haitians
to enjoy freedom of association and expression”
(S/2011/183*, para. 82).
My wish, in fact, is that the democratic gains be
maintained and that the people of Haiti, both the
governing and the governed, with the support of the
international community, take up the tremendous
challenges of the reconstruction and re-establishment
of our country resulting from our endemic poverty and
especially from the consequences of the natural
disasters that hit us in 2010.
I thank Mr. Mulet very much and congratulate
him on the work done by MINUSTAH under his
leadership.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank His
Excellency President Préval for his statement.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Simões (Brazil): I would like to begin by
congratulating the Government of Colombia on its
timely initiative of convening the Security Council for
an open debate on the situation in Haiti. It is an honour

11-29014

(spoke in French)
His two mandates as executive Head of State in Haiti
have contributed to the creation of a central political
equilibrium in that country that has depolarized the
system. President Préval has defused the mechanisms
of violence in Haitian politics and has guaranteed
freedom of expression and of the press. Thanks to his
work, Haiti will see for the first time in its history a
peaceful transfer of power to an opposition candidate.
We can hope that this will be the beginning of the end
of the winner-takes-all culture.
(spoke in English)
We are all united by the important task of
contributing to the stability and development of Haiti.
Brazil has been firmly committed to Haiti from the
outset on three different levels, namely, the
multilateral, bilateral and regional. On the multilateral
level, as the main contributor of troops to the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
and as the country responsible for commanding its
military component, we are proud of the harmonious
and constructive interaction our men and women in
uniform have managed to develop with the local
population, which has been made possible, to a large
extent, by our shared historical roots and cultural
affinities and by the positive footprints that our
peacekeepers have sought to leave in the country.
Haitians often refer to Brazilian troops as “bon bagay”,
the Creole expression for good people. This close
relationship, to which the implementation of quickimpact projects is a key contribution, has important
consequences when it comes to implementing
MINUSTAH’s mandate and maintaining a secure and
stable environment.
On the bilateral level, Brazil has consistently
offered Haiti different modalities of cooperation, in

11

S/PV.6510

agriculture, health, energy, job creation and institutionbuilding, among other areas. As recently as last
February, Ambassador Antonio de Aguiar Patriota,
Minister of External Relations of Brazil, had the
opportunity to visit Haiti and personally convey to the
Haitian authorities the readiness of the Government of
President Dilma Rousseff to renew our engagement on
all those fronts.
At the regional level, the Union of South
American Nations (UNASUR) has been implementing
a cooperation programme with Haiti that was approved
by our region’s heads of State and Government in
2010. A $100 million pledge to support its
implementation has been approved, in addition to the
newly established UNASUR office in Port-au-Prince.
Brazil is confident that, in line with the commitment to
Haiti expressed here today by His Excellency President
Santos Calderón, UNASUR Secretary-General María
Emma Mejía of Colombia will help us to advance
Haiti’s cooperation agenda.
It is Brazil’s belief that the active engagement of
Latin America and the Caribbean in Haiti is not only a
demonstration of solidarity towards a sister nation, but
also a powerful message as to the willingness and
capacity of our societies to live up to their international
responsibilities. In that context, let me express Brazil’s
gratitude to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to Haiti, Ambassador Edmond Mulet
of Guatemala. His remarkable knowledge and
understanding of the characteristics and specific needs
of our sister nation of Haiti have allowed him to make
a critical contribution to the country. We should also
mention at this juncture that the Organization of
American States has played a decisive and effective
role in supporting the electoral process that is about to
be concluded. We would also like to praise the
effective work of Mr. Colin Granderson in supporting
the Haitian authorities in the electoral process.
This open debate is taking place on the heels of
the announcement of the provisional electoral results in
Haiti. In spite of a number of difficulties, the
democratic determination of the Haitian people has
prevailed. We look forward to the successful
completion of the electoral process, which will lead to
strengthened
institutions
and
more
inclusive
governance. With a new Government in Haiti, the stage
will be set for reconstruction efforts to move forward,
in keeping with the urgent needs of Haitians. We trust
that, with the final results of the electoral process and

12

the transfer of power to the new Government, we will
be able to concentrate our efforts on reconstruction
tasks that will pave the way for Haiti’s development in
an environment of sustainable peace and political
stability.
It is true that much progress has been made to
date. Key structures are in place and technical
assistance is being provided. But major challenges
remain unmet. Those challenges include the need for
more financial aid from the international community.
The resources disbursed so far represent only
approximately 30 per cent of the pledges made for the
2010-2011 period. Brazil urges donors to redouble
their efforts. We need the necessary financial means to
do what it takes to promote Haitian reconstruction and
development. We advocate for resources to be
channelled primarily through the Government of Haiti,
whose ownership of the reconstruction process is of the
essence.
This is an especially appropriate occasion for the
Security Council to reaffirm its commitment to Haiti.
This commitment, as emphasized in the debate Brazil
had the privilege to chair last February (see
S/PV.6479),
should
take
into
account
the
interdependence between peace, security and
development. This is why Brazil and others have, since
the beginning, advocated a truly multidisciplinary
approach for MINUSTAH, with parallel actions aimed
at promoting security, reconciliation and development.
Stability and security are paramount to attracting
investment and sustaining growth. The promotion of
the rule of law and social and economic progress are
mutually reinforcing parts of our work in Haiti. For
Haiti to attract investment and generate critically
needed jobs, it must be able to provide energy that is
clean and conducive to sustainable development, as
expressed by Special Envoy Clinton here today.
In that context, Brazil considers the construction
of the Artibonite 4C hydroelectric plant to be a key
element in generating a virtuous cycle of stability and
prosperity in Haiti. The basic project developed by the
Brazilian Army, an undertaking of $5 million dollars, is
ready. The full project has already been approved by
the
Interim
Reconstruction
Commission
and
recommended to receive $40 million funding from the
Haiti Reconstruction Fund. We encourage additional
sponsors to join us in this endeavour.

11-29014

S/PV.6510

The promotion of the sort of the multidisciplinary
approach that is needed depends on our capacity to
achieve better coordination at all levels. In that
connection, allow me to highlight the positive
prospects stemming from joint efforts by MINUSTAH
and the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission. Enhanced
cooperation between these two bodies can and will
generate greater benefits for Haiti. We will continue to
support the work of the Interim Commission towards
its goal of converting it into a national development
agency.
This is the time for the international community
to convey a message of confidence in all Haitians. This
is the time for us to reiterate our readiness to lend
continued support to Haiti, including through
MINUSTAH, and always in accordance with the very
priorities established by the country’s democratically
elected Government.
(spoke in French)
In conclusion, I wish to express my admiration
for the Haitian people, their courage and their dignity
in the face of such adversity. The nation of Haiti can
always count on the solidarity and support of Brazil.
Together we have before us a historic opportunity in
this veritable national reconciliation process, which
will create stable conditions for the just and sustainable
reconstruction of the country. Long live Haiti.
Mr. Lidington (United Kingdom): I would first
like to express the thanks of my Government to the
Secretary-General, President Clinton and President
Préval for their briefings today. I would also like to
join with my Brazilian colleague in expressing our
appreciation for the priority that you personally,
Mr. President, and the Government of Colombia have
given to the future of Haiti in bringing forward this
debate this morning.
We welcome the debate not just on the
strengthening of democracy in Haiti but also on the
role of United Nations peacekeeping. In the latter
context, I would like to take this opportunity to express
the condolences of the British Government to the
Secretary-General on the deaths of United Nations
peacekeepers and civilian staff in recent days in
Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Côte d’Ivoire. The fate that they suffered is an
important and sobering reminder to us of the dangers
that United Nations personnel face every week

11-29014

worldwide as they go about their work on behalf of all
of us.
The United Kingdom welcomes the preliminary
results of the second round of the presidential elections
in Haiti, and we are encouraged by the initial positive
assessment by the joint electoral observation mission
of the Organization of American States and the
Caribbean Community. We look forward to the
announcement of the final result on 16 April and urge
the authorities to meet that deadline. As Haiti enters
the final stage of this electoral process, we call upon all
parties and all candidates to continue to demonstrate
their commitment to democracy and the rule of law.
We believe that the newly elected president, in
partnership with the new Parliament, should push
forward with an agenda to rebuild the administrative
capacity of the Government of Haiti and to provide the
necessary platform for international investment and for
job creation. We want to see the highest priority given
to a continued commitment by the new authorities in
Haiti to inclusiveness, accountability and impartiality,
and
a
demonstrable
willingness
to
engage
constructively with the international community.
The humanitarian situation is improving, but
Haiti continues to face very serious challenges in
meeting basic needs, principally permanent shelter,
clean water and sanitation, as President Clinton said to
us this morning, as well as in fighting cholera. The new
Haiti President will need to demonstrate strong
leadership in order to address those challenges.
The lack of capacity of the Haitian National
Police continues to have a worrying impact on the
safety and security of vulnerable Haitians, including
women and children. The Haitian Government must
reach a position where the troops of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) are no
longer the main providers of security in Haiti.
MINUSTAH, for its part, should continue to do its
utmost to support the development of local policing
capabilities. Building the capacity of Haiti’s own
police is the only sustainable solution in the long term,
as MINUSTAH cannot stay in Haiti forever. We
therefore look forward to the next police reform plan,
which will map out this essential capacity-building
work for 2012 and beyond.
My Government also believes that it is vital that
Haiti’s State institutions be afforded the same attention
and priority. A fully functioning judiciary and other

13

S/PV.6510

rule-of-law institutions, with — as President Préval
pointedly reminded us — no room for impunity, are
paramount. The rehabilitation of the Haitian
corrections system is another key element in the
recovery process, and donors, including the United
Kingdom, have channelled their efforts into making
valuable progress in this important area.
We continue to underline the importance of the
role that the international donor community has to play
in helping to re-establish Haiti’s institutions and to
invigorate its economy. We would like join with other
Member States in calling for all outstanding pledges to
be fulfilled without delay.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank, on
behalf of the British Government, President Clinton
and his colleagues for their work on the Interim Haiti
Recovery Commission. We urge the Commission to
redouble its efforts to achieve efficiencies in the donor
coordination process and increase the pace at which
donor assistance is able to get to those places where it
is most desperately needed.

General, Mr. Edmond Mulet, for his outstanding
contribution, including driving the United Nations
response to the devastating earthquake of January
2010.
Mr. Dunn (United States of America): The
United States is honoured to participate in this
important debate on Haiti. We would like to thank you
personally, Mr. President, for your leadership at this
meeting and for your efforts to sustain international
attention to the situation in Haiti during Colombia’s
presidency of the Security Council. We are pleased to
welcome Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
President Clinton and thank them both for their
briefings. We also welcome President Préval and the
many distinguished Ministers of Government who are
here today.
The United States supports the draft presidential
statement that has been proposed by the Colombian
delegation. As a member of the Group of Friends of
Haiti, we join with the statement that Uruguayan
Minister Almagro will deliver on behalf of the Group.

MINUSTAH continues to play a fundamental role
in maintaining peace and security in Haiti and is a
crucial deterrent in the fight against violent crime and
civil disorder. As we reach the end of 2011, we hope to
see the conclusion of MINUSTAH’s two-year surge
period. We hope that political stability and improved
security will enable a drawdown of the additional
military personnel that were deployed to MINUSTAH
early last year as part of the United Nations immediate
disaster response. This improved stability and security
should create space for the private sector to play a
more prominent role in the efforts to create
employment and rebuild the country. Of course this
effort has to be led by the Government and the people
of Haiti themselves, but private enterprises from across
the international community, including from the United
Kingdom, stand ready to assist and invest.

Progress in the reconstruction and development
of Haiti is crucial to achieving the future that the
people of Haiti deserve. To achieve sustainability, it is
important that the international community work
through Haitian institutions and thereby strengthen
those institutions for the benefit of the people of Haiti.
We call on countries that have pledged assistance to
fulfil those commitments and to work through the
Interim Haiti Recovery Commission (IHRC), the
coordination body for reconstruction activities in Haiti.
We commend the IHRC for its leadership of the
strategic planning process, helping to focus donor
efforts on the top four priorities in Haiti’s action plan
for national recovery and development: debris removal,
water and sanitation, health, and housing. To date, the
Commission has approved a total of 87 projects,
representing a long-term investment of over $3 billion.

My Government’s view is that the United Nations
must now begin to reassess the nature of our longerterm support for Haiti. We need to explore how the
development role of donors and United Nations
agencies and programmes can best supplement and
complement the peacekeeping role of MINUSTAH.

Haitians continue to face enormous difficulties.
However, through their hard work and determination
and with the support of the international community,
the people of Haiti are making progress and rebuilding
their lives and their country. I would like to briefly
highlight a few areas where we have seen results.

Finally, I would like to place on the record our
thanks to the men and women of MINUSTAH for their
ongoing efforts in Haiti. In particular, I want to pay
tribute to the Special Representative of the Secretary-

First, with respect to debris removal, the
earthquake of 12 January 2010 in Haiti created an
estimated 10 million cubic meters of rubble in
30 seconds, which is enough debris to fill dump trucks

14

11-29014

S/PV.6510

parked bumper to bumper halfway around the world.
The United States remains the leading donor in the area
of debris removal. We reiterate the call of the IHRC for
more donor attention to that sector. Through short-term
rubble-removal jobs programmes, the United States
Government has cumulatively employed more than
350,000 people in rubble removal work, creating more
than 3.5 million person-days of work. To date, those
programmes have injected nearly $19 million into the
local economy. On average, 40 to 50 per cent of those
jobs are being filled by women.
We applaud United Nations agencies — in
particular
the
United
Nations
Development
Programme, the United Nations Human Settlements
Programme and the United Nations Office for Project
Services — as well as the International Labour
Organization, for working with the United States in
implementing this top priority of the IHRC, as we
heard from President Clinton.
Secondly, with regard to water and sanitation, in
October, when cholera was first confirmed in the
Artibonite region of Haiti, the leadership of the Haitian
Ministry of Health and Population was crucial in the
planning of what became a nationwide response. The
United States provided Haiti with $45 million in
emergency funding for immediate efforts. The
Government of Spain and the Inter-American
Development Bank have also been particularly active
in the water and sanitation sector.
Despite the challenges, especially in sanitation,
the people of Haiti have seen rapid progress with
respect to the availability of safe drinking water. The
IHRC target was to increase the rate of sustainable
access to potable water from an original 2 per cent to
50 per cent by October 2011. Today, the IHRC
estimates that one third of Haiti’s population has access
to potable water, thanks to chlorination efforts, and that
Haiti will meet or exceed the 50 per cent goal by
October 2011 — a major accomplishment that is ahead
of schedule.
Thirdly, with regard to the health sector, the longterm investments planned by the United States build
upon the partnership with Haiti’s Ministry of Health
and Population. The United States is working with
Haiti to reduce infant and maternal mortality rates,
increase
contraceptive
prevalence,
lower
the
prevalence of infectious diseases, reduce levels of

11-29014

severe malnourishment in children and improve
sanitation and hygiene practices.
Fourthly, with regard to housing, population
density rates in some areas of Port-au-Prince are four
times those of New York City, but without the familiar
high-rise buildings. From a high peak of 1.5 million
people living in camps, the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) estimates
that approximately 680,000 continue to live in those
spontaneous settlements today. Major long-term
challenges remain in that sector. The IHRC has
expressed a need for the Government of Haiti to
establish a framework for the identification of property
owners and to identify beneficiaries of housing
programmes. The United States recently joined with
the Clinton-Bush Haiti Fund and the World Bank
Group to create a new housing finance facility, which
President Clinton described.
Fifthly, with regard to job creation, despite the
many challenges Haiti faces, its economy offers cause
for guarded optimism. A strategy that links
development to trade is paramount for this Caribbean
nation. The creation of a new industrial park near
Cap-Haïtien, a combined effort of the Government of
Haiti, the United States and the Inter-American
Development Bank, is projected to create 20,000
permanent export-oriented jobs by the first tenant of
that park alone, Sae-A, a global textile firm.
The United States applauds the nations of the
Caribbean Community for providing duty-free access
to Haitian goods. We urge the international community,
especially those here in the Americas, to support
Haiti’s long-term development through aid and trade.
Sixthly, with regard to security, a secure and
stable environment is critical for Haitians to continue
rebuilding their lives. The international community’s
support, through MINUSTAH, is a critical contribution
to that stability. We applaud the commitment of all
those nations that have contributed troops and police to
MINUSTAH. We urge MINUSTAH to continue
assisting the Government of Haiti in providing
protection to the civilian population, especially in the
context of the ongoing electoral process. The United
States joins with other partners of Haiti in working to
help strengthen Haitian institutions, which is a critical
element of Haiti’s ability to assume responsibility for
its own security.

15

S/PV.6510

Finally, with regard to elections, we applaud the
cooperation between MINUSTAH and the Haitian
National Police, which provided a secure environment
during the second-round election on 20 March. The
United States supports a timely conclusion to the
electoral process based on a fair and transparent
procedure and a peaceful and democratic transition of
power by early May.
The United States remains committed to assisting
the people and the Government of Haiti in their efforts
to rebuild their country. We welcome today’s open
debate as a contribution to, and continuation of, that
process.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to welcome the President of
Colombia to the Security Council for our discussion of
topical issues regarding the situation in Haiti. We also
welcome the presence here today of President Préval.
Over the past year, Haiti has had to confront
serious trials. The destructive earthquake was followed
by the outbreak of a cholera epidemic and a difficult
period in the country’s political development. It is
significant that, thanks to the collective efforts made,
those problems are gradually being overcome.
International assistance provided to the country,
in which the United Nations has played a leading role,
is greater and more united than ever before. Russia has
participated in rescue operations and has provided
$8 million towards Haitian recovery efforts through the
channels of various international organizations,
especially United Nations funds and programmes.
The conduct of the second round of presidential
and parliamentary elections in a peaceful and calm
environment shows that the situation has stabilized. We
congratulate the people and Government of Haiti on
that major event. We look forward to the publication of
the official election results and hope that it will be
possible to form competent national organs of authority
within the established time frame.
We are pleased that the security situation is
generally calm. Much credit is due to United Nations
peacekeepers and the Haitian National Police.
However,
the
political,
socio-economic
and
humanitarian situation in the country remains complex.
Recovery processes will take some time. About
700,000 Haitians are still living in tent camps. We
agree
that
international
efforts
to
provide

16

comprehensive assistance to Haiti, including
humanitarian aid, must be continued. We believe that
international assistance should be provided with
unconditional respect for Haitian sovereignty and for
the lead role of national institutions of authority in the
country’s recovery. The key thrust of external
assistance should be to strengthen Government
agencies. Over the long term, that will give Haitians an
opportunity to independently deal with issues related to
the country’s reconstruction and national development.
We support the work of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), which
has been in constant contact with all political forces
and which is carrying out important work in supporting
law and order, protecting the civilian population and
strengthening the national security forces. We thank the
head of the Mission, Mr. Mulet, and his staff for their
dedicated work under complex circumstances.
MINUSTAH also has a number of Russian
peacekeepers on duty.
We welcome the constructive contribution of
regional organizations in Latin America and the
Caribbean in providing multilateral assistance to
Haitians. We deeply appreciate the efforts of the
Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for Haiti, President
Clinton. The Russian Federation will continue to
provide assistance to the people and Government of
Haiti to ensure the conditions for a peaceful, stable and
sustainably developing State. We also support
Colombia’s draft presidential statement.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Allow
me to welcome you, President Santos Calderón. I thank
you, Sir, and your Government for convening this
timely and important debate. Also allow me to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon and the United
Nations Special Envoy for Haiti, President Clinton, for
their comprehensive briefings and contributions to
today’s debate. We also welcome the participation of
His Excellency President Préval in today’s meeting.
Bosnia and Herzegovina appreciates the
opportunity to express its support and encouragement
to the people of Haiti in their efforts to overcome
difficulties and rebuild their country.
The successful conclusion of the presidential
elections and the establishment of a legitimate
Government are an important component of Haiti’s
ongoing recovery as well as a significant step towards
long-term stability and development. We therefore

11-29014

S/PV.6510

welcome the ongoing electoral process in Haiti and
encourage the Haitian authorities to conclude the
process in a credible manner. We praise the role of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and the Organization of American States
and their commitments in assisting Haitian authorities
in the electoral process.
A new Government in Haiti will face many
challenges, bearing in mind the existing conditions on
the ground. Along with reconstruction, the Government
will have to address outstanding issues in many areas,
particularly in security, the rule of law and institutional
reform. Haiti needs to strengthen its governance
structure and put in place basic services in order to
improve the conditions and alleviate the suffering of its
population.
It is therefore of the utmost importance that
during this crucial period in determining the future of
the country all political actors are united by their
common goal: a stable and prosperous Haiti. Political
instability, on the other hand, may divert their country
from the road to recovery and development. It is also
imperative that MINUSTAH and its international
partners extend their indispensable support to the
national authorities in those endeavours.
Haiti’s reconstruction and recovery will be a very
complex task, requiring the full commitment of the
national Government and its institutions. This process
will inevitably be accompanied by challenges and
obstacles, which should be addressed with increased
resolve and intensified efforts. The determination of
the Haitian Government and its people to build a better
Haiti is the crucial ingredient that, with the continuing
support of the international community, will
additionally reinforce efforts to achieve that goal as
soon as possible.
In this context, we commend the work of the
Interim Haiti Recovery Commission and the Haiti
Reconstruction Fund for their pivotal role in long-term
reconstruction. It is essential that the international
community coordinate its activities with the Interim
Haiti Recovery Commission to make international
assistance more efficient. We plead with all donors to
continue fulfilling their commitments and providing
resources necessary for Haiti’s reconstruction and
development.

persons (IDPs) in Haiti. We consider it crucial that
national authorities, with assistance from their
international partners, continue to provide services to
IDPs and create an environment conducive to
resettlement of that vulnerable population. All
activities related to IDPs must be carried out with due
sensitivity. Bosnia and Herzegovina fully supports the
efforts of MINUSTAH and the assistance it provides to
the national authorities in the protection of civilians, in
particular IDPs.
During these difficult times for Haiti, the United
Nations and MINUSTAH have played a critical role. It
is important that partnership between the Haitian
people and the United Nations be further strengthened
in order to preserve positive developments and meet
remaining challenges. The international community
should remain with the Haitians and help them in
shaping the future of their country. This is a long-term
commitment, and both sides must be patient and
devoted until the ultimate goal is achieved.
In conclusion, on behalf of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, I would like to praise the United Nations
and MINUSTAH personnel for their tireless efforts and
the important work they are carrying out in Haiti.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): Let me lend my voice to
those who have congratulated you, Mr. President, and
the delegation of Colombia for initiating this important
discussion on Haiti. Your effort speaks to the fraternal
and long-standing relationship your nation shares with
Haiti and the vital role Colombia continues to play in
supporting Haiti’s efforts to overcome its daunting
challenges.
We want to welcome President Préval to the
Security Council and to thank him for all his efforts for
the survival of Haiti. The presence among us of the
Ministers of the Organization of American States
(OAS) and of European States speaks to their integral
role in Haiti’s recovery. I also wish to thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his
comprehensive report and statement. I especially thank
the United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti, President
Clinton, for his very insightful remarks.
I intend to address the political, security and
humanitarian aspects of Haiti’s progress and the role of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) in that endeavour.

We are deeply concerned about the dire living
and economic conditions of internally displaced

11-29014

17

S/PV.6510

The response of the international community to
the Haitian earthquake of 2010 was both remarkable
and swift. However, Haiti’s recovery efforts have been
especially complicated by the outbreak of cholera,
insecurity and political instability. In our view, Haiti
can overcome those obstacles only through a
comprehensive programme of institutional reform,
including inclusive political dialogue and economic
development, as we have heard this morning.
Notwithstanding
major
obstacles,
Nigeria
recognizes Haiti’s potential for growth and stability.
That is why we welcome the news of the preliminary
results of the elections, and we believe that it reflects
the will of the people. Indeed, the elections, which
were regarded as largely free and fair, mark an
important milestone for Haiti as the Government and
people confront the enormous challenge of rebuilding
their nation.
The interdependence between peace and security
and development is indisputable in today’s world, as
we have heard this morning, and that fact should be the
guiding principle of all our efforts in Haiti. In fact,
peace and security can be sustained only when we
relinquish leadership of the process of development to
the Haitian people.
The very fabric of Haitian society must be
restored. The economy is in dire need of restoration at
the local and national level. Social infrastructure such
as schools, hospitals, prisons and courts must also be
rebuilt as societal missions, as well as with bricks and
mortar. Public spiritedness, justice, opportunity and
respect for human rights must also be fostered as a
matter of top priority. That seems to be a tall order for
any society, and not least for one that is only now
recovering from a massive natural disaster, but it can
be done.
In order to rejuvenate Haitian society, it is also
imperative that Haiti’s legislative and executive
branches of government engage genuinely and
constructively. That cooperation will ensure political
stability in the current challenging environment and
indeed will buttress the maturation of Haiti’s
democratic experience. In that connection, we urge the
new Parliament to ratify the constitutional amendments
of September 2009 and affirm the consensus that they
represent. Further, we encourage Parliament to renew
the emergency law of 15 April 2010 and extend the

18

mandate of the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission to
enable it to fulfil its mission.
Those charged with governing the Haitian people
should do so with an attitude of transparency and
vocation. Such is the enormity of their task.
As aptly noted in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2011/183*), the sustained support of the
international community will have a major impact on
Haiti’s prospects. While the funds pledged to date are
urgently needed on the ground, a great deal of care
must be exercised to manage, coordinate, prioritize and
effect the distribution of those funds in accordance
with Haiti’s own stated priorities. As friends of Haiti,
we should also promote capacity-building measures in
the country to enable Haitians ultimately to drive their
own renaissance.
That goal, however, does not preclude
international assistance. Haiti needs long-term partners
on its road to recovery. As President Santos reminded
us this morning, many hands make the load lighter.
Turning to Haiti’s security environment, Nigeria
notes with regret that the security situation continues to
simmer. That was particularly evident in the violence
following the first round of elections. The Haitian
National Police maintained order during the run-off,
and should be commended. Nonetheless, they need
continued support to combat organized crime, drug
trafficking, kidnapping and armed robbery, among
others.
We are also dismayed at the ongoing violence,
particularly against women, within internally displaced
persons (IDPs) camps. The time has come to strengthen
Haiti’s capacity to meet those and other core security
challenges. MINUSTAH’s active role as a guarantor of
peace and security must be recognized. We
acknowledge that the force has been a critical actor,
engaged under an appropriately broad mandate. Its
important work on behalf of the international
community should be lauded.
Despite the efforts of MINUSTAH and other
actors, there are still many humanitarian issues to be
addressed. We commend the United Nations country
team for providing humanitarian and recovery
assistance, including the return and relocation of IDPs,
and for responding to the hurricane season and cholera
epidemic. We look forward to successful collaboration
between MINUSTAH and the United Nations country

11-29014

S/PV.6510

team in establishing the integrated strategic framework,
which will facilitate the Haitian Government’s national
action plan for recovery and development.
I want to state that Nigeria was among the early
responders to Haiti’s call for assistance in 2010. We
will continue to support efforts to provide humanitarian
and other forms of assistance to Haiti. We were there
for the Haitian people at the beginning of the process.
We will stand with them until their aspirations are fully
realized.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
appreciate Colombia’s initiative to hold this open
debate on the question of Haiti. I would also like to
thank President Santos Calderón for his presence today
to preside over this meeting. I also listened carefully to
the statements made by Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General and
former United States President Clinton, and President
Préval of Haiti.
Last year, Haiti suffered a series of setbacks as a
result of the earthquake and the cholera epidemic. It
now faces the long-term and daunting task of
maintaining security and stability and rebuilding the
country. China is concerned about the current political,
security and humanitarian situation in Haiti. The
international community should continue to focus on
Haiti and to provide proactive assistance and support.
Today, I would like to focus on four points.
First, our priority for Haiti now is to drive
forward its political process and to ensure a peaceful
and smooth transfer of power after the election. China
hopes that the second round of the presidential election
will be a significant impetus to the democratic process
and political reconciliation in Haiti. We also hope that
the Haitian parties concerned will maintain their unity
and strengthen their mutual trust so as to create
favourable conditions for political stability and early
reconstruction.
Secondly, in ensuring security and stability in
Haiti, the international community should increase its
assistance to Haiti for post-disaster reconstruction and
development. To date, the pace of recovery and
rebuilding in Haiti remains slow. We call on the
international community to pay greater attention to
Haiti’s existing difficulties and real needs so as to
accelerate fulfilling the commitments made at the
United Nations donor conference on 31 March last year

11-29014

and to ensure that the resources are obtained and the
projects carried out.
Thirdly, the Government and people of Haiti bear
the primary responsibility for maintaining their
national security and stability, rebuilding their country
and
achieving
sustainable
development.
The
international community should respect Haiti’s
ownership and leading role. China believes that the
international community’s priority should be to help
Haiti to maintain security and stability, to restore and
strengthen the institutional capacity of the
Government,
and
to
accelerate
post-disaster
reconstruction. The parties concerned should improve
their division of labour and strengthen cooperation and
coordination.
Fourthly, China appreciates the contributions
made by the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) in helping Haiti to maintain
security and stability. China supports MINUSTAH’s
ongoing implementation of its Security Council
mandate to focus on assisting Haiti to maintain security
and stability, to drive forward its political process, and
to support the capacity-building of Government
institutions, in particular in the security, police and
judicial sectors, so as to create a safe and stable
environment conducive to the reconstruction and
development of Haiti.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome Presidents Santos
Calderón, Préval and Clinton, and to thank them and
the Secretary-General for their excellent introductory
remarks. I, in turn, would like to make the following
comments.
Painful tragedies have long dwelled in the
collective memory of the Haitian people. These include
the natural disasters and political and economic crises
of 2010, starting with the earthquake, which claimed
the lives of 230,000 people and displaced more than
2 million, and the cholera epidemic, which took more
than 4,500 lives and has infected more than 240,000 to
date, as well as insecurity and political instability
arising from problems related to the electoral process.
However, our meeting today once again demonstrates
the international community’s commitment to moving
forward in the reconstruction of Haiti. It shows the
resolve of the United Nations to establish a lasting and
strategic partnership with that country to ensure that it
enjoys a better future.

19

S/PV.6510

In that regard, we commend the international
community for its solidarity with and support to the
people of Haiti and its Government, which continues to
provide relief and support in various areas. We call on
donors to honour their commitments in that respect.
For its part, Lebanon has joined the efforts of the
international community in relief activities, thereby
showing its solidarity with the Haitian people.
We welcome the positive developments this year,
including improved political stability and security, the
notable 50 per cent decline in the number of displaced
persons, the noticeable progress in the reconstruction
and rehabilitation of State institutions, and the holding
of parliamentary and presidential elections.
The presidential statement that the Security
Council will adopt today shows the link between
development and security. By highlighting that issue in
preparing for this meeting, Colombia has underscored
its importance and implications for Haiti’s future and
prosperity. There is no doubt that economic and social
crises fuel conflict and threaten international peace and
security. That is a challenge for the Security Council,
which is entrusted with addressing those crises. It is
the role of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti, whose duties, in addition to maintaining security
and stability, include tasks related to development,
such as reconstruction and building State institutions.
The link between development and security leads
us to another issue — the link between democracy and
security. Haiti has had experience of that phenomenon
throughout its contemporary political history. It
experienced tragedy and suffering under protracted
dictatorships. On the other hand, the recent elections
were held in an acceptable, calm and stable
atmosphere. We congratulate the people of Haiti on
that democratic achievement and call on all parties to
support the formation of a new Government, which
will face the same significant challenges facing the
entire country.
We once again commend President Préval for his
wise leadership in the various crises that have beset the
country. The cholera epidemic remains a source of
great concern, and we call on the international
community to provide immediate assistance in bringing
it to an end. As the Secretary-General noted, without an
immediate and broad international response, we will be
unable to end that threat to the lives of hundreds of
thousands of Haitians. In that respect, we welcome the

20

establishment of a panel of experts to investigate the
sources of the epidemic.
In conclusion, we reaffirm our support for efforts
to strengthen national capacity-building, security,
development, the rule of law, good governance and
respect for human rights. We also reaffirm the need for
the people and Government of Haiti to assume
leadership together, above all in the reconstruction of
the country. As one Haitian proverb has it, a borrowed
drum never makes for good dancing.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa
welcomes you, Madame, to the Security Council today.
We would like especially to thank your country for its
initiative in organizing this very important debate on
the situation in Haiti. We salute your leadership in
focusing the attention of the international community
back on Haiti and in reminding us of the terrible
tragedy that befell that nation and the ongoing
challenges that still lie ahead on the road towards
reconstruction and recovery. The international
community should use this opportunity to reaffirm its
commitments and to redouble its efforts in support of
the Government and people of Haiti as they rebuild
their lives for the better.
My delegation wishes to extend a warm welcome
to President Préval and his delegation, and to thank
him for leading the Haitian people towards stability
during these trying times. We also welcome the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for Haiti,
President Clinton, and thank them for their continued
inspiring leadership of the recovery efforts in Haiti. We
further welcome and thank all the high-level
participants in today’s debate, especially from the
immediate region. This high-level participation is proof
of the international community’s continued solidarity
with the people and the Government of Haiti during
this critical juncture in that nation’s history.
In January, we met in this Council (see
S/PV.6471) to commemorate the anniversary of the
earthquake that shook Haiti last year and caused so
much devastation. We believe that, with the continued
support of the international community, Haiti will be
able to overcome these challenges. We assure the
Council of South Africa’s continued commitment to the
country’s current and future reconstruction and
development efforts. South Africa will continue its
bilateral support to Haiti, including through such

11-29014

S/PV.6510

mechanisms as the India-Brazil-South Africa trilateral
mechanism.

community to fulfil its commitments and help rebuild
the lives of the people of Haiti.

It is without doubt that the challenges facing
Haiti today are interrelated. Certainly, security and
institution-building in such areas as the rule of law,
democracy, justice and development are mutually
reinforcing and should be pursued simultaneously.
South Africa welcomes the signing of the
memorandum
of
understanding
between
the
Government and the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), in accordance with
resolution 1927 (2010), through which MINUSTAH
will provide temporary logistical assistance to build
capacity in Haitian rule of law institutions. This is a
good example of how the international community can
support Haiti’s own efforts in building a strong State.
My delegation also wishes to express our
appreciation to MINUSTAH, under the leadership of
Edmond Mulet, for its efforts in stabilizing Haiti.

In the light of the security situation in the camps
and the high rate of violence, especially sexual and
gender-based violence, we believe that the efforts of
the Haitian National Police, MINUSTAH and the
United Nations country team should be reinforced to
ensure the protection of the most vulnerable.

South Africa welcomes the fact that the second
round of presidential and legislative elections was held
under generally peaceful conditions. We also take note
of the announcement of the provisional results on
4 April, and congratulate Michel Martelly on his
victory. As the results are still to be finalized on
16 April, we call on all parties to ensure that the
electoral process runs its full course and that the
democratic transition is completed within the
framework provided by the Constitution and electoral
law of Haiti.
It should be emphasized that the legal conclusion
of the electoral process is central to the legitimacy of
the new Government in Haiti. It is important that all
sides accept the outcome of the elections and work
together in the post-electoral phase in the formation of
the new Government. All parties must work together in
a spirit of reconciliation and inclusiveness, which are
essential to the stability of Haiti.
Without a concerted effort of the international
community to support Haiti in its recovery from the
various humanitarian disasters that affected it last year,
Haiti will not be able to achieve sustainable stability
and development, regardless of its efforts to build
strong institutions. My delegation remains deeply
concerned about the fact that very little of the aid
committed to the recovery effort has been delivered
this year. We therefore call on the international

11-29014

In conclusion, South Africa remains convinced
that Haiti — the first black Republic in the world, from
which we drew inspiration during our own struggle for
freedom — has both the ability and the resilience to
recover from the calamity that befell it and to rebuild
itself. South Africa will do all it can to ensure that the
dream of a united and successful Haiti becomes a
reality.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I would like to
congratulate His Excellency President Santos Calderón
on presiding over the Security Council’s open debate
today. It is also a matter of great satisfaction that
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, his Special Envoy
President Clinton, President Préval of Haiti, the
Foreign Minister of Colombia, the Vice-Minister of
Brazil and the Minister of State of the United Kingdom
are in our midst today. We appreciate their taking time
off to address us on the situation in Haiti. Their
participation in today’s debate underlines their
commitment to the cause of Haiti. We have benefited a
great deal from their views.
The Security Council, along with the other organs
of the United Nations system, has continued to pay
attention to the situation in Haiti by holding regular
meetings and, in this context, we are glad that the
Colombian presidency of the Council has organized
today’s open debate. We hope that the sustained
engagement of the international community and the
Council in developments in Haiti will not only reassure
the people and Government of Haiti, but also bring
about greater coherence in the efforts of multilateral
agencies and bilateral partners in assisting the Haitian
authorities.
We all know well the extent of devastation that
was caused in Haiti by the earthquake, which took the
lives of some 300,000 and injured an equal number.
While Haiti was battling to overcome this disaster, an
outbreak of cholera further aggravated an already grim
situation. Amidst all this, the country plunged into a
political crisis with a series of electoral disputes in

21

S/PV.6510

presidential and legislative elections. The return of
erstwhile Haitian leaders from exile seemed to add to
the political tensions.
With a change in Government and the challenge
of sustaining recovery efforts, Haiti will face testing
times this year too. It is a matter of satisfaction that the
preliminary results of the run-off election held last
month have been announced and that Mr. Michel
Martelly has been declared the winner. It is our hope
that the final result of the presidential election will be
announced soon and that all political actors in Haiti
will accept it. In that connection, we note with
appreciation the roles played by regional organizations,
in particular the Organization of American States, in
resolving electoral disputes during the first phase of
the presidential election. It is critical that the transition
of power be smooth. We also hope the political
leadership in Haiti will show maturity at this difficult
time and live up to the expectations of the Haitian
people.
Haiti requires the sustained support of the
international community in its national efforts towards
long-term recovery, reconstruction and development.
With nearly 680,000 persons still living in camps and
millions living in extremely difficult conditions,
including the lack of access to clean water, sanitation
and other basic services and recovery efforts, the need
of the hour is not only solidarity and commitment but
also an acceleration in the pace of reconstruction
efforts. Simultaneously, it is also necessary to focus on
governmental reforms towards good governance, the
rule of law and institution-building in a process owned
and led by Haiti.
Better coordination between aid agencies, donors
and the Government of Haiti requires no emphasis.
That would not only avoid duplication but also direct
aid to sectors considered most necessary by the
Government and people of Haiti. The various United
Nations agencies also have to work hard towards
improving Haiti’s technical capacity to fully and
properly utilize aid.
India has made a modest contribution to the
efforts of the Haitian authorities to deal with the
situation there. In the immediate aftermath of the
earthquake, on behalf of India, I handed a modest
offering to my colleague the Permanent Representative
of Haiti. India also made a contribution to Central
Emergency Response Fund, which was put to good use

22

in the earliest stages of recovery work in Haiti. We
have also pledged to reconstruct one of the
Government ministries, to be identified by the
Government of Haiti. We await an indication as to
which building we should start preparations to rebuild.
In recognizing the need to provide basic
amenities — shelter, drinking water and sanitation —
to the Haitian people, we have joined our partners
Brazil and South Africa in expanding the India-BrazilSouth Africa (IBSA) trust fund for the waste
management project in Haiti, both in its area of
coverage and its scope to handle different types of
waste. IBSA is also involved in other projects in this
effort and devoting resources for the reconstruction of
a community health centre in Haiti.
We highly commend and support the role played
by peacekeepers of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) in the humanitarian and
recovery efforts in aid of local authorities in Haiti. We
are proud of their sterling efforts, both on the civil and
military and police sides, in the immediate aftermath of
the disastrous earthquake, despite the tremendous
losses that they themselves suffered. We are also happy
to note the important role played by MINUSTAH in
ensuring a peaceful run-off election in March. I also
recall the contributions made by the Indian police
officers deployed with MINUSTAH, presently
numbering 470 in three contingents, two of which were
deployed by India after the earthquake at the request of
the United Nations.
We hope that, with the support of the
international community, Haiti will this year not only
recover faster from the effects of last year’s disasters
but also show political resilience to achieve muchneeded reforms to improve the living conditions of the
Haitian population. India is committed to our collective
efforts to achieve those goals.
Mr. Wittig (Germany) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to express my gratitude to the Colombian
presidency for its initiative to organize today’s meeting
on the situation in Haiti.
(spoke in English)
With Haiti currently in the final phase of the electoral
process, this debate is very timely. At this critical
moment, it is important that the Council reiterate its
clear message of support and solidarity with the people
of Haiti.

11-29014

S/PV.6510

Your presence, Madame President, and that of
President Santos Calderón here today underscore the
great importance that your country, jointly with many
other countries, in particular from Latin America and
the Caribbean, attaches to helping the people of Haiti
recover from the horrific earthquake, which was
followed by devastating hurricanes and an outbreak of
cholera.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General and
his Special Envoy, former President William Jefferson
Clinton for their reports and briefings today. I was
impressed to learn of President Clinton’s initiatives in
the field of economic recovery, especially the small
business initiative. I also wish to join my colleagues in
very warmly welcoming President Préval to the
Security Council. I would like to pay tribute to him for
steering his country through enormously difficult and
trying times, including a peaceful transfer of power.
Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later in this debate on behalf of the European
Union.
More than a year after the devastating
earthquake, the magnitude of the challenges that the
people of Haiti face remains daunting. The Council
will rightly reiterate that the ownership of, and the
primary responsibility for, recovery and reconstruction
lie with the Government and people of Haiti. At the
same time, we are all aware of the fact that this will
require sustained and well-coordinated support and
assistance from the international community.
The United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) has a complex mandate, which it is
implementing in a pragmatic manner. We would like to
recognize Edmond Mulet’s able leadership in that
regard, as well as to thank him and his team for their
unflagging commitment. I would also like to pay
tribute to his predecessor, the late Hédi Annabi, who
lost his life in the earthquake.
I would like to focus on three aspects where
MINUSTAH has an important supporting role to play,
namely, elections, security and reconstruction,
development and the rule of law. I should first like to
turn to elections.
The electoral process must be completed in a
peaceful, credible and legitimate manner. In the light of
the preliminary results of the presidential election, we
join the call on all political leaders in Haiti to live up

11-29014

to their responsibilities, to contribute constructively to
an atmosphere of political dialogue, to help to heal the
wounds of the political battles of the past and to build
together a better future for their country.
Secondly, on security, MINUSTAH’s continued
presence remains a prerequisite for the stabilization
and development of the country. We pay tribute to all
the men and women from the different nations
participating in this important United Nations Mission.
The security-related challenges are manifold, ranging
from gang violence, drugs and human trafficking to
sexual and gender-based violence. On the latter aspect,
we commend the United Nations for developing an
operational plan for strengthening women’s security,
and MINUSTAH for launching a campaign aimed at
discouraging sexual violence. We urge all relevant
actors to continue all efforts aimed at enhancing the
protection of vulnerable groups.
Thirdly, on reconstruction, development and the
rule of law, for the future of Haiti and the
reconstruction and long-term development of the
country, it will be essential that Haiti succeed in
attracting private foreign investment.
Germany would like to express its sincere
gratitude to Special Envoy President Clinton for his
persistent efforts in helping the people of Haiti to
embark on that road of reconstruction and development
and to encourage the private sector to look at Haiti as
an investment opportunity. For these efforts to be
successful, the rule of law must be strengthened in all
areas of society and respected and implemented by all
relevant actors.
Institutional capacity and an adequate legal
framework are prerequisites for sustainable economic
development and an increase in foreign investment. We
commend Special Representative Edmond Mulet for
his initiative to realign resources in support of a ruleof-law compact aimed at bringing the rule of law and
economic development together.
We also note the Secretary-General’s call on all
international partners to work with the Government
and the United Nations in a concerted and cohesive
effort to strengthen the rule of law.
Madam President, in preparing today’s debate,
the Colombian Government strongly supported a call
for the enhanced and effective coordination of all
international efforts for Haiti. We fully share your

23

S/PV.6510

sense of urgency on this issue and support any
initiative aimed at enhancing existing mechanisms for
coordination in line with the priorities of the Haitian
Government.
The United Nations, including the United Nations
country team and MINUSTAH, must continue to play a
fundamental role in this regard. In that context, we also
encourage the United Nations Coordinator for
Humanitarian Affairs to continue her coordination
efforts. All stakeholders, including the hundreds of
non-governmental organizations working in the field,
are called upon to continue to contribute constructively
to these efforts in order to make real progress possible.
In concluding, let me underscore that Germany
remains committed to assisting the people of Haiti,
both nationally and as member of the European Union.
Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): Madam
President, my delegation commends you for having
convened this debate on the situation in Haiti. We
would like also to thank President Clinton and the
Secretary-General for the detailed information they
have provided us concerning the situation there.
This debate is taking place following the second
round of presidential elections in Haiti, in a context of
renewed hope. We welcome the presence among us of
President Préval as well as the role he played in the
successful resumption of the electoral process.
Gabon has a particular interest in this debate. In
the course of our history we have been the beneficiary
of contributions from Haiti; thus we have focused our
continued attention on the situation in that country
since 2004, and in that spirit we made a small
contribution of $1 million following the January 2010
earthquake. My delegation would also like to address
the political, security and humanitarian situation there.
Gabon, which has paid close attention to the
information that has been provided to us, would like to
acknowledge the considerable contribution made by
the international community in Haiti since 2004. Our
joint efforts and our contribution will be more than
ever necessary to ensure a sustainable recovery in
Haiti, in particular to allow that State to resume the
provision of basic services to its citizens.
The political environment is currently reflective
of the results of the second round of presidential
elections, which were announced by the Electoral
Council. We commend the efforts of the political

24

stakeholders and of the Haitian people during the
particularly sensitive period between the two rounds of
voting. It is our hope that the conclusion of the
electoral process will enable the country’s institutions
to resume functioning as normal. In addition, the
conclusion of the electoral process must lead to muchdesired reforms and the consolidation of the
democratic institutions, which is necessary to the
development of the country. This reform process
requires reconciliation among the Haitian people, who
have for so long lived in a context of deep social
division. Gabon therefore calls on the political
leadership and civil society to work jointly to that end
so as to create conditions conducive to a
comprehensive, sustainable recovery in Haiti.
The security situation has improved in recent
months, owing mainly to the enhanced operational
effectiveness of the Haitian National Police, as
reflected in the level of security during the electoral
process. That is one of the gains achieved by
MINUSTAH, which has been in place since 2004. The
military and police components of the Mission, along
with the Haitian National Police, worked jointly to
provide security during the process as a whole. Gabon
welcomes this fruitful cooperation and the results we
see today.
However, the security situation must continue to
improve. Efforts to that end must lead not only to
increased security in urban areas but also, and in a
spirit of urgency, to the protection of vulnerable
groups — women and children. It is therefore
important to enhance security in camps for displaced
persons, where many people are still staying.
MINUSTAH and Haiti’s other partners must
continue to provide assistance in strengthening the
human and organizational capacity of the National
Police so that it can tackle other security problems and
other types of criminal activity in Haiti, including the
uptick in gang violence and drug trafficking.
MINUSTAH is today more than ever involved in
the process of the recovery and reconstruction of the
country’s institutions, economy and infrastructure. We
wish
to
commend
the
determination
and
professionalism of its staff and hope to see the rapid
implementation of the integrated strategic framework,
whose operationalization will enhance the coordination
of the activities of MINUSTAH and the United Nations
country team.

11-29014

S/PV.6510

Similarly, we welcome the high level of regional
and subregional cooperation, characterized, inter alia,
by the support of the Organization of American States
and of the Caribbean Community, whose contributions
to the reconstruction efforts represent an important
pillar.
Additionally, my country deeply appreciates the
added value provided by decentralized cooperation,
which has allowed for the mobilization and rapid
deployment of humanitarian assistance, particularly in
the context of combating the cholera epidemic.
We must learn from other attempts to coordinate
the activities of the international community in Haiti,
including the example of the interim cooperation
framework and the framework for State governance
and reform. The action plan for reconstruction and
development must open up new prospects, in particular
with respect to ownership of the process by the Haitian
people, both in Haiti and abroad, and the identification
of structural, institutional and sectoral priorities.
But above and beyond that, it is important for the
international community to honour its commitments.
Haiti’s future, as well as its ability to deal with the
urgent challenges facing it following the earthquake,
require a democratic, peaceful transfer of power; the
implementation of institutional and political reforms;
strong support on the part of the international
community for the new Government; and capacity on
the part of the new Government to give momentum to
economic development by promoting investment and
creating jobs.
In conclusion, Gabon reiterates its support for the
efforts of the international community to assist Haiti as
well as for those of MINUSTAH. Finally, we endorse
the presidential statement that will be adopted at the
end of this debate.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): Madam
President, I should like to thank Colombia for having
convened this debate at a key moment in the history of
Haiti. I should like also to thank President Santos
Calderón and President Préval for participating in this
debate. I should like in addition to welcome the efforts
made by Mr. Mulet as Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
The Secretary-General, in his most recent report,
detailed the challenges that Haiti continues to face: a
long-standing political crisis, a very slow process of

11-29014

reconstruction, hundreds of thousands of displaced
persons, an economy that needs to be rebuilt, a weak
rule of law and increased criminality, including sexual
violence against women and girls in camps for
displaced persons.
In this difficult context, the immediate challenge
is restoring political stability. Slow development
undoubtedly has a negative impact on stability, but
there can be no solid development without political
stability. The elections that have just taken place must
allow for the establishment of new institutions with
which the international community will pursue its
efforts for cooperation.
We appeal to the candidates, the politicians and
the people to respect the democratic process and to
build the future of the country on that basis following
Mr. Martelly’s victory. Haiti needs a calm political
climate in order to move forward and resolve its
problems. The future of the country will depend most
of all on the key political decisions that will be made
by the newly elected leaders.
Indeed, the international community is at Haiti’s
side, but it will not be able to provide anything of a
lasting nature if the country’s leadership does not take
a determined role in guiding the political process and
reconstruction. Such national ownership is particularly
important in terms of the rule of law. How can
investments be ensured without public and legal
security or without a judicial system that is up and
running? How can security for the people be ensured
without a police force that is competent and large
enough to deploy throughout the country, and that
respects its own mandate as well as human rights?
We welcome the real progress made in these
areas, but it must encourage Haitian politicians and the
international community alike to tirelessly pursue the
efforts they have undertaken. The future Haitian
authorities can count on France to help them in
rebuilding and developing the country.
With respect to reconstruction, certain obstacles
must be lifted to accelerate the pace of rubble cleanup
and the reconstruction of homes, which will involve
the use of heavy machinery. To that end, France has
just provided 40 trucks, which are adapted to the
terrain, to the Ministry of Public Works, Transport and
Communications.

25

S/PV.6510

Above and beyond this, the international
community must continue its efforts and its
mobilization. We must emphasize the scope of the
human, technical and financial efforts made by the
international community in Haiti. These efforts are the
result of the relentless work of thousands of people
working on the ground, in particular for the United
Nations and especially in the context of MINUSTAH,
which will continue to play an essential role in
stabilizing the country.
This involves bringing in technical expertise to
build local capacities, since there will be no recovery
without strengthening the competencies that have been
reclaimed and developed by the Haitians themselves. It
ultimately involves financial assistance, in particular
the financing that has been promised and must be
delivered. That has yet to happen, as President Préval
and President Clinton noted.
France has a presence in all areas. We contribute
to MINUSTAH, including more than 70 gendarmes and
police officers. We provide technical assistance, in
particular through training for police and judges,
amounting to more than €300 million for the 20102011 period, more than half of which has already been
disbursed. Our contribution is also channelled through
the European Union, as will be highlighted later by the
High Representative of the European Union. France
aligns itself in advance with her statement.
France will maintain its commitment to the
people and the Government of Haiti, in close
cooperation with the United Nations. We will do so
within a comprehensive effort involving the State and
bringing in local French communities, in particular the
French Departments of the Americas, nongovernmental organizations, businesses and the Haitian
diaspora living in France.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal) (spoke in
French): Allow me to thank the Colombian presidency
of the Council for having organized this very important
debate, and to thank the President of the Republic of
Colombia and the President of Haiti, Mr. René Préval,
for their presence here today. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General and President Clinton for their
briefings, which are very useful to our work. I would
emphasize the presence of so many representatives of
various friendly Governments, members of our IberoAmerican community, whose support for this debate is

26

eloquent testimony to our collective commitment to
and solidarity with Haiti.
We are conducting an extensive debate on Haiti
today. It is extensive in that we must address a number
of challenges confronting that country, all of which are
interrelated. They include security, reconstruction,
socio-economic development, the strengthening of its
institutions and of the rule of law, and the promotion of
human rights and civil society. This is an extensive
debate because it also needs to address the underlying
causes of the present difficulties, as well as a range of
measures at the disposal of the international
community to consolidate its support for the people
and Government of Haiti.
We begin, of course, with one simple observation.
Peace and security in Haiti, as well as the efforts for
national reconstruction and the pursuit of development,
are the responsibilities first and foremost of the people
and authorities of Haiti, an independent and sovereign
country. The international community cannot replace
this sovereign will and can only act to support the
efforts to stabilize and develop that country that are
being conducted by the Haitians themselves.
For these reasons, we welcome the election of
Michel Martelly as President of the Republic. This
democratic choice of the Haitian people is an essential
condition to guarantee political and institutional
stability in the country and to strengthen the
confidence of the Haitians and the international
community in the ability of the future Government to
successfully deal with a process of reconstruction and
development that is indeed very complex.
In this regard, I recognize all the work carried out
by President Préval, the progress achieved and the
transparent manner in which the presidential elections
were held. The second round of the election was an
important step forward in the Haitian democratic
process. We would also like to thank the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
and the joint electoral observer mission of the
Organization of American States and the Caribbean
Community for all their work in that respect. The
electoral process must now be concluded in a credible
and transparent way, thus further strengthening the
legitimacy of the country’s institutions.
Obstacles to security and development in Haiti
are long-standing and structural in nature. The terrible
earthquake of 2010 merely forced us to take an

11-29014

S/PV.6510

unvarnished look at the scarcity and difficulties that
Haitians have experienced on a daily basis for decades.
Overcoming the impact of the natural disaster and
accumulated deficits will take time and much effort
before the Haitian people will be able to fully benefit
from the security and development to which they are
entitled.
These efforts will require an ongoing and
significant commitment on the part of the international
community, as well as more effective aid coordination
and greater coherence between the work of
MINUSTAH, the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission,
donors, the United Nations Development Programme,
the various United Nations agencies, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, UNWomen
and
the
various
non-governmental
organizations.
I am delighted to hear from President Clinton that
success has been noted in this area, but more can be
done to improve this coordination. MINUSTAH has
seen decisive success in supporting the work of the
Haitian authorities in reconstruction, property
distribution and the provision of essential services,
medical care, reducing the number of displaced persons
and combating epidemics. Its role also remains
important, in close cooperation with the Haitian
authorities, in the areas of institutional capacitybuilding, pursuing the reforms necessary to
strengthening the rule of law, promoting human rights,
fighting crime and protecting the most vulnerable
groups, effectively delivering justice and putting an
end to impunity. These are all elements vital to
ensuring peace and security in the country and to
promoting its sustainable development.
Portugal enthusiastically welcomes all of the
work carried out by MINUSTAH since 2004 and the
dedication of the members of the Mission. In that
connection, I would like to say a special word of
thanks for the personal efforts made by Mr. Edmond
Mulet. We encourage them to continue to work along
these lines while promoting progressive ownership by
the Haitian authorities of their full competencies and
responsibilities in all of these areas, as emphasized by
President Juan Manuel Santos Calderón. Peace requires
neither dependence nor external assistance. Above all,
it depends upon the will of the Haitian people, their
democratic institutions and the economic and social
progress they achieve.

11-29014

Haiti now has a new democratically elected
President, and thus a real opportunity to promote a
process of national reconciliation and a model of socioeconomic development based on the rule of law and
respect for the fundamental rights of its citizens. My
delegation believes it would be useful in this new
context for the Council to do some in-depth thinking
on ways to strengthen Haitian institutions, the
complete transfer of responsibility for the country’s
reconstruction and development in terms of these
institutions, as well as the future of an international
presence in Haiti.
We would also like for the next report of the
Secretary-General to include specific proposals to deal
with security challenges.
Today I wish to express Portugal’s confidence in
the will and determination of the Haitian people to
confront and overcome the many challenges they face,
as well as our belief in the commitment and solidarity
of the international community to contribute to this
effort to the greatest extent possible.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I have been
authorized to make the following statement on behalf
of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and unity of Haiti and
emphasizes that the Government and people of
Haiti bear the primary responsibility for the
attainment of peace and stability and for the
recovery efforts in Haiti. The Council
acknowledges the contribution the international
community is making to support the stabilization
process in Haiti, including the strengthening of its
legislative, judicial and executive institutions.
“The Security Council recognizes the
interconnected nature of the challenges in Haiti
and reaffirms that sustainable progress on
security, institutional capacity-building, including
rule of law, as well as consolidation of national
Government
structures,
democracy,
the
promotion and protection of human rights and
development, are mutually reinforcing. The
Council appreciates the efforts made by the
Haitian Government and the international
community to address these challenges.

27

S/PV.6510

“The Security Council welcomes the
ongoing electoral process in Haiti and stresses the
importance of its completion in a peaceful,
credible and legitimate way which will contribute
to the consolidation of democracy, allow for the
completion of constitutional reform and provide a
strong basis for the continuing reconstruction
efforts. The Council recognizes the important
contribution of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the
Organization of American States and other
international,
regional
and
subregional
organizations in supporting the political process.
“The Security Council underlines that
security and development are closely interlinked
and mutually reinforcing and reiterates the need
for security to be accompanied by social and
economic development. In this context, the
Security Council acknowledges that rapid and
tangible progress in the recovery and
reconstruction of Haiti is fundamental to
achieving lasting stability.
“The Security Council recognizes the
various challenges in Haiti and stresses
MINUSTAH’s fundamental role in supporting the
Haitian authorities in creating a secure and stable
environment conducive to economic recovery,
including by implementing labour intensive
projects and the provision of basic services in
Haiti.
“The Security Council expresses its concern
at the situation of vulnerable groups, including
internally displaced persons and children as
victims of trafficking, and the increase of sexual
and gender-based violence. In this regard, the
Security Council encourages MINUSTAH and the
United Nations country team to continue assisting
the Government of Haiti in providing adequate
protection to the civilian population, with
particular attention to the needs of internally
displaced persons and other vulnerable groups,
especially women and children.
“The Security Council stresses that there
can be no genuine stability or sustainable
development in Haiti without strengthening its
democratic institutions. In this regard, the
Council emphasizes the importance of promoting
the rule of law in strengthening the Haitian

28

institutions. The Council further reaffirms the
responsibility of MINUSTAH in supporting the
Haitian State in the fields of rule of law, good
governance, extension of State authority and the
promotion and protection of human rights, in
accordance with its mandate.
“The Security Council stresses the crucial
importance of strengthening the Haitian National
Police to ensure its ability to maintain law and
order and to tackle violent crime, particularly
sexual and gender-based violence, as well as gang
violence and transnational organized crime. In
this regard, the Council welcomes the continued
support of the United Nations and the
international community to the Haitian authorities
and calls for MINUSTAH continued support in
the vetting, mentoring and training of the Haitian
National Police and corrections personnel and
intensification of cooperation to face this
challenge, including assistance in counternarcotic efforts and training in human rights.
“The Security Council recognizes Haiti’s
long-term recovery challenge and calls upon the
international community to continue to support
Haitian authorities in order to ensure that the
most vulnerable segments of the population have
access to basic social services and justice.
“The Security Council acknowledges the
efforts of the donor community and calls upon
them to fulfil without delay all pledges, including
those made at the International Donors’
Conference towards a New Future for Haiti, held
on 31 March 2010. The Council welcomes the
work of the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission
in focusing donor efforts on the top priority areas
for recovery and encourages all reconstruction
donors, non-governmental and international
organizations to continue to channel their efforts
through the Commission.
“The Council reiterates the need for
Member States and other stakeholders to continue
to support the Haitian authorities in strengthening
Haiti’s core governance structures, implementing
the Government of Haiti’s national action plan for
recovery and development as an efficient and
coherent framework.
“While acknowledging the willingness of
the international community to continue to

11-29014

S/PV.6510

partner with the Government of Haiti in
establishing future long-term security and
development strategies that are mindful of a
cohesive framework, the Security Council
stresses the importance of consistent coordination
and joint efforts among the Government of Haiti,
the United Nations, the Interim Haiti Recovery
Commission and other stakeholders with a view
to producing sustainable results.
“The Security Council welcomes the
willingness of regional and subregional
organizations to contribute to the ongoing process
of stabilization, reconstruction and further
consolidation of democracy in Haiti. In this
respect, the Council calls on MINUSTAH to
continue to work closely with such organizations,
as well as international financial institutions and
other stakeholders, among them the Organization
of American States, the European Union, the
Caribbean Community, the Union of South
American Nations and the Inter-American
Development Bank.
“The Security Council expresses its
appreciation to the Member States that support
the recovery and stabilization process in Haiti,
including the troop- and police-contributing
countries of MINUSTAH. The Council expresses
its gratitude to the Secretary-General’s Special
Envoy for Haiti, former United States President
William
J.
Clinton,
and
the
Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
Ambassador Edmond Mulet and the personnel of
MINUSTAH for their dedication and personal
involvement in the ongoing stabilization and
recovery efforts in Haiti in accordance with their
respective mandates and in strong coordination
with all United Nations entities and Member
States.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2011/7.
I now give the floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): Barely one year ago at United Nations
Headquarters, more than 150 Governments and other
international actors committed to cooperating to
provide substantial aid for the recovery and
reconstruction of Haiti after the disaster caused by the
earthquake of 12 January of that year.

11-29014

As a statement, it was a commendable show of
solidarity. Though insufficient, the total pledged for
reconstruction — $9 billion, of which $5 billion was to
be disbursed in the first two years, in addition to
valuable offers in kind — reflected an undeniable
willingness to help. The declared principle of directing
this aid with full adherence to the Haitian
Government’s priorities, so as to strengthen the
authority of the State, showed universal respect for the
sovereignty of that beleaguered nation and its
governing authorities’ prerogatives. There appeared to
be a universal desire to aid that heroic nation, the first
to break free of the colonial yoke and to abolish
slavery in the hemisphere of the Americas.
Unfortunately, what has happened since has not
been consistent with the spirit that ruled the conference
of 31 March 2010. Nevertheless, many of the selfproclaimed principal donors have continued to dedicate
exorbitant resources to war and military intervention.
The sums pledged for financial and material aid,
however insufficient to the magnitude of the problem,
have not been disbursed. The will of the Haitian
Government has not been respected, and its priorities
have not been attended to. The reconstruction of Haiti,
to which we all committed, is a task that is still
pending.
In the months following the terrible earthquake,
Haiti seemed to be being torn apart by the
Governments of the most powerful and industrialized
countries, which distributed their aid in an arbitrary
and arrogant fashion through their voracious
companies and some of their wealthiest nongovernmental organizations. Even today, funds and
resources continue to be directed outside the
programmes and control of the Haitian Government,
leading to waste, corruption and the satisfaction of
very marginal or selective interests.
Cuba shares the concerns expressed by the Heads
of Government of the Caribbean Community in the
communiqué issued at their intersessional meeting on
26 February, in which they made critical references to
the working methods of the Haiti Reconstruction Fund
and the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission, to the
need to respect the Haitian Government’s priorities,
and to the insufficient flow of pledged resources.
Cuba has concentrated its efforts in the area
where it can have the greatest impact — public health,
a key element in Haiti’s social sustainability and

29

S/PV.6510

stability. In full coordination with the Bolivarian
Alliance for the Peoples of Our America, and following
the directions and priorities of the Haitian Government,
we have worked tirelessly to implement a programme
to rebuild the national health system, aimed essentially
at meeting the health needs of 75 per cent of the
neediest part of the population at minimum cost. Since
12 January 2010, almost 2 million patients have been
treated, more than 36,000 surgeries have been
performed and almost 8,500 babies have been
delivered. More than 465,000 patients have received
rehabilitation treatment. Services are being provided at
23 community referral hospitals, 30 rehabilitation
wards, 13 health centres, two eye surgery clinics and
the Public Health Laboratory. A comprehensive
programme for hygiene and epidemiology is being
developed in all 10 of the country’s departments.
This Cuban cooperative programme has 1,117
health workers, of whom 923 are Cuban and 201 come
from the various countries educating and graduating
students in Cuba, including young Haitians. The
resources generously provided in solidarity by
President Hugo Chávez Frías of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela have been essential, and we
have worked closely with Brazil through a tripartite
agreement with Haiti.
Cuba has also received the backing of several
countries in carrying out this health programme.
Namibia, Norway, South Africa, Australia and Spain,
along with groups of individual donors, have
contributed just over $3.5 million. We are ready to
work, in a strictly humanitarian fashion and in respect
for and in full coordination with the Haitian
Government, with any and all countries and
organizations willing to take part in rebuilding and
developing Haiti’s health system.
At the same time, Cuban doctors have confronted
a serious cholera epidemic. Sixty-seven units have
been set up to care for more than 73,000 patients, a
third of all the cases in the country. Of these, only 272
have died, for a death rate of 0.37 per cent, five times
lower than that of other institutions in Haiti. Caring for
these patients has required selflessness and a spirit of
sacrifice, especially at night. In the past 77 consecutive
days, our medical and nursing personnel have seen no
deaths from cholera. The creation of active survey
groups, known as Subcomuna Adentro, was a new
experiment that permitted the examination of almost
1.7 million people living in communities without

30

access to health care services, and the diagnosis of
more than 5,300 cholera cases in their own homes.
I mention these results in all the modesty of our
people merely to cite practical examples in support of
our conviction that what Haiti needs is substantial and
impartial aid, closely coordinated with the
Government, that contributes to its development and
helps overcome the immense socio-economic
difficulties and disparities affecting Haiti and hindering
its people’s stability and progress.
Haiti does not need an army of occupation; it is
not and cannot become a United Nations protectorate.
The role of the United Nations is to support the
Government and people of Haiti in strengthening their
sovereignty and self-determination. The forces of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) have a very specific mandate to promote
stability in that country, and that should have been and
should still be rigorously respected. MINUSTAH does
not have the political prerogative to involve itself in
strictly internal Haitian affairs, nor should it do so. It is
not acceptable for it to participate in electoral choices
or to pressure sovereign authorities in any way. It also
has no right to speak on behalf of Haiti.
Cuba is firmly convinced that the humanitarian
situation in Haiti is a matter not for the Security
Council but for the General Assembly, whose authority
the Council frequently usurps. This is not an issue that
threatens international peace and security, and it cannot
be resolved by a military presence conceived for
peacekeeping operations. The serious consequences of
the omissions, excesses, double standards and antidemocratic procedures of the Council are also well
known.
The problems of this sister nation are essentially
the result of centuries of colonial and neocolonial
pillage, underdevelopment, the imposition of one of the
longest and bloodiest dictatorships ever seen in our
region, and foreign intervention. The inalienable rights
of the Haitian people to independence and selfdetermination should finally be respected.
Haiti needs resources for reconstruction and
development. It needs humanitarian commitment, and
not interference or political manipulation. It needs a
minimum of generosity, instead of so much egoism.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to state that President Clinton asked me personally to

11-29014

S/PV.6510

convey his thanks to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Cuba and his country for the way in which Cuba has
been cooperating in the reconstruction process in Haiti.
I now give the floor to of the representative of
Argentina.
Mr. Timerman (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Before turning to the topic of today’s debate, I wish to
convey the condolences of the people and Government
of Argentina to the United Nations, the Governments of
the countries of the victims and to the families of those
individuals who died in the service of peace in
Afghanistan as a result of the attack on the United
Nations compound on Friday. Once again, we see that
intolerance towards others on religious or cultural
grounds leads to unacceptable acts of violence. We
hope that the sacrifice of those who gave their lives for
international peace and security will encourage us to
redouble our efforts to build a culture of peace.
I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of April and to thank you in particular
for having convened this open debate on the situation
in Haiti, which gives us the opportunity to reaffirm our
robust commitment to that country, reflected in the fact
that 70 per cent of the personnel deployed by Argentina
in seven United Nations peacekeeping missions are
serving in the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH).
The international community has reiterated on
several occasions its steadfast commitment to Haiti.
Moreover, the successive crises caused by devastating
natural disasters regularly remind us of the need to
maintain continuous cooperation efforts.
Following the January 2010 earthquake, the
Interim Haiti Recovery Commission was established
with the essential task of coordinating international
assistance. We hope that the United Nations will
continue playing an appropriate role, in that regard.
For its part, Argentina has assumed additional
specific responsibilities that we continue to fulfil in
direct contact with the Haitian authorities. These
include the delivery of humanitarian assistance by
White Helmets, completing a total of four missions
between 2004 and 2010, and the promotion of
autonomous production of fresh food in household,
school and community gardens through the Haiti Pro-

11-29014

Huerta programme, with the ultimate objective of
achieving food security.
Argentina’s commitment to Haiti can also been
seen in our active participation in the Union of South
American Nations, an organization which, among its
many actions and commitments, decided in February
2010 to establish a fund for the reconstruction of the
country and in August 2010 institutionalized its
presence on the island with the opening of a technical
secretariat in Port-au-Prince.
Notwithstanding the commitment of the
international community as a whole to the
reconstruction of Haiti, we are aware of the
dissatisfaction of some sectors of the Haitian
population with the failure to deliver the humanitarian
assistance promised, which has indirectly affected the
perception of the entire international presence in Haiti.
This has led to consideration of ways to adapt the
mandate of the Mission and of ways in which the
countries of our region will participate in the new
phase.
We are convinced that local participation is the
fundamental principle to be taken into account in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding endeavours. In this
regard, like other countries of the region, we believe it
very important to establish direct contact with the
elected authorities as soon as possible so as to ascertain
their position on what they expect from international
cooperation as a whole and from the varied support
that the States Members of the Organization can
provide for reconstruction in Haiti.
In this regard, a number of Ministers for Foreign
Affairs and Defence from Latin America met in
Montevideo on 10 March to consider this matter.
Subsequently, we decided to draw up a report on the
situation in Haiti and the possibilities for cooperation
between the region and the new authorities, including
through institutional support and MINUSTAH.
Once that regional report has been finalized, we
are confident that we will be able to work with the
Secretariat to ensure that, in the drafting of the next
report of the Secretary-General and the setting of the
budget for MINUSTAH, appropriate attention is given
to two important aspects. First, due attention should be
paid to aspects relating to the strengthening of the rule
of law and institutional reconstruction in Haiti, such as
the provision of training and equipment to the Haitian
National Police. It is also very important to take into

31

S/PV.6510

account MINUSTAH’s potential contributions to
peacebuilding in the country, including the possibility
of stepping up the activities of the engineering
component in the field of reconstruction, building on
the work achieved so far.
Finally, regardless of the criteria that may be
applied to the mandate of MINUSTAH, it is essential
that the United Nations assume further responsibility
for the coordination international efforts in support of
Haiti, always on the basis of the priorities set by the
country itself, in order to make sustained progress
towards the consolidation of a framework of stability
that will allow for a progressive transfer of
responsibilities to the Haitian authorities.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.
Mr. Moreno Charme (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile wishes to congratulate Colombia on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of April and on its initiative to hold a
debate in the Council on the situation in the sister
Republic of Haiti, a topic at the forefront of our
concerns in Latin America and the Caribbean.
The participation in this meeting of the President
of the Republic of Haiti, His Excellency Mr. René
Préval; a great number of Ministers for Foreign Affairs
from the region; the Secretary General of the
Organization of American States, Mr. José Miguel
Insulza; and the President of the Inter-American
Development Bank, Mr. Luis Alberto Moreno, strongly
underscores our commitment to addressing the needs of
and challenges facing the Haitian people. It also
reinforces our appeal to the international community to
demonstrate its solidarity with and support for the
Haitian people and their efforts to attain peace and
security, political stability and economic and social
development.
Chile aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Uruguay on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti, of
which Chile is a member.
Chile has a long-standing interest in the situation
in Haiti. As a member of the Security Council when the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti was
established pursuant to resolution 1542 (2004), Chile
was one of the first countries to participate in the
Mission. Since that time, we have supported the efforts

32

of the Government and the people of Haiti to achieve
peace and security, development, the protection and
promotion of human rights and the establishment of the
rule of law.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report on
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) (S/2011/183*), which gives a full
picture of the latest developments and indicates the
areas in which our action must be strengthened. We
also thank the United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti,
former President of the United States Bill Clinton, for
the comprehensive report submitted on the activities of
the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission. We recognize
and appreciate his commitment to seek productive
investments that can use and enhance the national
strengths of the people of Haiti, its workers, its
business people and its professionals. Our special
gratitude also goes to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Edmond Mulet, for his
tireless efforts at the head of MINUSTAH. His work
deserves the highest praise.
As the Secretary-General’s report acknowledges,
2010 was a year of multiple crises in Haiti. Chile hopes
that 2011 will be remembered as the year when there
was a peaceful transfer of power, consolidation of the
process of political and social stabilization and national
reconstruction. In accordance with the principles
underlying our foreign policy and with the priority
accorded by the Government of Chile to its regional
relations, our special commitment to support Haiti’s
own efforts to meet the challenges of reconstruction,
development and stability is based on the principle of
national ownership.
The interrelated nature of those challenges means
that sustainable and sustained progress must cover
aspects ranging from security to democratic
consolidation and from the rule of law to national
reconstruction, including institution-building, the
promotion of human rights and economic and social
development. Accordingly, the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti must continue to work
towards those goals, strengthening cooperation with
institutions involved in the process of stabilization,
reconstruction and democratic consolidation of the
country, such as the Organization of American States
(OAS), the European Union, the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM), the Union of South American Nations,
the
Inter-American
Development
Bank
and
international financial institutions.

11-29014

S/PV.6510

With regard to the country’s institutional
reconstruction, I wish to highlight the electoral process
currently under way and wish to note the valuable
contribution of MINUSTAH and the cooperation of
OAS and CARICOM, through the joint electoral
observation mission headed by Mr. Colin Granderson.
The Government of Chile is grateful to him and to his
entire team. The role of the joint mission was crucial
for the smooth conduct of the second round of
elections. Chile hopes that the final vote counting will
also proceed smoothly and that in May power can be
transferred to a new democratically elected President
who, vested with legitimacy, will tackle the challenges
with the full support of the Haitian people and the
international community.
When it comes to the strengthening of the rule of
law, as shown by the report of the Secretary-General,
much still remains to be done. There must be an end to
the serious upsurge in crime, armed gangs and genderbased sexual violence, as well as to the trafficking and
sexual exploitation of children. My country is
committed to providing the maximum possible
assistance in that regard. We are currently reviewing
the projects submitted by the Office of Rule of Law
and Security Institutions of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, with a view to choosing the
ones we will support, in addition to continuing to
provide police fellowships.
MINUSTAH must continue to perform its
mandate for the implementation of quick-impact
projects and assistance to the Haitian Government for
the adequate protection of the civilian population, with
particular attention being given to internally displaced
persons and other vulnerable groups, especially women
and children.
It is a matter of particular concern that organized
crime, in particular crime related to drug trafficking, is
using Haiti as a base for drug distribution operations.
Clearly, the precarious state of the rule of law,
combined with the lack of development, provides
fertile soil for crime. Accordingly, we believe in
comprehensive support from the United Nations for
Haiti. In due course, the Council should renew the
mandate of MINUSTAH and emphasize its links with
the efforts of other stakeholders relevant to the
development of Haiti, in the light of existing
circumstances.

11-29014

In order to contribute to the future of Haiti,
Chile’s participation is not limited to security aspects
but also includes human resources training, police
training, early childhood education and technical agroecology instruction. In all of these areas, we hope to
continue to work to enhance our contribution to the
security, peace and sustainable development of our
kindred nation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. García Belaunde (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
I would first like to congratulate and thank you,
President Juan Manuel Santos Calderón, as well as the
Government of Colombia, for this important initiative
of convening an open debate of the Security Council to
address the situation in our sister republic of Haiti. I
also wish to avail myself of this opportunity to thank
President Préval for his presence here today and
congratulate him on an electoral process conducted
with seriousness and transparency.
Peru attaches particular importance and attention
to the process of stabilization and reconstruction being
conducted by the Haitian Government with the support
of the United Nations and other institutions of the
international community. In that regard, Peru is
contributing a contingent of over 300 troops to the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), including officers to the Mission’s
military command. We have also expressed our
intention to deploy a female contingent to that effort,
which we are confident will contribute to combating a
scourge currently affecting Haiti, namely, violence
against women and children.
In addition to its presence on the ground, Peru
participates constructively in the Group of Friends of
Haiti, the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti of the
Economic and Social Council, the Group of Friends of
Haiti of the Organization of American States and the
Latin American Political Coordination Mechanism for
Haiti, known as the 2x9 Mechanism.
The devastating earthquake that struck Haiti on
12 January 2010 reconfigured the setting and context
in which the international community’s efforts were
deployed to stabilize Haiti. We face the challenge of
implementing a strategy that will, under the leadership
of the Haitian Government, effectively address the
problems of security and development that the country
faces today. More than a year after the earthquake, the

33

S/PV.6510

challenge remains. To overcome it, it is necessary to
reaffirm the principle of national ownership. Peru
therefore reiterates that at all times it should be the
Haitian Government itself that leads the process of
reconstruction and consolidation of its institutions, in
accordance with the strategy and priorities established
in the consensus national action plan for recovery and
development in Haiti, including the various sectors of
Haitian society, intergovernmental consultation and the
support of the international community.
The countries of South America are firmly
committed to the process of Haiti’s reconstruction and
recovery. During the special summit of the Union of
South American Nations on the situation of Haiti, held
in the city of Quito in February 2010 under the
initiative of Peruvian President Alan García Pérez, it
was agreed to establish a special fund for Haiti of $100
million, which included contributions from the
countries of the region. To date, 65 per cent of that
amount has already been disbursed, of which Peru,
which pledged $10 million, has already disbursed more
than $4.5 million, nearly half of its pledge. The current
situation in Haiti compels us to spare no effort in
continuing to provide robust support to the Haitian
people as they face the challenges that lie ahead.
In that context, it is imperative to further improve
coordination between the various agencies operating on
the ground, be they national, regional or part of the
United Nations, and the Haitian Government. Equally
important and, in our opinion, essential is the
development of linkages with the country’s local
Governments so as to ensure the efficient use of
resources and avoid duplication of efforts. International
financial assistance must be channelled with maximum
efficiency and coordination, in accordance with the
national priorities established by the Haitian
Government and the principles of national ownership,
inclusiveness, the rule of law, social well-being and, of
course, respect for human rights.
Peru commends the Government of Haiti for its
efforts to achieve political stability and economic
recovery. That task should be continued, hand in hand
with the international community, by the new,
democratically elected Government, which will soon to
take over.
I reiterate that the Haitian people need ongoing
support to build and strengthen solid national
institutions so as to effectively establish the rule of

34

law, close the gaps in weak institutional capacities, and
remedy the country’s shortage of human and material
resources. In that regard, I believe that it is important
to highlight three areas that have a direct impact on the
current reconstruction and recovery process in Haiti.
Those are governance, security and development.
Peru believes that it is important to maintain the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti so that it
can continue its work with a focus on reconstruction
and
development,
taking
into
account
the
interdependence between those tasks and security
activities. My country therefore believes that, as the
Security Council considers the renewal of
MINUSTAH’s mandate, it should consider not only the
national priorities established in the action plan for
national recovery and development, but also those set
forth in the new United Nations integrated strategic
framework for Haiti.
With that goal in mind, Peru attended a meeting
of Ministers of Defence and Foreign Affairs of South
American countries with troops in Haiti, held in
Montevideo in March. At that meeting, an agreement
was reached to assemble a special assessment mission
to Haiti in order to evaluate the position and
requirements of the new Haitian Government in
relation to MINUSTAH, and subsequently make
proposals for the renewal of the Mission’s mandate in
October.
We are facing a complex and difficult situation
that compels us to continue supporting Haiti so as to
consolidate peace and security and ensure the stable
reconstruction of the country. In that regard, all actors,
public and private alike, must be included in the
process by means of a strategic alliance. With a view to
carrying out those tasks, I wish to emphatically
reaffirm that Peru will continue to provide strong,
committed and unwavering support to the Government
and people of Haiti.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of the Dominican Republic.
Mr. Morales Troncoso (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): The Dominican Republic conveys
its deep appreciation to the Government of Colombia
for having organized today’s meeting at this critical
juncture in Haiti’s history.
The Dominican Republic fully supports the
presidential statement that the Council has just adopted

11-29014

S/PV.6510

(S/PRST/2011/7). At the same time, we thank you, Sir,
for your efforts to reflect the balance of views on Haiti,
which poses one of the most pressing challenges to
peace and security in the Americas.
We welcome the report of Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon (S/2011/183*) and reiterate that all measures
adopted must be in benefit of the Haitian people
themselves. The Dominican Republic also wishes to
reiterate its appreciation for the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), which
has been no less effective in fulfilling its role, despite
the heavy human and financial losses it suffered in the
tragic earthquake in January 2010.
Less than two months ago, in February, the
Dominican Republic took part in another open debate,
held here and organized during the Brazilian
presidency of the Security Council (see S/PV.6479), on
the need to create a peacebuilding strategy based on the
interdependence between security and development in
all its aspects. The Dominican Republic once again
calls for a sustainable peace in Haiti that is based on
sustainable human development. We call for a
development process that ensures equal opportunities
for all Haitians in Haiti, with political stability,
harmony with the natural environment and the creation
of decent jobs for all Haitians.
Creating equal opportunities for all Haitians
requires the Government to ensure their access to basic
public services, such as water, education, electricity,
health care and security. It also means that all Haitians
living abroad will have an opportunity to return to
Haiti and enjoy the same rights and obligations
enjoyed by all Dominicans returning to their own
country, and to contribute their knowledge and
resources to the development process.
For Haitians, harmony with their natural
environment means having a non-polluting energy
infrastructure, as mentioned earlier this morning, the
duly remunerated and distributed use of non-renewable
resources, and the preservation of forests for the
enjoyment of present and future generations.
Also
important is job creation that enables all business
entrepreneurs and workers to live in due dignity both
during and after their working life.
Dominican investments by Grupo M in the border
area between Ouanaminthe and Dajabón have
generated over 8,000 jobs for Haitians in Haiti. That
was made possible through the firm support of

11-29014

President Préval during the past five years of his
Government.
Furthermore, the disbanding of the army two
decades ago led to the emergence of criminal networks
that have been engaging in a renewed level of activity
since the earthquake. That has led to increased flows of
illicit substances and illegal weapons across Haiti, as
indicated by President Préval and the SecretaryGeneral in paragraph 14 of his report (S/2011/183*).
Human and financial capital has been
continuously flowing out of Haiti. We are all aware
that no country can develop without sufficient human
and financial capital. No amount of foreign aid, even
when delivered effectively and in a timely manner, can
compensate for a lack of domestic capital.
As we said in Montreal 14 months ago,
environmental degradation continues to pose the main
threat to the survival of human settlements in Haiti.
Ancestral practices of slash-and-burn agriculture have
depleted soil fertility. The burning of forests to produce
coal has left barely 2 per cent of Haitian territory with
forest cover. The result has been food and nutritional
insecurity, a greater risk of floods and environmental
migration.
Once again we call, as we did in Montreal, for all
international organizations and bilateral donors
cooperating with Haiti to increase the priority they give
to reversing the environmental problem. The
introduction of new agricultural practices and plant
varieties that can renew soil fertility requires special
attention. Haitians also urgently need alternative
sources of energy that would eliminate, once and for
all, the use of charcoal. On the other side of the border
there is an alternative to chopping down trees: the
connection of Haiti to the Dominican electrical and
natural gas distribution networks, to radically
transform the Haitian energy matrix.
With a sustainable peace [“país” ??] in Haiti we
would have a prosperous, developing Haiti that we all
want, with equal opportunities, harmony with the
environment and jobs for all Haitians. Thus our
Binational Joint Commission — which resumed at the
end of July last year — is eager to resume its work on
the vast agenda of topics of mutual interest to our sister
Republic of Haiti and the Dominican Republic. All our
peoples, just today, have demonstrated their solidarity
in the face of disaster. President Préval, President
Santos, the Dominican Republic is ready for a

35

S/PV.6510

prosperous Haiti. Let us now work together as equals
in building the solid institutions required to have two
nations, two States, on the island of Hispañola.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Luís Almagro, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Uruguay.
Mr. Almagro (Uruguay)(spoke in Spanish): My
delegation is speaking on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti, composed of Argentina, Brazil,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, France, Peru, the United
States and Uruguay.
We wish to congratulate the President of
Colombia, His Excellency President Juan Manuel
Santos, for taking the important and opportune
initiative to organize this open debate on the question
concerning Haiti, coinciding with the issuance of the
midterm report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
(S/2011/183*).
Our Group is very grateful for the presence of the
President of Haiti, René Préval, among us. We also
welcome the participation in today’s debate of the
United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti, former
President William Clinton, of the Secretary-General of
the United Nations and of the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative and Head of MINUSTAH,
Ambassador Edmond Mulet. I wish to highlight Mr.
Mulet’s tireless efforts to help the Haitian people break
the cycle of poverty, to help the Haitian Government
create the conditions for a peaceful political transition,
and to mobilize international assistance and investment
intended for the social and economic recovery of the
country following the tragic earthquake of 12 January
2010.
I also wish to express thanks for the presence of
the Secretary General of the Organization of American
States, Mr. José Miguel Insulza, and of the President of
the Inter-American Development Bank, Mr. Luís
Alberto Moreno. The Group also wishes to thank all
United Nations personnel on the ground for their
dedication and selfless sacrifice.
The Group of Friends of Haiti once again
reaffirms its continuing support for the Government
and people of Haiti in the reconstruction of their
country, the consolidation of peace and stability and
the promotion of recovery and sustainable
development. The presence of several Ministers for

36

Foreign Affairs and representatives of countries
members of the Group of Friends of Haiti in today’s
meeting, as well as your own direct involvement,
Mr. President, constitute clear evidence of the
sustained commitment of the Group to the Haitian
process.
As the coordinator of the Group of Friends of
Haiti, I wish to express our strong support for
MINUSTAH and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for their efforts to improve stability
and governance in Haiti. The latest report of the
Secretary-General, dated 24 March 2011, highlights the
progress made in the implementation of the Mission’s
mandate as set out in resolution 1944 (2010) and
previous resolutions.
The Group of Friends of Haiti wishes to
congratulate the Haitian authorities and the candidates
in the presidential and legislative elections, as well as
the people of Haiti themselves, for holding, for the first
time in their history, a second round of presidential and
legislative elections, which took place on 20 March
2011. Although we are still awaiting the final results, I
wish to underscore that the voting was held in a
generally calm and peaceful atmosphere, which
represents an important step for the consolidation of
the democratic process. The Group also commends the
Provisional Electoral Council of Haiti and thanks the
missions on the ground of the OAS and the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM), MINUSTAH and the United
Nations Development Programme, which made vital
contributions to the electoral process.
As the Secretary-General pointed out in his latest
report, the incoming Government of Haiti will inherit a
set of daunting challenges, compounded by the onset of
another hurricane season and the need to strengthen the
country’s institutional capacity and to improve
governance and the delivery of public services.
The Group of Friends of Haiti encourages the
current and upcoming representatives of the executive
and legislative branches of government to work
together to meet the aspirations of the Haitian people
and to achieve the reforms the people have been
longing for for far too long. We stand ready to support
Haitians in the implementation of a strategy that will
transform plans into reality, working more closely with
the Haitian authorities and MINUSTAH.
Haiti continues to struggle with poverty and a
fragile humanitarian situation. In those areas, partly

11-29014

S/PV.6510

due to the earthquake of January 2010, there has
unfortunately been a marked deterioration in the daily
living conditions of the vast majority of the Haitian
people. The Groups of Friends of Haiti acknowledges
the efforts of the donor community and calls upon them
to fulfil without delay the pledges made at the
International Donors Conference Towards a New
Future for Haiti, held in New York on 31 March 2010.
We believe that donors will be especially motivated in
the fulfilment of their commitments if the international
community enhances and strengthens Haiti’s
institutional capacities, enabling them to improve their
planning for and implementation of projects in their
long-term development strategy.
We emphasize the importance of promoting the
rule of law in Haiti as a fundamental building block for
a just and prosperous society that must confront the
important challenges of its reconstruction, especially
after the 2010 earthquake, and respond to the needs of
Haitians living in poverty. As the Secretary-General

11-29014

pointed out, this will call for a genuine commitment on
the part of the new authorities to create an independent
and effective judiciary, a parliament that is increasingly
accountable to the people and a Government that acts
with increasing transparency, effectiveness and
awareness, responding to the needs of the country and
being truly representative of the Haitian people.
Furthermore, in the Group’s view, the promotion
of the rule of law should be accompanied by the
creation of complete land and civil registries,
construction and building codes and commercial laws.
The rule of law should be evident in the capacity of the
State to guarantee adequate legal protection as a way to
facilitate economic development.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are still
a number of speakers remaining on my list for this
meeting. I intend, with the concurrence of the members
of the Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.50 p.m.

37
