"TheCouncil will remain seized of the matter, and asks to be kept
informed of developments by the parties concerned on a regular
basis"

the use of force and from any violation of international humanitarian
law, and looks forward to the report of the fact-finding mission sent by
the Secretary-General to Georgia in this regard;
4. Approves the continued presence of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia until 31 January 1994 comprising up to five
military observers plus minimal support staff, with the following
interim mandate:

At its 3325th meeting, on 22 December 1993, the Council decided
to invite the representative of Georgia to participate, without vote, in the
discussion of the item entitled "The situation in Georgia: letter dated 16
December 1993 ftom the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/26901 )". 23

(a)
To maintain contacts with both sides to the conflict and
military contingents of the Russian Federation;

Resoludon 892 (1993)

(b)
To monitor the situation and report to Headquarters, with
particular reference to any developments relevant to the efforts of the
United Nations to promote a comprehensive political settlement;

ofll December 1993

The Security Council,

5. Decides that the Mission will not be extended beyond 31 January
1994 unless the Secretary-General reports to the Council that substantive progress has been made towards implementing measures aimed at
establishing a lasting peace or that the peace process will be served by
the prolongation of its mandate, and requests the Secretary-General to
report as appropriate, but in any event by late January 1994, on the
activities of the Mission;

Reaffirming its resolutions 849 (1993) of9 July 1993, 854 (1993)
of 6 August 1993, 858 (1993) of 24 August 1993, 876 (1993) of 19
October 1993 and 881 ( 1993) of 4 November 1993,
Also rea.ffinning its resolution 868 ( 1993) of 29 September 1993
concerning the security of United Nations operations,
Having considered the letter dated 16 December 1993 from the
Secretary-General to the President of the Securi: Council concerning
the situation in Abkhazia, Republic ofGeorgia,2

6. Requests the Secretary-General to take planning steps which
would enable, upon a further decision by the Council, prompt deployment of additional personnel within the originally authorized strength
of the Mission if the Secretary-General reports that the situation on the
ground and in the peace process warrants it;

Taking note of the letter dated 9 December 1993 from the Permanent Representative of Georgia to the United Nations to the SecretaryGeneral,2' transmitting the Memorandum of Understanding between
the Georgian and Abkhaz sides signed in Geneva on 1 December 1993,

7. Decides to remain seized of the matter.
Adopted unanimously at the 3304th meeting.

Welcoming the signature of the Memorandum of Understanding,

Decisions

Noting that the parties to the Memorandum of Understanding
consider that the maintenance of peace would be promoted by an
increased international presence in the zone of conflict,

At its 3307th meeting, on 8 November 1993, the Council discussed
the item entitled "The situation in Georgia".

Noting also the first expert-level talks held between the parties in

At the same meeting, following consultations held earlier among
members of the Security Council, the President made the following
statement on behalf of the Council: 27

Moscow on 15 and 16 December 1993 and the intention to convene a

"The Security Council is following with deep concern developments in the Republic of Georgia, where the continuing disorder has
led to mass suffering of the civilian population and threatens to
worsen seriously the humanitarian situation in neighbouring
Azerbaijan and Armenia.

Noting.further that encouraging progress has been achieved in the
negotiations between the parties, which justifies the deployment of
additional United Nations military observers,

new round of negotiations in Geneva on 11 January 1994 with a view
to achieving a comprehensive political settlement of the conflict,

Taking note of the decisions of the ministerial meeting of the
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe held in Rome on 30
November and 1 December 1993,1° and welcoming the continuing
cooperation between the United Nations and the Conference in this
matter,

"In this connection, the Council notes the appeal by the Government of the Republic of Georgia to the Russian Federation, the
Azerbaijani Republic and the Republic of Armenia for assistance to
protect and ensure the uninterrupted operation of railroads in
Georgia. These are crucial communication links for the three
Transcaucasian countries. The Council welcomes the improvement
in security for the lines of communication that has followed the
Russian Federation's response, which was made in accordance with
the wishes of the Government of Georgia

D_eeply concemed at the humanitarian situation in Georgia, in
particular at the number of displaced persons and refugees,

1. Welcomes the letter dated 16 December 1993 from the SecretaryGeneral to the President of the Security Council;

"The Council appeals to the international community to continue
its efforts to provide emergency humanitarian assistance to the
population of the Republic of Georgia.
28
Official Records of the Security Council, Forty-eif{hth
Year, Supplement for October, November and December [993,
document S/2690 I .

27

S/26706.
68

29

Ibid., document S/26875.

JO

Ibid., document S/26843.

"The members of the Security Council express their deep concern
at the devastating effect of interruptions in the supply of goods and
materials, in particular energy supplies, to Armenia and to the
Nakhichevan region of Azerbaijan. They note with serious concern
that these interruptions, combined with an unusually harsh winter,
have brought the economy and infrastructure of the region to near
collapse and created a real threat of starvation.

2. Authorizes the phased deployment ofup to fifty additional United
Nations military observers to the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia, as recommended by the Secretary-General in his letter, to
perform the functions described in paragraph 4 of resolution 881
(1993) and in this manner to contribute to the implementation by the
parties of the provisions of the Memorandum of Understanding of 1
December 1993, and requests the Secretary-General to inform the
Council of the duties of new observers as additional deployments
beyond the initial ten referred to in his letter are undertaken;

"The members of the Council urge all countries in a position to
help to facilitate the provision of fuel and humanitarian assistance.
They call on Governments in the region, with a view to preventing
a further deterioration of the humanitarian situation, to allow
humanitarian supplies to flow freely, in particular fuel to Armenia
and to the Nakhichevan region of Azerbaijan.

3. Notes the intention of the Secretary-General to plan and prepare
for a possible further expansion of the Mission to ensure prompt
deployment should the situation on the ground and the course of
negotiations warrant it;

"The members of the Council reaffirm their full support for the
efforts of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe
(CSCE), designed to bring the parties together and achieve peace in
the region. They call upon the parties to agree to an immediate ceasefire and an early resumption of talks within the CSCE framework.

4. Expresses its willingness to review the existing mandate of the
Mission taking into account any progress achieved towards the
promotion of a comprehensive political settlement and in the light of
the report of the Secretary-General due late January 1994, which report
should cover, inter alia, the specific activities the Mission will
undertake, prospects for the Mission and anticipated costs, in light of
the situation on the ground and in the negotiations;

"The members of the Council will keep the matter under consideration."

5. Urges the parties to comply fully with all the commitments they
have undertaken in the Memorandum of Understanding, and in
particular with the commitments undertaken in accordance with the
main provisions of the cease-fire agreement of27 July 1993, set out in
paragraph 1 of the Memorandum of Understanding;

The situation relating to Nagomy Karabakh 2

Decisions

6. Urg&Sthe parties to take all steps necessary to ensure the security
ofMission personnel, and welcomes the readiness of the Government
of the Russian Federation to assist the Secretary-General in this regard;

At its 3194th meeting, on 6 April 1993, the Council decided to invite
the representative of Azerbaijan to participate, without vote, in the
discussion of the item entitled:

7. Also urges the parties fully to comply with their undertakings in
the Memorandum of Understanding to create conditions for the
voluntary, safe and speedy return of refugees to the places of their
permanent residence and to facilitate the provision of humanitarian
assistance to all victims of the conflict;

"The situation relating to Nagorny Karabakh:
"Letter dated 29 March 1993 from the Permanent Representative
ofAi.abaijan to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/25488); 3

8. Further urges the parties not to take any political or any other
steps that could aggravate the existing situation or hinder the process
towards a comprehensive political settlement;

"Letter dated 30 March 1993 from the Permanent Representative
ofAi.abaijan to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/25491 );3

9. Encourages donor States to make contributions in response to the
United Nations humanitarian appeal;

"Letter dated 31 March 1993 from the Permanent Representative
10.

of Azerbaijan addressed to the Secretary-General (S/25508); 3

Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
Adopted unanimously at the 3325th meeting.

"Letter dated 31 March 1993 from the Permanent Representative
of A7.erbaijan to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/25509); 3

ITEMS RELATING TO THE SITUATION BETWEEN
ARMENIA AND AZERBAIJAN

"Letter dated 1 April 1993 from the Permanent Representative of
Armenia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/25510);4

Statement by the President of the Security Council (in connection
with intemiptions in supply of goods and materials, in particular
energy supplies, to Armenia and to the Nakhichevan region of
Azerbaijan)

"Letter dated 3 April 1993 from the Permanent Representative of
Turkey to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/25524); 4

Decision
On 29 January 1993, following consultations with the members of
the Council, the President made the following statement to the media
on behalf of the members of the Council: 1

2
Resolutions or decisions on this question were also adopted
by the Council in 1992.
3
See Official Records qfthe Security Council, Forty-eighth
Year, SupplementforJanuary, February and March 1993.

S/25199.

lbid.,SupplementforApril, May and June 1993.

69
