S/PV.7528

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7528th meeting

Tuesday, 6 October 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Sarki
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power
Mr. Méndez Graterol

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2015/732)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-30044 (E)
*1530044*

S/PV.7528

The situation in Mali

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in Spanish): As this is the
first formal meeting of the Security Council for the
month of October, I should like to take this opportunity
to express my personal thanks and those of the members
of the Council to the outgoing President and the Russian
delegation for the excellent work performed not only by
the Head of the Russian Mission, Ambassador Vitaly
Churkin, but by his entire team, because, in the final
analysis, the Security Council’s work is about the
teamwork of the 15 members of this important principal
organ of the United Nations. Furthermore, they did
a very good job in a special month, in which the
presidency of the Council coincided with the opening
of the General Assembly at its seventieth session and
the major task of establishing the development agenda
for the next 15 years.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2015/732)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Mali to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Mongi
Hamdi, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/732, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali.
I now give the floor to Mr. Hamdi.
Mr. Hamdi (spoke in French): I am honoured to
brief the Security Council on the latest report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2015/732).
Today I would like to give the Council an overview on

2/6

06/10/2015

developments in the political, security and humanitarian
situation and summarize the actions being taken and
efforts made to implement the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali.
The signing of the Agreement by the Coordination
des mouvements de l’Azawad (CMA), which I noted in
my most recent briefing (see S/PV.7468), marked the
beginning of its implementation phase. Immediately
after 20 June, Algeria, as leader of the international
mediation efforts, officially launched the Comité de
suivi de l’accord. Since then, the Comité de suivi de
l’accord has held five meetings and established its
rules of procedure. At its third meeting, it set up four
subcommittees, and at the fourth, the Government of
Mali presented an action plan for implementation of
the Agreement, including a contingency plan for the
interim period.
In that regard, in line with its mandate from
the Council, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
is currently developing a reconfiguration plan for
supporting implementation of the Agreement. In
addition, it is creating a structure, based on existing
resources, that will provide technical, administrative
and logistical support to the Comité de suivi de l’accord
and its subcommittees. Those efforts will be closely
coordinated and synergized with every component of
the Mission and the United Nations system.
At my last briefing, I said that the path to peace and
implementation of the Agreement would be strewn with
obstacles, and that is indeed the case. The difficulties we
have encountered have been more significant and have
appeared sooner than we foresaw. In the three months
since the final signing of the Agreement on 20 June,
there have been serious setbacks to the implementation
schedule. These were caused mainly by frequent
violations of the ceasefire, in a context characterized
by the actions of terrorist groups and activities related
to the illicit transnational trafficking. Violations of the
ceasefire have limited progress in the implementation
of the Agreement. Valuable time was lost, as discussed
at the ministerial meeting on 1 October on the Malian
peace process, held in the margins of the General
Assembly.
The takeover of Anéfis by the Platform on 17 August
was a clear violation of the peace Agreement and led
the CMA to suspend its participation in the Comité
de suivi de l’accord. Any progress on crucial issues,
especially related to the cantonment, was halted. While
15-30044

06/10/2015

The situation in Mali

the Platform was present in Anéfis, CMA has expanded
its presence in areas of the Timbuktu region, also in
violation of the Agreement. After the withdrawal of the
Platform from Anéfis in mid-September, its forces took
positions further to the north. These movements have
exacerbated tensions with CMA and led to clashes in
the area of In-Khalil, near the Algerian border.
(spoke in English)
Throughout this period, MINUSMA directed
political and military efforts to overcome these
challenges. First, military resources were directed to the
protection of civilians in Kidal and Anéfis. Secondly, an
enhanced effort was undertaken to survey the movement
of armed groups. Thirdly and most importantly, in order
to address violations of the ceasefire, which often lead
to serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, I used my good offices to persuade
the parties to abide by their commitments and avoid an
escalation of tensions.
It bears particular mention that, on 28 August,
President Keïta called for the Platform’s unconditional
withdrawal from Anéfis. His determined efforts, added
to those of MINUSMA and the rest of the international
community, succeeded in persuading the Platform to
eventually withdraw. The return of CMA to Anéfis on
18 September was not coordinated in the context of the
Commission technique mixte de sécurité, as sought by
the international mediation. CMA’s return to Anéfis,
although justified according to the provisions of the
disengagement plan, raised tensions unnecessarily at a
time during which the paramount goal was to ensure
that the parties returned to “the logic of the peace
Agreement”.
When confrontation broke out near In-Khalil at
the beginning of September, MINUSMA was deeply
concerned that it could lead to the end of the peace
process. In response, I called on the leadership of
CMA and the Platform and met with them separately
to address the situation. On 23 September, I facilitated
a joint meeting in Bamako of the Platform and CMA
leadership to break the political stalemate. This
involved MINUSMA bringing together for the first
time the top military leadership of both movements. At
that meeting, the parties agreed on the following.
First, that they would cease hostilities, including
provocative troop deployments. Secondly, they would
return in principle to their initial positions prior to the
20 June signature of the peace Agreement. Thirdly,

S/PV.7528

they would return to the peace process, including
participation in the Comité de suivi de l’accord and
its subsidiary bodies. Fourthly, the would agree on the
circulation of people without arms. Lastly, there was
a general agreement to continue dialogue among the
communities and to resolve problems peacefully.
I am pleased to report that the ceasefire and the
terms of these agreements are now holding. CMA and
Platform have continued discussions and participated
in a joint visit, together with Government ministers, to
Anéfis on 27 and 28 September.
The difficulties of these past two months show the
importance of determined international engagement
to prevent escalation and bring the peace process
back on track. They also show the urgent need to
make decided progress in the work of the institutions
established by the peace Agreement. The international
community, with MINUSMA playing a key role, must
remain engaged in political efforts to defuse tensions.
There is a particularly urgent need to advance in the
cantonment process, and that is in fact happening now.
Reconnaissance missions of cantonment sites proposed
by the Platform are ongoing. As soon as CMA turns in
its proposed sites, similar reconnaissance missions will
take place.
Over the past few months, criminals, along with
opportunistic elements, have been resorting to looting
and banditry. This fosters insecurity and fear among
the population, while reducing faith in the peace
process. In some cases, there have been calls for the
formation of self-defence groups — a move that could
create added security challenges further down the line.
The priority at present is to rebuild trust among the
Malian parties and to promote national reconciliation
and fight against impunity. To this end, MINUSMA is
supporting a conference of national understanding, to
be organized by the Government of Mali.
Redress for victims of human rights and
humanitarian law violations is key to the consolidation
of peace and national reconciliation. Those responsible
for serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law must be held accountable. I welcome
the commitment of the Malian authorities to establishing
transitional justice mechanisms, and call for a more
transparent and inclusive process that places victims at
the centre of discussions.
To contribute to a more secure environment,
MINUSMA is seeking to deploy longer-range unmanned

15-300443/6

S/PV.7528

The situation in Mali

aerial vehicles. It also hopes to free up troops previously
dedicated to the protection of supply lines through the
deployment of a combat convoy battalion. These moves
would help the Mission to expand its presence in key
areas of the north and to take timely, dissuasive action
within the framework of its mandate.
I also appeal to troop- and police-contributing
countries to provide elements with appropriate
equipment to allow MINUSMA to reach its mandated
force and police levels. In order to ensure gender
mainstreaming within the Mission, troop- and
police-contributing countries are encouraged to include
women in the contingents. The deployment of military
observers, most of whom are expected to be operational
by the middle of this month, will help in the task of
observing and reporting on ceasefire violations. In
light of recent experience, such reports could form the
basis for discussions on implementing sanctions against
spoilers of the peace Agreement.
I would like to stress the importance of statements
coming from the Council on its support for MINUSMA
and its role in the implementation of the peace process.
I welcome the conclusions of the aforementioned
ministerial consultative meeting on the Malian peace
process, which took note of the Security Council’s
readiness to consider targeted sanctions against those
obstructing or threatening the implementation of the
Agreement.
There is a strong need to ensure the delivery
of peace dividends, especially to the population
of conflict-affected areas. MINUSMA has been
seeking to provide improved water access, supporting
expanded electricity supply, ensuring the return to
school of children whose education has been thwarted
by the conflict, and encouraging the voluntary return
of internally displaced persons or refugees to their
communities of origin. In that regard, I am pleased to
note the efforts of the Government, in cooperation with
MINUSMA, to help children from Timbuktu and Gao
to return to school, while kids from Kidal are expected
to go back to school by the middle of this month.
In addition, it is imperative to involve civil society
closely in this phase of implementation, including
women, youth, and traditional leaders, ensuring broad
ownership of the peace Agreement. MINUSMA
is strongly committed to raising awareness and
disseminating the peace Agreement, in partnership
with civil society.

4/6

06/10/2015

While we regret the delays in the implementation
of some provisions of the Agreement, it is important
to stress that the concerted action of MINUSMA, the
Government of Mali and the international mediation
was successful in bringing the parties back to the logic
of the peace Agreement. I also take note of the recent
decision of the Malian authorities to postpone local
elections. The postponement offers an opportunity
to bring the electoral calendar in line with the terms
outlined in the peace Agreement.
In closing, the peace process is back on track.
Nonetheless, vigilance will be required, since the peace
process remains fragile. It is my strong conviction that
promoting the implementation agreement through
close support to the Government provides the best
opportunity for Mali to address its multiple challenges.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mali.
Mr. Kassé (Mali) (spoke in French): Allow me
at the outset to convey the warm congratulations
of the delegation of Mali on the Kingdom of Spain’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of October. At the same time, I commend the
delegation of the Russian Federation for its outstanding
leadership of the Council’s work last month.
On behalf of the President of the Republic, His
Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keïta, and the
people and Government of Mali, I wish to pay a ringing
tribute to the men and women of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), under the leadership of Mr. Mongi
Hamdi, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of MINUSMA.
In the framework of the search for a solution to
the crisis in Mali, we are always extremely pleased
to recognize the efforts of Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, as well as those of Algeria, leader of the
international mediation process and Chair of the Comité
de suivi de l’accord, the African Union, the Economic
Community of Western African States, the European
Union, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
France, Burkina Faso, Mauritania, Nigeria, the Niger,
Chad and the United States of America.
Before proceeding any further, I wish to pay my
deepest respects to the memory of all victims — civilian
and military, national and foreign — of the Malian
crisis.

15-30044

06/10/2015

The situation in Mali

The delegation of Mali takes note of the report of
the Secretary-General before us (S/2015/7321), which is
devoted to the situation in our country, and commends
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
introducing it.
Since the signing in May and June of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, the Government
of Mali, with the support of its partners, has set about
its implementation. Among the accomplishments to
date, I would like to mention the following actions.
First, the adoption in June by the Council
of Ministers of documents establishing regional
development agencies, in application of article 40 of the
Agreement; secondly, the establishment of a national
coordination mechanism for implementation of the
Agreement under the auspices of the Prime Minister,
our Head of Government, in order to better coordinate
the action of the various State authorities involved
in implementing the Agreement; the provision of a
headquarters for the Comité de suivi de l’Accord, with
renovation work to begin shortly and the Government
contributing to the relevant costs; the Government’s
decision to postpone local and regional elections
with a view to promoting calm and to allowing for an
inclusive preparatory process with the participation
of all concerned stakeholders, in response to a strong
request from our political parties and civil society; and
the appointment in August of the Chair of the Truth,
Justice and Reconciliation Commission, in accordance
with article 46 of the Agreement, with the remaining
members of the Commission to be named shortly.
Also in the context of the initiatives and action
undertaken by the Government, I would like to stress
the pursuit and strengthening of dialogue within and
outside the Comité de suivi de l’Accord. In that regard,
the Government has held numerous meetings with
all stakeholders in the process in order to anticipate
the difficulties ahead and to assist in resolving
those that arise. To give just one example, with the
agreement of all concerned parties, three members of
the Government traveled to Anéfis, in the region of
Kidal, between 25 and 29 September with the aim of
putting an end to clashes on the ground and to establish
outreach commissions for the population and armed
groups aimed at re-establishing peace and advancing
the reconciliation process among the three regions. A
meeting for the signing of a peace agreement between
and within communities is expected to be held in
the coming weeks and to be countersigned by the

S/PV.7528

Government. Moreover, in September, the Government
held a meeting in Bamako with representatives of the
Mbéra refugee camp in Mauritania to discuss possible
mechanisms for their return to Mali.
Alongside the actions I have just mentioned, the
Malian Government has worked to share the dividends
of peace with the populations that were hardest hit.
Schools in Gao and Timbuktu reopened on 1 October.
I am especially pleased to announce the reopening of
schools in Kidal, scheduled for mid-October, just a few
days from now, after three long years during which
classes in that region were suspended. In addition, the
anti-malaria campaign resumed on 1 October in the
region of Kidal.
Moreover, again with a view to advancing progress
and promoting peace, the Government has taken a
number of confidence-building measures, including
an exchange of prisoners with armed movements, in
partnership with MINUSMA and with its support,
along with that of France’s Opération Barkhane and
human rights organizations. That exchange involved
16 soldiers from the Malian armed forces and 32 from
armed groups. Another wave of releases is expected in
the next few days.
In addition, in application of article 38 of the
Agreement, the Government has moved ahead with the
development and presentation to the Comité de suivi de
l’accord of a global action plan for the implementation
of the Agreement and an emergency plan for the
interim period, both of which detail the entirety of the
activities provided for by the Agreement as well as the
coordination and implementation mechanisms for those
action plans. The implementation of the emergency
plans, which have already been finalized with the
armed movements and Mali’s technical and financial
partners, begins this month.
Finally, with a view to making better use of the
peace process for the people of Mali as a whole, the
Government has embarked on a communications
campaign targeting institutional and non-institutional
actors through a number of campaigns aimed at
disseminating information and raising awareness.
The optimism created by the signing and the
first phase of implementation of the Agreement has
unfortunately been dampened for several months by
the persistence of a number of threats and challenges
that remain to be addressed. The challenges include
terrorism, drug trafficking and all other forms of

15-300445/6

S/PV.7528

The situation in Mali

organized crime in the region of the Sahel-Sahara.
The criminal activities of terrorist groups and drug
traffickers indiscriminately target peaceful civilians,
the Malian armed forces and the international forces
of MINUSMA and France, with a toll of fatalities,
casualties and material damage. Such threats, which
are frequently cross-border, concern all the countries
of the Sahel and beyond. It is therefore time to urge the
Security Council once again to support the decision of
the Heads of States member of the Nouakchott Process
to create a rapid response intervention force.
The delays observed in the implementation
of the Agreement derive essentially from ongoing
incidents on the ground and from multiple violations
of the ceasefire by certain actors who are nonetheless
signatories of the Agreement. The Government has
consistently condemned all violations of the Agreement
and has called for independent investigations in order to
identify those responsible and punish the perpetrators.
However, I would like to stress emphatically that
such incidents should not serve as a pretext for armed
movements that have signed the Agreement to hold the
peace process hostage.
On the contrary, such incidents underscore the need
and the urgency to move forward with the activation of
the security mechanisms provided for by the Agreement
with regard to overseeing and monitoring violations of
the ceasefire. This concerns in particular the activation
and launch of the Operational Coordination Mechanism
and the Commission technique mixte de sécurité.
These incidents are a clear reminder of the pressing
need for the implementation of the provisions of the
Agreement on cantonment, security-sector reform, and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, whose
subcommittee is co-chaired by the United Nations.

06/10/2015

Another major challenge lies in mobilizing the
resources necessary for the effective and comprehensive
implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. To that end, the Government
has planned, as part of its 2015 budget, to allocate
the sum of 11.4 billion CFA francs, that is, more than
$19 million, including for emergency action during the
interim period such as humanitarian work, the return of
refugees and displaced persons, and so on.
Similarly, the Government, in order to meet its
commitments stemming from the Agreement, has
planned over the next five years a budgetary allocation
that would be considerably more significant; the exact
figure will be announced during the conference that is
to take place at the headquarters of the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development in Paris
on 22 October.
I would like to take this opportunity to call on
all partners, bilateral, multilateral and private, to
participate in large numbers in the mobilization
conference for financing-for-development partners in
Mali and to make pledges that are commensurate with
the pressing needs in the area of peace and security in
Mali, in the Sahel and the rest of the world.
By way of conclusion, I would like to reiterate
the need to accelerate the implementation of the
measures provided for by the Agreement in the area of
security and to invite the international community to
strengthen the leadership of the Government of Mali
in the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.30 a.m.

6/6

15-30044
