S/PRST/2004/32

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 September 2004
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5030th meeting of the Security Council, held on 10 September 2004, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The question
concerning Haiti”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council extends its appreciation to participating countries
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), and hopes
that those countries that have pledged to contribute troops and civilian police
will do their utmost to expedite the early deployment of their personnel.
“The Security Council notes that, while the overall situation in Haiti has
improved since last February, challenges by illegal armed groups to the
authority of the Transitional Government are undermining stability and
security in some parts of the country.
“The Security Council condemns attempts by some illegal armed groups
to perform unauthorized law enforcement functions in some Haitian cities. The
Council underscores the need for the Transitional Government to extend its
control and authority throughout the country. It stresses the need that
MINUSTAH actively assist the Transitional Government’s security institutions
in addressing the activities of all illegal armed groups in accordance with the
mandate provided in resolution 1542 (2004).
“The Security Council stresses the urgency of disbanding and disarming
all illegal armed groups. It calls upon the Transitional Government to complete
without delay the establishment of the required structures and the adoption of
the required legal framework for the implementation of a national
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme. It notes that
MINUSTAH will assist the Transitional Government in these efforts.
“The Security Council underlines that stability and security remain key to
the political and economic reconstruction efforts of the Transitional
Government and the international community. It stresses the importance of
building the capacity of an effective and professional national police in Haiti.
It reiterates the importance of effective coordination and cooperation between
MINUSTAH and the Haitian National Police. It also underlines the urgency of
improving the situation of human rights in the country, including women’s
rights.

04-50625 (E) 100904

*0450625*

S/PRST/2004/32

“The Security Council underlines that only a comprehensive and
inclusive dialogue in Haiti can lay down the foundations of a peaceful and
democratic political environment. It calls upon all Haitian political actors to
participate in the national dialogue, as well as in the transition and in the
electoral process to occur in 2005.
“The Security Council welcomes that the Provisional Electoral Council
(CEP) has marked the start of the electoral process in Haiti by holding a broad
dialogue on the preparation of elections. The Council encourages the United
Nations and the Organization of American States to finalize a Memorandum of
Understanding outlining election responsibilities of each organization as soon
as possible.
“The Security Council reiterates that an end to impunity is key to
national reconciliation in Haiti. The Council stresses that justice should apply
equally to all citizens in that country and be carried out by an independent
judicial system with the support of a reformed correctional system. The
Council expresses its strong concern at reports of double standards in the
administration of justice. The Council welcomes the intention expressed by the
Transitional Government to cease travel restrictions without judicial
justification in place against former civil servants and politicians. It urges the
Transitional Government to end such restrictions without delay.
“The Security Council welcomes the results of the donors’ conference
held in Washington, D.C. on 19 and 20 July and urges for a timely
disbursement of the funds pledged. The Council looks forward to the follow-up
implementation meeting to be held in Port-au-Prince from 22 to 23 September,
taking into account the priorities identified by the Haitian Government’s
Interim Cooperation Framework.
“The Security Council reiterates its support for the establishment of a
Core Group to maintain the mobilization of the international community, to
increase the consultation among major stakeholders to enhance the
coordination and effectiveness of the assistance for Haiti, and to contribute to
the definition of a long-term development strategy aimed at the promotion of
lasting peace and stability in that country.
“The Security Council welcomes the appointment of Mr. Juan Gabriel
Valdés as Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
MINUSTAH and commits its full support to his work.”

2
