S/PV.8118

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8118th meeting

Wednesday, 29 November 2017, 5.10 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cardi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Italy)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Rosselli Frieri

Agenda
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-40305 (E)
*1740305*

S/PV.8118

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The meeting was called to order at 5.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Republic of Korea to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Feltman and by myself in my capacity
as Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006).
I now give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: According to the official news
agency of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and various governmental sources, at approximately
2.48 a.m. local time on 29 November, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea launched a ballistic
missile, which it termed an “intercontinental ballistic
rocket Hwasong-15”. The missile was reportedly
launched from an area north of Pyongyang. It covered
approximately 950 kilometres (km) and reached an
apogee of approximately 4,500 km, before impacting
into the sea in Japan’s exclusive economic zone.

29/11/2017

realized the great historic cause of completing the State
nuclear force, the cause of building a rocket power”.
This is the thirteenth time that the Security Council
meets to discuss the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea in 2017. The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s repeated nuclear and missile tests over the past
two years have created great tension on the Korean
peninsula and beyond. This dynamic must be reversed.
The solution can only be political.
Given the grave risks associated with any military
confrontation, in exercise of its primary responsibility,
the Security Council needs to do all it can to prevent
escalation. Unity in the Security Council is critical.
Security Council unity also creates an opportunity for
sustained diplomatic engagement — an opportunity
that must be seized in these dangerous times to seek offramps and work to create conditions for negotiations.
The Secretary-General strongly condemns this
latest launch. This is a clear violation of Security
Council resolutions and shows complete disregard
for the united view of the international community.
The Secretary-General urges the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to desist from taking any further
destabilizing steps. The Secretary-General reaffirms
his commitment to working with all parties to
reduce tensions.
I called a meeting this morning with the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea Permanent Representative
to deliver the Secretary-General’s message in person.
During the meeting, I stressed that there is nothing
more dangerous to peace and security in the world than
what is happening now on the Korean peninsula.

Those parameters indicate that, if flown on a
standard trajectory, the missile as configured would
have a range in excess of 13,000 km. That is the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s third test of
a ballistic missile of apparent intercontinental range in
less than six months, and its twentieth ballistic missile
launch this year. The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, again, did not issue any airspace or maritime
safety notifications.

The Secretary-General discussed the situation
on the Korean peninsula with all concerned parties
in the margins of the high-level week of the General
Assembly. During the Secretary-General’s meeting
with Mr. Ri Yong Ho, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, on
23 September, the Secretary-General expressed concern
about the tensions on the Korean peninsula and appealed
for de-escalation and the full implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions. The SecretaryGeneral emphasized the need for a political solution.

The official media claimed that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea was now “capable of striking
the whole mainland of the United States”. It also claimed
that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea “finally

Amid the heightened tensions, the United
Nations and other humanitarian actors play a critical
role in saving the lives of the most vulnerable in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The needs are

2/18

17-40305

29/11/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

increasing, and food security remains a critical concern
for 70 per cent of the population. Member States are
again reminded of the need to support the life-saving
activities carried out by humanitarian organizations in
the country.
We will continue to closely follow the developments
and remain in close coordination with the international
organizations concerned, and with Members of the
Council, as well as other Governments concerned.
The President: I thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006).
I have the honour to brief the Security Council on
the activities of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006) during the period from
12 September 2017 to 29 November 2017, in accordance
with paragraph 12 (g) of that resolution. The Committee
strongly condemns the continuing violations by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, in particular
the ballistic missile launch on 14 September, which
flew over Japan, and the launch on 28 November.
Following the adoption of resolution 2375 (2017),
on 11 September 2017, which significantly expanded
the scope of the sanctions regime, the Committee has
been engaged in facilitating the implementation of all
sanctions measures, continuing its efforts in that regard.
As part of the Committee’s outreach activities, I
convened an open briefing with the United Nations
membership on 9 October to offer a detailed overview
of the expanded sanctions regime and Member States’
obligations in that regard. The briefing provided a
forum for Member States to explore challenges and
opportunities they faced and to raise specific questions
and concerns while implementing the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea sanctions. I also encouraged
them to submit their national implementation reports
on concrete measures they have taken to effectively
implement the resolutions.
As of today, the Committee has received 102, 89 and
31 national implementation reports on resolutions 2270
(2016), 2321 (2016), and 2371 (2017), respectively. While
this submission rate continues to be much higher than
under previous resolutions regarding the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, it should be recalled that
resolution 2375 (2017) requires all Member States to

S/PV. 8118

submit their national implementation reports within
90 days of its adoption, that is by 12 December 2017.
During the reporting period, the Committee
received notifications from Member States informing
the Committee of amendments to their national
legislation in order to ensure consistency with the
financial provisions of resolutions 2321 (2016) and 2356
(2017), and continued to perform its duties through the
no-objection procedure envisioned by paragraph 5 (c)
of the guidelines of the committee for the conduct of
its work.
In that regard, on 12 September the Committee
approved updates to the informal list of individuals and
entities in the Korean language, which incorporated
the individuals and entities listed in annexes I and II
of resolution 2371 (2017). Following the adoption of
resolution 2375 (2017), the Committee approved, on
18 October, further updates to the informal list in the
Korean language, which incorporated the individuals
and entities listed in annexes I and II of that resolution.
With regard to the implementation of resolutions
2270 (2016), 2371 (2017) and 2375 (2017), I am pleased
to report that on 29 September the Committee agreed
on a list of items of concern related to weapons of
mass destruction, in accordance with paragraph 4 of
resolution 2375 (2017). On 2 October, the Committee
approved a list of conventional arms-related items — in
accordance with the requirements set out in paragraph
5 of resolution 2375 (2017) — and reported to the
Security Council. The Committee’s deliberations are
ongoing with regard to updating the list of items related
to chemical and biological warfare.
I am also pleased to report that on 3 October, in
accordance with paragraph 6 of resolution 2375 (2017),
the Committee was able to reach an agreement on a list
of four vessels for designation, pursuant to the measures
imposed by paragraph 6 of resolution 2371 (2017).
With regard to the sanctions list pursuant to resolution
1718 (2006), the Committee approved, on 19 October,
a technical correction to an entity designated on that
sanctions list and is considering an intergovernmental
organization’s requests pertaining to a designated
entity and an individual.
During the reporting period, the Committee
received an exemption request from one Member
State to allow one-time entry for the vessel PETREL 8
to the port of Donghae in the Republic of Korea. On
3 November, the Committee approved an exemption

17-403053/18

S/PV.8118

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

to the measures imposed by paragraph 6 of resolution
2371 (2017) and resolution 2375 (2017). The Committee
continued to receive notifications on the implementation
of resolution 2270 (2016) relating to coal transportation
through the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
solely for export from the port of Rajin. The Committee
was further notified of planned trans-shipments of coal
through the port of Rajin, in accordance with paragraph
8 of resolution 2371 (2017).
On 26 September, the Committee received a
notification from a Member State of imports of
iron ore, iron, lead ore, lead and seafood from the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea during the
period from 6 August to 4 September, in accordance
with paragraphs 8, 9 and 10 of resolution 2371 (2017).
During the reporting period, the Committee received
a number of notifications, including on training,
scientific cooperation and granting visas to nationals
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to attend
meetings, and also determined whether those activities
were compliant with the sanctions regime.
The Committee continued its consideration of
proposals for assistance to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea from international organizations on a
range of issues, including the participation of nationals
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in United
Nations regional meetings and programmes, as well
as an official country visit to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to examine the implementation of
international drug control conventions, and intended
donations of information technology equipment.
I am also pleased to report that the Committee
concluded its deliberations on Implementation
Assistance Notice No.2 and a fact sheet, which
were approved on 3 November. On 15 November,
the Committee further approved Implementation
Assistance Notice No.1 and Implementation Assistance
Notice No.6. All of the updated Implementation
Assistance Notices and the fact sheet are available on
the Committee’s website.
In conclusion, let me recall that the Panel of
Experts continued to investigate possible violations of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea sanctions
regime and conducted a number of outreach activities,
a list of which is attached to the report as an annex.
Finally, while recalling that the primary responsibility
rests with Member States to implement the provisions
of resolutions 1718 (2006), 1874 (2009), 2087 (2013),
4/18

29/11/2017

2094 (2013), 2270 (2016), 2321 (2016), 2356 (2017),
2371 (2017) and 2375 (2017), let me reassure the
Council that the Committee is committed to facilitating
the implementation of those measures, with a view to
contributing to a peaceful and comprehensive solution
to the issue of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea.
As this is the last time that I will have the honour
to present to the Council the 90-day report on the
activities of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006), I wish to thank all members of
the Council and their delegations for the support that
my team and I have received during my tenure, which I
am sure will also be provided to my successor.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, for your leadership in convening
this meeting and for your leadership of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006). We also
appreciate Mr. Feltman’s briefing.
This is the ninth time this year that the Security
Council has met in reference to North Korea. At
the Council’s previous meeting on North Korea’s
development of nuclear weapons, the United States
made it clear that the future of North Korea was in
the hands of its own leaders (see S/PV.8042). If they
chose the path of peace, then the world would live in
peace with them; but if they chose the path of defiance,
we would respond appropriately. The choice, we said,
was theirs.
Yesterday the North Korean regime made a choice.
It chose to fuel its nuclear aggression. It chose to thumb
its nose at the civilized world. It chose to challenge the
patience of a world united against its recklessness. With
that choice comes a critical decision point for the rest
of the world. The world has responded powerfully to
North Korea’s outrageous and lawless actions.
The Council has taken unprecedented measures
to stop North Korea’s development of a nuclear-tipped
ballistic missile. We have levelled the most impacting
sanctions that any country has experienced for a
generation. We have cut deep into North Korea’s major
export industries to eliminate the revenue for its illegal
missile programme. We have reduced the country’s
17-40305

29/11/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

S/PV. 8118

military access to the refined petroleum required to run
its war machine.

more powerful missiles and, in doing so, continues its
march towards a functional nuclear arsenal.

In addition to our work here in the Security Council,
many nations have taken their own strong actions against
North Korea’s threat to peace. This year alone, as North
Korea’s behaviour has become increasingly intolerable,
more than 20 countries from all corners of the globe
have restricted or ended their diplomatic relations with
North Korea. Mexico, Peru, Italy, Spain and Kuwait
have expelled North Korea’s Ambassadors from their
countries. Portugal and the United Arab Emirates have
suspended diplomatic relations. The Philippines and
Taiwan have suspended all trade with North Korea.
Singapore — formerly North Korea’s seventh-largest
trading partner — has cut all trade ties. Uganda has
halted all military and security ties. The European
Union, Australia, South Korea and Japan have made
additional sacrifices for peace and security by going
well beyond the requirements of the Security Council.

The continuing development of those missile
systems demands that countries further isolate the
Kim Jong Un regime. Therefore, today we call on all
nations to cut off all ties with North Korea. In addition
to fully implementing all United Nations sanctions, all
countries should sever diplomatic relations with North
Korea and limit military, scientific, technical and
commercial cooperation. They must also cut off trade
with the regime by stopping all imports and exports and
expel all North Korean workers.

All of the countries that have taken actions to
isolate North Korea have acted based on deep concern
for that regime’s dangerous refusal to abandon its
nuclear programme. They have selflessly placed our
collective security above their individual political and
economic interests. They have won the gratitude of the
international community for their responsible actions.
Regrettably, not all countries have done the same.
All States Members of the United Nations are, at the
very least, obligated to fully implement all United
Nations sanctions. However, we know that that is not
happening in every case. The Council has banned
coal exports from North Korea, and yet we have
reports of the regime continuing to smuggle coal into
neighbouring Asian countries, using deceptive tactics
to mask the coal’s origins. The Council has required
that all refined petroleum imports into North Korea
not exceed the annual cap, and we banned ship-to-ship
transfers. Yet we see North Korea illegally obtaining
refined petroleum from neighbouring States through
ship-to-ship transfers in the Yellow Sea and the Sea
of Japan.
There are countries that are continuing to fund the
North Korean nuclear programme by violating United
Nations sanctions and obstructing our efforts. The
world knows who many of them are. As successful as
we have been in levelling multilateral sanctions against
it, the North Korean regime continues to test new and

Just last week, the world was given a stark reminder
of the barbarity of the North Korean regime when
one of its own soldiers fled the country. Even more
than the dramatic video of the soldier’s escape, more
shocking was his medical condition unrelated to his
bullet wounds. While being treated by a South Korean
medical team, doctors discovered that the soldier had
parasites and uncooked corn kernels in his digestive
tract — clear evidence that the North Korean regime is
unwilling to properly feed even its own high-ranking
military troops. That is the incomprehensible nature of
North Korea.
Yesterday’s missile launch was more advanced than
previous launches. No one can doubt that this threat
is growing. No one can doubt that the North Korean
dictator is getting more aggressive in his obsession
with nuclear power. Yesterday, the regime declared
itself a nuclear power, saying that it had
“completed the State nuclear force, tipped with a
super-large heavy warhead capable of striking the
whole mainland of the United States”.
But the North Korean regime missed something
very important; as we have said before, being a nuclear
Power comes with certain standards. It comes with
being responsible enough to know that you do not
threaten other countries with nuclear weapons. You
do not starve your own people in order to fund nuclear
weapons. You do not bully and play games with nuclear
weapons. The regime has shown time and again that it
does not want to talk. Kim Jong Un did not even speak
with President Xi Jingping’s envoy when he was sent to
talk to the regime.
The regime has emphatically said it will not
eliminate its nuclear production — and North Korea is in
clear violation of multiple Security Council resolutions.

17-403055/18

S/PV.8118

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

29/11/2017

We are once again at a time of reckoning. We have some
options. First, we should continue to treat North Korea
as the international pariah it has become, by taking its
United Nations rights and privileges away, including
its voting powers. Secondly, we know the main driver
of its nuclear production is oil. Through sanctions, we
have cut off 90 per cent of North Korean trade and
30 per cent of its oil, but the crude oil remains. The
major supplier of that oil is China.

missile development programmes and launched another
ballistic missile with the range of an intercontinental
ballistic missile (ICBM), in flagrant violation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions. North Korea
later claimed that it conducted a successful launch of
the new ICBM Hwasong-15 with “technical capabilities
far superior to the previous Hwasong-14”. North Korea
even stated that they can load the heaviest warhead and
strike anywhere in the mainland United States.

In 2003, China actually stopped the oil to North
Korea. Soon after, North Korea came to the table. We
need China to do more. President Trump called Chinese
President Xi Jinping this morning and told him that
we have come to the point where China must cut off
the oil for North Korea. That would be a pivotal step
in the world’s effort to stop this international pariah.
As I mentioned, many countries have made some big
economic and political sacrifices by cutting ties with
North Korea, which they did to serve the peace and
security of us all. We now turn to President Xi Jinping
to also take that stand. We believe he has an opportunity
to do the right thing for the benefit of all countries.
China must show leadership and follow through. China
can do that on its own, or we can take the oil situation
into our own hands.

This launch is totally unacceptable. Japan lodged
a strong protest against North Korea immediately after
the launch and condemned the act in the strongest terms.
Japan demands that North Korea immediately cease
all ballistic missile launches and nuclear development
programmes and provocations. Japan will never tolerate
a nuclear-armed North Korea.

The dictator of North Korea made a choice yesterday
that brings the world closer to war, rather than taking
it further away from it. We have never sought war
with North Korea, and still today we do not seek it.
If war does come, it will be because of continued acts
of aggression such as we witnessed yesterday. And if
war comes, make no mistake, the North Korean regime
will be utterly destroyed. The nations of the world
have it within their power to further isolate, diminish
and — God willing — reverse the dangerous course of
the North Korean regime. We must all do our part to
make that happen.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking the President for convening this meeting,
jointly requested by the United States, the Republic of
Korea and Japan. I thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing,
and I also thank Ambassador Cardi, as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006), for the presentation of the
Committee’s 90-day report to the Council.
On 29 November, North Korea once again
completely ignored the repeated calls of the
international community to abandon its nuclear and
6/18

The missile reached the highest-ever apogee of
well over 4,000 kilometres, flew for 53 minutes and
fell within the Japanese exclusive economic zone,
approximately 250 km west of the Aomori prefecture.
The local fishery association hastened to check the
safety of all fishing vessels that were operating in the
sea at the time of the launch. We were lucky that no one
was hurt, however this does not change the fact that
this was an extremely dangerous and irresponsible act
by North Korea.
This ballistic missile launch, with the range of an
ICBM, was the third of its kind this year. Considering
its estimated range, it has become abundantly clear that
this is not merely a regional threat but a global threat
to all Member States. This most recent provocation
made it ever more evident that North Korea is nowhere
near ready to give up its nuclear programmes, nor is
it interested in coming back to a meaningful dialogue.
There is no other choice for us but to work together to
put maximum pressure on North Korea so that it alters
its course of action and works towards denuclearization.
Due to this new launch, some Security Council
members may feel frustrated that the sanctions do not
seem to be working yet. However, the full implementation
of all existing Security Council resolutions, including
the recently adopted resolutions 2371 (2017) and 2375
(2017), can bring about a significant impact on North
Korea’s calculus. It is extremely important that the
Council urge all Member States to fully implement the
relevant resolutions. Without faithful implementation,
we cannot achieve the intended policy change of
North Korea.
17-40305

29/11/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

We should also not lose sight of the fact that it is
the North Korean regime that is diverting its resources
towards pursuing nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles
instead of the welfare of its people, who have great
unmet needs. We must send a clear, consistent message
that it is North Korea that needs to change. Japan will
continue to work very closely with Council members
and all other Member States to reach a comprehensive
solution to the problems related to North Korea.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): We have met
too many times this year to discuss the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s flagrant violations of
unanimous Security Council decisions, and I am
deeply disappointed that we have to meet again today
following yet another such violation. For the third time,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea regime
has tested an intercontinental ballistic missile. Based
on an initial assessment, that missile flew higher and
longer than any of those previously launched by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We therefore
condemn in the strongest terms North Korea’s actions,
and its continued pursuit of its illegal ballistic missile
and nuclear programme. Today we summoned the
Ambassador of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea in London to convey our deep concern about that
reckless behaviour.
The latest missile launch is not a one-off: it follows
19 previous launches this year, and North Korea’s
sixth nuclear test in September. The latest violation
demonstrate once more North Korea’s disregard for
collective security and the international obligations that
all of us, as law-abiding States, take upon themselves.
We have condemned the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea many times before. The Security Council,
along with the broader international community, must
now redouble its efforts to persuade the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to change course.
This year through the Council we have worked
together to implement measures to curtail the regime’s
illegal ballistic missile and nuclear programmes. In
developing those measures, we have ensured that the
humanitarian needs of the population are protected. It
is not the people of North Korea who are threatening
global security, it is the regime. Our actions are in stark
contrast to the brutality of that regime towards its longsuffering people, who are being held hostage to the
whims of its reckless leadership. When those measures
are fully implemented, we know that they have an
effect. We also know that we must exhaust every avenue

S/PV. 8118

to resolve the issue peacefully and diplomatically.
We all hope to avoid the need to use military force.
That would not only be devastating for the citizens of
North Korea, but also for global stability and all of us.
Therefore, we must all pursue existing measures and
all other diplomatic avenues available to us — fully and
without delay.
The existing measures will be effective only if they
are robustly implemented in full by all Members of the
United Nations, beginning with all of us in the Security
Council. Many States carry out those responsibilities
diligently, but it is clear that more must, and can, be
done. The reporting deadline under resolution 2371
(2107) was on the 3 November, but by 21 November
only 29 Member States had submitted reports on their
implementation of the measures set out in the resolution.
Given the scale of the threat, that is simply not good
enough. The reporting deadline under resolution 2375
(2017) is on 12 December. We call on all United Nations
States Members to meet that deadline and provide an
update on the implementation of those measures. We
will continue to work with partners around the world to
further improve the enforcement of existing measures.
We welcome the valuable work of the Panel
of Experts as part of our shared efforts to stop the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s illegal
programmes. It provides us with information that we
need to implement all the relevant measures, and we
urge all States to cooperate fully with the Panel and
take swift and robust action in response to the Panel’s
recommendations. If they do not, then they would be
helping the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
regime to threaten the world.
I have focused so far on our shared efforts to
persuade the regime of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to change course. In conclusion,
however, I must emphasize that it is that regime alone
that the bears responsibility for those programmes, and
therefore for its international isolation. It has chosen
that path. It can change course. A better future is
possible for the country and its benighted people. It
must now make the responsible decision to step back
towards the negotiating table and to comply with the
obligations set by our community of nations.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
continues to firmly condemn North Korea’s development
of nuclear weapons and launching of ballistic missiles
in violation of the relevant resolutions of the Security

17-403057/18

S/PV.8118

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Council, as they pose a threat to international and
regional peace and security. Accordingly, that stance
is based on Egypt’s firm commitment to maintaining
the credibility of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons regime and that of the Security
Council. Egypt also favours the United Nations system
dealing with threats to the non-proliferation regime
decisively and seriously, without discrimination or
double standards.
Egypt also recognizes that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s repeated violations of the relevant
Council resolutions pose a threat to international
peace and security. They also dangerously threaten the
stability of North-East Asia and the national security of
countries that enjoy friendly relations with Egypt, such
as Japan and the Republic of Korea. Egypt calls on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to immediately
cease all violations and actions that run counter to the
relevant resolutions. We call on North Korea to refrain
from any escalation that might lead to more tension
and instability, thereby threatening international and
regional peace and security.
Egypt reiterates the need for the Security
Council and all United Nations bodies to assume their
responsibilities in that regard. Through efforts aimed
at reaching a sustainable and peaceful settlement to
the very alarming situation on the Korean peninsula,
such a settlement should include the total elimination
of all nuclear weapons and achieving sustainable
peace between the two Koreas in accordance with the
provisions of the relevant resolutions, including the
revitalization of the Six-Party Talks and negotiations,
so as to break the vicious cycle generated by the
continued violations of Security Council resolutions by
North Korea.
In conclusion, I would like to express our high
appreciation to the outstanding efforts that you have
made, Sir, together with the members of the Italian
delegation, as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), during Italy’s
membership on the Security Council. Those efforts
have had an obvious impact on facilitating the work of
that important Committee, which plays a critical role in
following up on the relevant resolutions concerning the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and helping
Member States take the appropriate measures. Your
efforts have been successful despite the technical
complexities related to the implementation of an
unprecedented international sanctions regime. I would
8/18

29/11/2017

like to take this opportunity to thank you, Mr. President,
for presenting your report today on the activities of the
Committee over the past 90 days. It underscores the
clear dynamism of the Committee, to which we accord
great importance in the light of Egypt’s commitment
to the scrupulously implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing.
Sweden condemns yesterday’s intercontinental
ballistic missile test in the strongest terms. The
test constitutes a clear threat to international peace
and security, an unacceptable provocation and a
clear breach of the international obligations of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in defiance of
numerous Security Council resolutions. The actions of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea represent a
threat not only to its own region but to all regions.
We again urge the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to heed the Council’s decisions that it should
cease provocations, fulfil its international obligations,
engage in meaningful dialogue and abandon its nuclear
and missile programmes in a complete, verifiable and
irreversible manner. It should return to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons regime and
the International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards.
Sweden fully supports the relevant resolutions
adopted unanimously by the Council in relation to
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. It is
important that the Council remain united and that the
Security Council resolutions be swiftly implemented
by all countries so as to ensure the full effect of
those resolutions.
At the same time, sanctions alone will not resolve
the situation on the Korean peninsula. We need to
pave the way for a peaceful, diplomatic and political
solution. Therefore, in parallel with an effective and
rigorous implementation of the sanctions regime,
we must urgently undertake further work to reduce
tensions, so as to advance the prospects for a
comprehensive settlement.
Turning now to the report of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, and your team for the
excellent work as Chair of that important Committee.
The Committee has a critical role to play in effectively
implementing the resolutions adopted by the Council
17-40305

29/11/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

in order to ensure that they have the desired effect.
The Committee and its Panel of Experts should
continue its outreach to Member States on sanctions
implementation, as well as to support their capacitybuilding efforts. Some further efforts are already
under way, but more can be done. We look forward
to continuing discussions on how to enhance the
effectiveness of restrictive measures.
The responsibility to protect and uphold the
well-being of its people indisputably falls to the
Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. Yet, while the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea regime diverts critical resources to expensive
weapons programmes, its people continue to suffer
from serious human rights violations and a grave
humanitarian situation.
The humanitarian situation remains of serious
concern. The measures adopted by the Council were
never intended to have a negative effect on humanitarian
assistance. Therefore, recent reports that the sanctions
are having adverse consequences, including on the
ability of humanitarian organizations to respond to those
urgent humanitarian needs, are deeply concerning.
Such challenges need to be addressed, and
humanitarian principles need to be adhered to. In
that regard, we look forward to discussions in the
Committee, with input from the Panel of Experts and
relevant United Nations bodies, on how to ensure
that the resolutions are implemented as intended and
rigorously, while, at the same time, ensuring that
humanitarian aid reaches those in need of assistance.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank UnderSecretary-General Feltman for his briefing on the
latest intercontinental ballistic missile launch by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
That launch, in blatant violation of numerous
Security Council resolutions, fosters the growing
nuclear threat in the region. Despite immense political
and diplomatic efforts to halt the North Korean
weapons of mass destruction programmes, we have
seen no signs whatsoever of any intention on the part of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to change
its behaviour. The irresponsible North Korean policy
has already seriously undermined the non-proliferation
regime as a whole. In that regard, I wish to recall
the statement of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of
Ukraine of 29 November, which states, inter alia, that
Ukraine resolutely condemns the launch of the new

S/PV. 8118

intercontinental ballistic missile Hwasong-15, which
is capable of carrying a nuclear payload, conducted
on 28 November by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea.
That deliberate act of Pyongyang, aimed at the
development of even more powerful missiles, as well as
its threats to use nuclear weapons, seriously endangers
not only the security of North Korea’s immediate
neighbours but also global security and stability far
beyond the Korean peninsula. Ukraine aligns itself
with all States that have condemned the dangerous
act of Pyongyang and calls upon the leadership of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to stop its
provocations immediately.
I join the previous speakers in commending your
efforts, Mr. President, as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006), aimed at ensuring full implementation of the
Security Council resolutions relating to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. We welcome the significant
expansion of the relevant sanctions regime, in
accordance with the recent Council decisions, as well as
the dynamic outreach activities conducted by both the
Italian Chair and the Panel of Experts. Unconditional
and full compliance with the resolutions are one of the
key prerequisites for lowering the level of the nuclear
threat in the region and curbing the ability of North
Korea to carry out further provocations.
In that regard, we endorse the constructive work of
the Committee during the reporting period, in particular
the update of the control lists of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) , in
accordance with resolutions 2371 (2017) and 2375 (2017),
and the adoption of several implementation assistance
notices. The specific and result-oriented measures
are important for strengthening the effectiveness and
efficiency of the current sanctions regime.
To conclude, I wish to stress that yesterday’s
provocation dampened hopes for resuming a dialogue
on the denuclearization of North Korea. Frankly, after
two and a half months of no tests and launches, there
appeared a glimmer of hope that such a dialogue was
not out of reach. However, yesterday’s act clearly
demonstrated that the North Korean regime is not
interested in talks. Instead, it is striving recklessly
to entertain the ideé fixe of obtaining the status of a
nuclear-weapon State, which will never be recognized
or tolerated by the international community.

17-403059/18

S/PV.8118

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Ukraine stands ready to engage constructively
with all partners to change the current situation and
to move closer to the denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula anyway.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman and
Ambassador Cardi for their briefings.
The relevant Security Council resolutions contain
explicit provisions on launches by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea using ballistic missile
technology. China expresses its great concern over
and its opposition to the latest missile launch by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We strongly
urge the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
comply with the relevant Security Council resolutions
and to cease actions that escalate the tensions on the
Korean peninsula.
In the recent past, the overall situation on the
peninsula was stable, which provided a window of
opportunity for diplomatic efforts. Regrettably, that
window failed to lead to a resumption of dialogue and
negotiations. The nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula
has continued for more than two decades. During
that period, the most valuable experience gained was
that when the parties moved towards each other and
engaged in honest interaction, there was the possibility
of reaching an agreement. And the most important
lesson was that when the parties adopted a tough stance
and misjudged each other, the chances for peace would
escape them.
This year, the Security Council has unamimously
adopted resolutions 2356 (2017), 2371 (2017) and
2375 (2017). Those resolutions demonstrate the united
position of the international community against the
development by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea of nuclear and ballistic missile capacities and of
upholding the international non-proliferation regime.
At the same time, they underscore the importance
of the parties concerned reducing tension on the
peninsula and reiterate the need to maintain peace
and stability on the Korean peninsula and in NorthEast Asia as a whole and the commitment to seeking
a settlement by means of peaceful diplomatic and
political negotiations, while emphasizing that people’s
livelihoods and the humanitarian assistance efforts in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea should not
be negatively impacted.
10/18

29/11/2017

In view of the current grave situation on the Korean
peninsula, the top priority is for all parties concerned to
show restraint, implement comprehensively and strictly
the relevant Security Council resolutions, and strive for
an early resumption of dialogue and negotiations.
China has always supported the denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula as well as peace and stability
thereon. China has consistently advocated dialogue
and negotiations as a means of achieving a settlement
and prevent conflict and chaos on the peninsula,
and it has worked tirelessly towards that goal. China
has put forward a proposal for the suspension by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of its nuclear
and missile activities, as well as the suspension by the
United States and the Republic of Korea of large-scale
joint military exercises.
China is proposing a dual-track approach aimed at
promoting parallel progress in denuclearization and the
establishment of a peace mechanism on the peninsula.
The Russian Federation, too, has put forward the idea of
a phased approach to the settlement of the issues facing
the Korean peninsula.
On the basis of the aforementioned proposals, China
and the Russian Federation issued a joint statement
on 4 July proposing a road map for the settlement of
the problems facing the Korean peninsula. The joint
initiative by China and Russia is practical and feasible
and is aimed at promoting the peaceful settlement of the
nuclear issue on the peninsula and at maintaining peace
and stability there. As such, we hope that it will elicit a
response and support from the parties concerned. In the
current situation, the Security Council must shoulder
its historical responsibility by prompting the parties
to take integrated measures to settle problems through
peaceful diplomatic and political means and maintain
peace and stability on the Korean peninsula.
China will continue to implement the relevant
Security Council resolutions comprehensively and in
their entirety and, together with the parties concerned,
will continue to play an active and constructive role in
seeking an appropriate settlement of the nuclear issue
on the Korean peninsula and an early realization of the
denuclearization of and long-term peace and stability
on the peninsula. China expects that all the parties
concerned, in particular the main parties, will make
efforts to that end by honouring their commitments and
playing a constructive role.
17-40305

29/11/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

S/PV. 8118

China believes that the work of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1718 (2006) should be conducive to the realization
of the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula, the
maintenance of peace and stability on the peninsula,
and the promotion of dialogue and negotiations among
the parties concerned, with a view to finding a solution.
The Panel of Experts must act in strict compliance
with its mandate and conduct its work on the basis of
the principles of objectivity and impartiality and of
substantiated evidence. It is China’s consistent view that
the Security Council sanctions against the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea should not negatively
impact the relevant humanitarian assistance activities.

work. We welcome the outreach activities he conducted
during the reporting period. In our view, such activities
significantly contribute to the full and effective
implementation of the relevant Council resolutions.
The increase in the number of national implementation
reports received following the outreach activities
undertaken by the Chair is testimony to this fact.

Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Feltman for his briefing on the ballisticmissile test carried out yesterday by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea in violation of the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.

The President: I thank the representative of
Ethiopia for his kind words.

For the past three months, we have been hopeful
that the tension on the Korean peninsula would be
subsiding. We were thus optimistic, as Ukraine was,
that there were reasonable grounds for a diplomatic way
out of the very dangerous stalemate we were witnessing.
This latest test, which we strongly condemn, has no
doubt undermined the hope that we had. But we are still
convinced that it is not proper to abandon this hope,
because in our view there is no other acceptable option.
The solution is political, as Under-Secretary-General
Feltman said earlier.
Many of those who spoke before me said that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea must change its
approach and behaviour. We agree. But in the meantime,
everything should be done to avoid any miscalculation,
and every effort should be made to de-escalate tensions.
It may not be easy, but we believe that all those who are
in a position to make a difference should spare no effort,
in a united fashion, to find a peaceful, diplomatic and
political solution to the situation in accordance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions and the United
Nations Charter.
In the meantime, ensuring the full implementation
of the various Security Council resolutions on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea remains critical.
We appreciate the briefing by Ambassador Cardi
on the activities of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) and
commend the able manner in which he is guiding its

I wish to conclude by once again reaffirming
Ethiopia’s commitment to continue to fulfil its
obligations in this regard, and we look forward to us
finding a political approach that would lay the basis
for resolving the crisis that we are facing on the
Korean peninsula.

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We wish to thank you, Mr. President, in your
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), for your
presentation of the 90-day report, as well as UnderSecretary-General Feltman for his briefing on the
launch by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
of a ballistic missile on 28 November.
This fresh violation by Pyongyang of a Security
Council resolution is cause for deep disappointment.
Once again, we must take stock of the fact that prospects
for normalizing the situation on the Korean peninsula
remain very distant. There is no doubt that this further
demonstration of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s open disregard of the demands set out in the
resolutions of the Security Council and the norms of
international law justifies the strongest condemnation.
Russia does not accept the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s goal of acquiring the status of a
nuclear power and has supported all Security Council
resolutions demanding an end to the missile and
nuclear programme of Pyongyang, in the interests of
denuclearizing the Korean peninsula.
At the same time, it is clear to us that there can
be no military solution to the problems on the Korean
peninsula. Given current conditions, we strongly call
on all parties concerned to halt the spiral of tension
that seems to follow each cycle of reaction and counterreaction. It is essential to take a step back and carefully
weigh the consequences of each move and to revise the
policy of mutual threats and intimidation, because such

17-4030511/18

S/PV.8118

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

a policy can only have the opposite effect of what is
being sought.
It is in the interest of the entire international
community for the situation on the Korean peninsula
to be resolved only through peaceful means. In
the meantime, until the States of the region show
their readiness to pay due attention to the political
components of all sanctions resolutions, including
resolution 2375 (2017), the situation will continue to
deteriorate, creating in a vicious circle.
Sanctions against Pyongyang are simply an
instrument aimed at engaging it in constructive
negotiations and should not be used either to strangle the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea economically
or to intentionally worsen the humanitarian situation.
This pertains in particular to the illegal unilateral
restrictions that strike at the civilian sector and have no
link to the country’s missile and nuclear programmes.
Over the past two and a half months, the United States
and its allies seem to have been testing Pyongyang’s
patience with their activities, including undeclared,
unscheduled military manoeuvres in October, recently
instituted unilateral sanctions, and United States and
South Korean military and air exercises to be conducted
next week on an unprecedented scale near the border
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and
which were only just announced. Against a backdrop of
relative calm from Pyongyang, these incessant gestures
of hostility towards the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea compel us to reconsider the sincerity of the
statements being made about preferring to use peaceful
means to resolve the crisis surrounding the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
We believe that this time should have been used
to take concrete steps to make direct contact with
Pyongyang rather than further escalating tensions. A
comprehensive solution to the problems of the Korean
peninsula is possible only in the framework of a
general military and political détente in North-East
Asia, reducing the level of military confrontation and
establishing mutual trust among the States involved in
the region. That was the approach proposed by Russia
and China in their joint statement on 4 July on a road
map for gradual progress towards a settlement, starting
with the principle of suspension for suspension, which
envisions a halt by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to its missile and nuclear tests with at the same
time a reduction by the United States and South Korea
12/18

29/11/2017

of the scale and intensity of their military exercises.
That in turn would pave the way to a discussion
of the principles of peaceful coexistence between
Washington and Pyongyang and a resumption of the
inter-Korean dialogue.
It must be clear to everyone that making progress
towards achieving a comprehensive settlement of the
Korean peninsula’s issues will be difficult as long as
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea feels that
its security is directly threatened. And that is how
Pyongyang sees the military hyperactivity that is going
on in the region in the form of the conduct of regular,
large-scale manoeuvres and exercises by the United
States and its allies, as well as by sending strategic
bombers and naval forces, including aircraft carriers.
An additional destabilizing factor in the region has
been the ramping up in the Republic of Korea of
elements of the American Terminal High Altitude
Area Defense anti-missile system. We have repeatedly
stated that such moves are not only an irritant but
undermine the military balance in the region generally
and jeopardize the security of neighbouring States. It is
now more important than ever for the parties involved
to refrain from provoking each other, show restraint
and make sure that no further steps are taken that could
further escalate tensions. In that regard, we strongly
urge the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
stop its nuclear-missile tests and call on the United
States and the Republic of Korea to refrain from the
large-scale unscheduled military manoeuvres starting
at the beginning of December, which will only inflame
an already explosive situation.
Russia’s position on resolving the situation around
the Korean peninsula remains unchanged. Finding
a long-term, mutually acceptable solution to all the
problems can be achieved effectively only through
determined, active diplomacy. In that context, we call
on all sides to start working without delay on finding
a formula for a political and diplomatic settlement. We
see no rational alternative to that.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to thank the Japanese and United States
delegations for calling for this emergency meeting. I
would also like to thank the Italian presidency for
organizing the meeting and Under-Secretary-General
Feltman for his clear and factual briefing. I would
also like to personally thank and commend you, Sir,
as Ambassador of Italy, for your work in your capacity
as Chair of the Committee pursuant to resolution 1718
17-40305

29/11/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

(2006), and for the clarity of your briefing and your
leadership of the Committee over the past year.
The delegation of Senegal in its turn once again
categorically condemns North Korea’s latest launch of
an intercontinental ballistic missile, which comes barely
two months after its launch of a missile on 15 September
and clearly casts doubt on the effectiveness of the
sanctions on North Korea. Despite all the resolutions,
sanctions and other measures that the Council has
adopted on North Korea, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, far from abandoning its military
nuclear ambitions, has managed to call into question
the Security Council’s ability to deal with the problem
posed by its illegal military nuclear programme. That is
why the Senegalese delegation would like to emphasize
that targeted measures are a legitimate response to
the threat posed by North Korea’s ballistic nuclear
programme. The measures outlined in the Council’s
recent resolution 2375 (2017) should be one integral
component of a comprehensive political strategy aimed
at convincing the parties to engage in frank dialogue
with the goal of denuclearizing the Korean peninsula,
with the international community’s active support.
In affirming its belief in the importance of finding
a peaceful and diplomatic settlement to the Korean
crisis, Senegal would like to reiterate its appeal to the
parties to resume face-to-face dialogue with the aim of
achieving the verifiable denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula, thereby fostering the possibility of peaceful
coexistence between the peoples and countries of
the region.
However, the challenge of implementing the
sanctions in place still has to be met by all States,
international organizations and the private business
sector, since they are a long way from being effectively
enforced, leaving large gaps that the North Korean
authorities systematically exploit in order to obtain
the resources they need to continue their illegal,
dangerous programme.
With regard to the work of the 1718 Committee,
my delegation commends the efforts of its members
to promote the full implementation of sanctions on
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and we
encourage them to redouble their efforts.My country
welcomes the awareness-raising work of the Committee
and of its Panel of Experts, who are always willing to
provide guidance to any State requesting assistance,
whether by providing information on designated entities,

S/PV. 8118

giving advice on submitting reports of non-compliance
or sharing ways to improve implementation of the
relevant resolutions.
We encourage the adoption of an implementation
reporting mechanism and support the draft assistance
notes on implementing the resolutions on North Korea,
which are very helpful to Member States. However, we
reiterate our concerns about recent cases of violations
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and
therefore urge it to refrain from provocations and commit
to a peaceful, diplomatic, political and comprehensive
solution through dialogue, with the aim of restoring
peace in the Korean peninsula. In that regard, we call
on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to halt
and abandon its existing nuclear and ballistic-missile
programmes as soon as possible and once and for all,
fully, verifiably and irreversibly.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Senegal’s
continuing readiness and willingness to make every
effort to implement resolution 1718 (2006) and other
resolutions pertaining to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. In that regard, my country will
submit its own report on the implementation of
resolutions 2371 (2017) and 2375 (2017) in the next
few weeks.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank UnderSecretary-General Feltman and Ambassador Cardi for
their informative briefings.
Kazakhstan is extremely concerned about another
provocative missile launch by Pyongyang. Our
Ministry for Foreign Affairs has issued an extremely
condemnatory statement on this matter. There is no
doubt that such actions run counter to the demands
of the international community and gravely violate
all relevant Security Council resolutions. Pyongyang
has to understand that the world will not accept its
nuclear status.
All sides should refrain from taking any provocative
action because further provocations will generate only
even greater confrontation and spur a new wave of
escalations, with untold consequences. The outcomes
of such a scenario will be most grave for all the parties
involved. We continue to hold the strong conviction
that there is no alternative to a peaceful solution to
the North Korean crisis, and that the stalemate can
be overcome only through negotiations, dialogue
and goodwill on the part of all parties. Economic
sanctions should be smart and targeted, and not lead

17-4030513/18

S/PV.8118

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

to a deterioration of the overall humanitarian situation
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We
must avoid heading down the military path, with often
unpredictable hazards from which we may not be able
to extricate ourselves.
Astana therefore stands for the tireless search
for a comprehensive and collective solution of the
issue through new, decisive political and diplomatic
actions. It is only through meaningful communication
and collective deliberations, accompanied by
confidence-building measures, that we will be able
to find a way out of this very complex situation. The
Council should remain united on that issue, and exert
a new, determined political will to avert undesired
consequences before the hostilities become even more
deeply entrenched and the last of the red lines has been
crossed irreversibly.
Once again, I thank Ambassador Cardi for his
informative report and for his most committed efforts
as Chair of the Committee pursuant to resolution
1718 (2006), especially since this will be his last
briefing on the subject in his current capacity. As
Italy will be leaving us at the end of this year, I would
like to acknowledge its outstanding contribution to
the work of the Security Council. We recognize the
practical outcomes of the Committee’s work under the
chairmanship of Ambassador Cardi, who has provided
very good momentum through a series of ongoing
outreach activities, the provision of regular updated
lists of individuals and legal entities, the agreed and
approved list of weapons of mass destruction-related
and conventional arms-related weaponry, updated
information notes and fact sheets, and other
relevant data.
The well-organized work of the Committee has
undoubtedly contributed to the effective implementation
of all the relevant sanctions resolutions of the Council.
We hope that the thorough work of the Committee and
its investment on every front to resolve the overall issues
with North Korea will also contribute to persuading the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to abandon its
nuclear programme.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): As my first order of business, I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his
informative briefing today. I also thank Ambassador
Cardi, in his capacity as Chair of the Committee
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), for his work.
14/18

29/11/2017

Bolivia once again strongly condemns the launch
yesterday, 28 November, of a ballistic missile by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, which is
thought to be the most powerful and longest range
device to date. We reiterate our urgent appeal to that
country to abandon its nuclear and ballistic missile
programme in a complete, verifiable and irreversible
manner. We call on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to comply with the provisions of the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.
Bolivia, as a country in the first region to be declared
a nuclear-weapon-free zone under the Treaty for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and
the Caribbean, better known as the Tlatelolco Treaty,
will always condemn the development and manufacture
of nuclear weapons, which constitute a grave violation
of international law and pose a direct threat to the
survival of our species on this planet. Similarly,
Bolivia, in its capacity as a pacifist State that promotes
the culture of and the right to peace, rejects any form
of the use of force or threat of the use of force as an
instrument to resolve disputes and conflicts among
States. In that regard, we urge all the parties involved
to avoid raising tensions and an escalation of the war of
words that jeopardize international peace and security,
particularly in the Korean peninsula.
We urge all parties to refrain from any act of
provocation, unilateral action or any action taken outside
international law and the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. We reiterate our support for the
Chinese initiative of a double freeze, which would
allow for a simultaneous halt of relevant activities in the
Korean peninsula. Likewise, in the framework of the
provisions of paragraph 27 of resolution 2371 (2017),
we must act to promote the resumption of the Six-Party
Talks, taking as a starting point the Russian-Chinese
proposal and its related road map, which is currently
the only tangible proposal that has been put forward for
resolving the situation.
Over the past six months, the Security Council has
adopted one of the most draconian sets of sanctions
of recent decades. States must work towards their
implementation so that they can serve their stated
purpose. We underscore that for Bolivia, sanctions
cannot be an end in themselves, but rather must serve
as a tool to encourage parties to bring the parties to
the negotiating table in a transparent dialogue that will
achieve a negotiated end to the conflict.
17-40305

29/11/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

We wish to remind the membership that, in line
with Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations,
we have the responsibility to maintain international
peace and security. To that end, we must take decisions
promoting the peaceful settlement of disputes, and of
this one in particular. In that spirit, we propose that the
Council endow the Secretary-General with the mandate
necessary to use his good offices to find a peaceful
settlement to this complex situation.
Finally, Bolivia reiterates its call on all the parties
involved to rule out any alternative military solution
or threat of the use of force, and to return to dialogue
and negotiations to achieve a peaceful, diplomatic and
political solution that, we reiterate, will result in the
denuclearized Korean peninsula.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman for
his briefing. I also thank you, Mr. President, for your
work as Chair of the Committee pursuant to resolution
1718 (2006) and for your exemplary energy and that
of your team on this matter this year. I also thank the
United States of America, Japan and the Republic
of Korea for requesting this meeting following the
announcement of a missile ballistic missile launch by
North Korea.
France, in a statement by President Macron, has
condemned the launch in the strongest terms, and I
would like to once again reiterate, as did our Minister
for Europe and Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jean Yves Le
Drian, the full solidarity of France with Japan and the
Republic of Korea, which are in the front lines in facing
this threat. Allow me to focus on the three main criteria
that guide French policy on this important issue.
The first requirement is the need to be cleareyed as the threat before us evolves. Let us make no
mistake. After the intercontinental ballistic launches of
this summer and the nuclear test of an unprecedented
scale on 3 September, the threat has changed in scale
and character. From a regional threat, it has become a
global threat. From a virtual threat, it has become an
immediate threat. In other words, it is of unprecedented
gravity. This threat affects all of us because it weighs
on all of us.
After this latest launch of an intercontinental
ballistic missile yesterday, North Korea has resumed
its irresponsible race towards escalation. This new
provocation reminds us above all how dangerously the
situation has evolved. The methodical progress made

S/PV. 8118

in the fields of nuclear and ballistic capabilities — of
which this launch is a further illustration — has led
to the immediate and global threat to which I have
referred. Through the accumulation of increasingly
offensive provocations, North Korea continues to
threaten regional and international peace and security.
The second requirement that we must prioritize
today is that of firmness. Faced with the regime’s
headlong and irresponsible acivities and flouting of its
international obligations, we must now more than ever
act swiftly, in unity and with resolve. We must respond
as one to this attack on peace and security and the
system of law on which they are built. Let us be clear that
it is the international nuclear non-proliferation regime
itself that is being tested by the North Korean nuclear
and ballistic programme. Weakness and inaction are
not options.
In that context, our priority is to exert maximum
pressure on the North Korean regime through a
sound combination of two axes of action. The first,
indispensable axis is to strengthen and accelerate the
strict and comprehensive implementation of sanctions
already in place. We still have significant options in
that regard. The activities of the Committee pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006), supported by the Panel of
Experts — as reflected in the very enlightening briefing
we received today — are essential in this respect. We
particularly welcome indications of the growing number
of national implementation reports and ongoing work to
make the sanctions stick. We must pursue and intensify
these efforts. We must also remain especially vigilant
against North Korea’s ever-changing efforts to evade
sanctions. Faced with its inventiveness, let us be even
more inventive.
But the rapid exacerbation of the threat requires
us to go further still. That is why France favours a
strengthening of sanctions. We know that only strong
sanctions are capable of influencing the North Korean
regime’s strategy. France is therefore ready to get
straight to work to that end, alongside all its partners
on the Security Council. The European Union is also
contributing to those efforts. Last month, it adopted
new autonomous measures, beyond the transposition of
United Nations sanctions.
The firm and united response so ardently sought
by France has a twofold objective. First, we must
react to Pyongyang’s unjustifiable attitude and avoid
sending any message of impunity for the flagrant

17-4030515/18

S/PV.8118

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

violation of our decisions. Secondly, as I have said, we
must maximise pressure on the North Korean regime
to meet its obligations and return to reason. In that
context, the third requirement — both logically and
chronologically — is diplomacy, the path to which will
be opened only by firm action. France is convinced that
maximum firmness today, in the form of strengthened
sanctions, is our best leverage for promoting a political
settlement tomorrow. Conversely, anything that could
be seen by the North Korean regime as an expression
of weakness or internal division would encourage it to
pursue its provocations and objectively heighten the
threat of resort to extreme measures.
To put it simply, the supremely firm attitude that
France urges the Security Council to adopt is our best
antidote to the threat of confrontation and war and our
best way to open the path to a political solution, which
we believe must be based on the complete, verifiable and
irreversible denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
We do not close the door to dialogue and have never
closed it. It is the North Korean regime that insists,
through its irresponsible and unacceptable attitude, on
rejecting it. So long as North Korea remains deaf to our
demands and continues to underline its threats with one
provocation after another, we will have no choice but
to raise the pressure in response. That is the only way
to bring North Korea back to the negotiating table and
open the path to the necessary political and diplomatic
solution that we seek.
These are France’s three complementary priorities
that must guide us: a clear-eyed understanding of the
unprecedented gravity of the threat, maximum firmness
in response, and diplomacy in the service of a political
resolution to the North Korean nuclear crisis. While
our collective security is at stake, and with it the future
of the entire non-proliferation regime that serves as its
backbone, France calls on all stakeholders to take this
demanding journey together.
Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltenman, for his briefing and the
delegations of the United States, Japan and the Republic
of Korea for having convened this open meeting.
Once again, we find ourselves here in the face of the
threat from North Korea, which persists in its obstinate
behaviour of flaunting its increasingly developed
nuclear programme and its capacity to launch nuclear
weapons. Uruguay reiterates its severest condemnation
16/18

29/11/2017

of the latest launch of an intercontinental ballistic missile
by North Korea yesterday. All these tests are reckless,
irresponsible and unacceptable. Uruguay reiterates its
call on North Korea to abandon its existing nuclear
programmes in a complete, verifiable and irreversible
manner, and immediately to cease all related activities,
including launches using ballistic missile technology
and other acts of provocation.
Three missile launches this year have threatened
Japan, constituting an immediate threat to that country
and its population. We reiterate that incidents such
as these are a serious threat to international peace
and security and constitute a flagrant violation of
international law. We reiterate that North Korea must
respect all the resolutions of the Security Council, set
aside its nuclear intentions and return to the path of
dialogue, whose ultimate goal must be denuclearization.
However, the repeated reiteration of all these
demands is simply not working. Without prejudice
to maintaining and improving an effective sanctions
regime, it is necessary to break the current vicious
cycle in which North Korea systematically violates the
resolutions of the Security Council, which then imposes
a posteriori sanctions and issues communications that
fail to change the situation in any way. We cannot
continue in this manner. We must coordinate strategies
that lead to a solution to this situation with the North
Korean regime, which is betting on an escalation of
tensions whose consequences could be disastrous for
the region and beyond.
Uruguay reiterates its call for dialogue, since we
see no solution to the North Korean issue other than
through the peaceful pursuit of talks, negotiation and
political compromise between the parties. It is time
to change the current pattern of developments on the
matter before it is too late and we have a catastrophe of
unimaginable proportions on our hands.
Uruguay is nearing the end of its mandate and
participation as a non-permanent member of the
Security Council. In these two years, we have witnessed
a major increase in the number of meetings at which
the situation of North Korea has been considered.
My country participated in the adoption of five of the
harshest and most meaningful resolutions, as well as
presidential statements and statements to the press.
Nevertheless, North Korea’s pattern of behaviour has
not changed.
17-40305

29/11/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

A way out of this delicate situation is possible
only through diplomacy, as part of an international
strategy that enjoys the resolute commitment of all
countries, especially those with influence in the
Korean peninsula. The provocative actions will not
stop unless the situation is redirected towards the path
of dialogue and negotiation. In that regard, Uruguay
reiterates its commitment to continue to work towards
a peaceful, diplomatic and political solution for the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Italy.
First of all, I would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing.
Once again, the Security Council is confronted
with an irresponsible and legal provocation by the
regime of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
As stated today by Prime Minister Gentiloni Silveri
and Foreign Minister Alfano, Italy firmly condemns
Pyongyang’s launch of another ballistic missile, with
intercontinental range, which constitutes a grave threat
of a truly global nature, as well as an immediate danger
to neighbouring countries, to which we express our
full solidarity. North Korea’s persistent defiance of
the non-proliferation regime, in violation of multiple
Security Council resolutions, represents a threat to
regional stability as well as to international peace and
security. We encourage the international community to
stand together in order to defend our collective security.
Maintaining a high level of economic and diplomatic
pressure on the regime constitutes the appropriate
response to the reckless behaviour of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. We will continue to work
on this matter as a member of the Security Council for
the remainder of the year, as well as within the European
Union. In that context, allow me also to reiterate the
primary importance that Italy attaches to the continued
unity of the Security Council on this matter.
Italy has adopted additional measures at the national
level consistent with the relevant Council resolutions,
such as suspending the accreditation procedure for the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea Ambassador in
Rome. Through that decision, we intended to convey
and unequivocal message regarding the need for the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to abandon it
defiant and self-isolating policies.

S/PV. 8118

I have already spoken about sanctions
implementation in my capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1718 (2006). However, I would like to add that we
are committed to ensuring — as reaffirmed in the
Council’s latest resolutions — that the sanctions regime
does not have unintended negative consequences on the
humanitarian situation in the country. We will address
that topic at the next meeting of the Committee. I
therefore renew our full solidarity with the people of
North Korea, who continue to suffer as the regime
ignores their basic needs in its pursuit of nuclear
weapons and the means to deliver them.
We call on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to reverse course immediately and
verifiably, including putting an end to all nuclear and
missile-related activities, thereby making credible
progress on its obligation to denuclearize. That is the
only course of action by which North Korea can begin
to regain the trust of the international community
and open up the way to a peaceful solution through
meaningful negotiations.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Republic
of Korea.
Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): Let me also
begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this
emergency meeting of the Security Council on North
Korea’s long-range ballistic missile launch conducted
at dawn, local time, on 29 November. I am grateful
for this opportunity to take part in the discussion on
this urgent and important issue. My special thanks go
to Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for his
briefing, and to you, Mr. President, for your 90-day
report as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006).
North Korea broke a 75-day pause in its provocations
with yet another ballistic missile launch yesterday. We
are taken aback by the degree of recklessness on the
part of North Korea, acting in defiance of the entire
international community, which has been sending out
an unprecedentedly strong and unified message of
warning to stop its further provocations.
Countries across virtually all continents have
recently taken robust and biting measures against
North Korea’s illicit programme of weapons of mass

17-4030517/18

S/PV.8118

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

destruction — not only through the full and thorough
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions but also through other available voluntary
means, such curtailing commercial transactions and
downsizing diplomatic presence and relations with
North Korea. It was amid those concerted actions by the
whole international community that North Korea came
up with yet another launch of a ballistic missile, with
intercontinental range. We simply cannot, and should
not, take such a reckless provocation less seriously than
any other previous provocations by North Korea.
For the past two months, some viewed the
absence of North Korean provocations following
the Hwasong-12 launch on 15 September as possibly
indicating that North Korea was finally awakened to a
stark reality. Others had high hopes that North Korea
would continue its restraint in the spirit of the Olympic
Truce resolution, which we adopted by consensus at
the General Assembly earlier this month (General
Assembly resolution 72/6). Some even saw a possible
window of opportunity, from that relatively long period
of silence, that might tip the balance towards an easing
of the tensions on the Korean peninsula. Those wellintentioned hopes may well evaporate following North
Korea’s missile provocation yesterday.
But it is premature to give up hope. Our road
towards the denuclearization of North Korea has once

18/18

29/11/2017

again proved to be extremely bumpy, but we should not
stop here due to frustration. As narrow as it maybe,
there is still a window of opportunity. We need to
remain patient and persistent in our diplomatic efforts
to bring North Korea back to the negotiating table.
The Security Council should never stop sending out an
unequivocal message that a nuclear-armed North Korea
with ballistic missile capability is unacceptable. The
Council should also renew its unwavering commitment
to stepping up sanctions and pressure until North Korea
finally abandons its nuclear and missile programmes.
For its part, North Korea must not take lightly the
message coming out of today’s meeting of the Security
Council. If North Korea continues to underestimate
or miscalculate the firm resolve of the international
community, it will turn out to be a grave mistake.
North Korea should be awakened from its false sense
of security. We once again urge Pyongyang to take
advantage of the rapidly closing window of opportunity
to resolve its nuclear problem peacefully, and thereby
ensure its security. As has been repeatedly emphasized
loud and clear, the international community is ready to
provide a better future for North Korea — if it makes
the right choice.
The meeting rose at 6.50 p.m.

17-40305
