United Nations

A/RES/55/154

General Assembly

Distr.: General
19 January 2001

Fifty-fifth session
Agenda item 161

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/55/611 and Corr.1)]

55/154. Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country, 1
Recalling Article 105 of the Charter of the United Nations, the Convention on
the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations, 2 the Agreement between the
United Nations and the United States of America regarding the Headquarters of the
United Nations 3 and the responsibilities of the host country,
Recalling also that, in accordance with paragraph 7 of General Assembly
resolution 2819 (XXVI) of 15 December 1971, the Committee should consider, and
advise the host country on, issues arising in connection with the implementation of
the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of America
regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations,
Recognizing that effective measures should continue to be taken by the
competent authorities of the host country, in particular to prevent any acts violating
the security of missions and the safety of their personnel,
1.
Endorses the recommendations and conclusions of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country contained in paragraph 62 of its report;1
2.
Notes that the Committee has taken note of the opinion of the Legal
Counsel of 1 September 2000 concerning the issuance of visas to participants in
United Nations-related meetings 4 and that, in this connection, the Committee has
recommended that the host country take that opinion into consideration in the future;
3.
Considers that the maintenance of appropriate conditions for the normal
work of the delegations and the missions accredited to the United Nations is in the
interest of the United Nations and all Member States, and requests the host country
to continue to take all measures necessary to prevent any interference with the
functioning of missions;
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 26 (A/55/26).
Resolution 22 A (I).
3
See resolution 169 (II).
4
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 26 (A/55/26), para. 51.
2

00 56863

A/RES/55/154

4.
Expresses its appreciation for the efforts made by the host country, and
hopes that the issues raised at the meetings of the Committee will continue to be
resolved in a spirit of cooperation and in accordance with international law;
5.
Notes that during the reporting period the travel controls previously
imposed by the host country on staff of certain missions and staff members of the
Secretariat of certain nationalities remained in effect, and requests the host country
to consider removing such travel controls, and in this regard notes the positions of
affected States, of the Secretary-General and of the host country;
6.
Also notes that the Committee anticipates that the host country will
continue to ensure the issuance, in a timely manner, of entry visas to representatives
of Member States, pursuant to article IV, section 11, of the Agreement between the
United Nations and the United States of America regarding the Headquarters of the
United Nations, 3 inter alia, for the purpose of their attending official United Nations
meetings;
7.
Requests the host country to continue to take steps to resolve the problem
relating to the parking of diplomatic vehicles in a fair, balanced and
non-discriminatory way, with a view to responding to the growing needs of the
diplomatic community, and to continue to consult with the Committee on this
important issue;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to remain actively engaged in all aspects
of the relations of the United Nations with the host country;
9.
Requests the Committee to continue its work in conformity with General
Assembly resolution 2819 (XXVI);
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-sixth session the
item entitled “Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country”.
84th plenary meeting
12 December 2000

2
