UNITEDNATIZONS

CIAL
THIRTY-SECOND

2
NEW

RECORDS
YEAR

Ill
MEETING

7 JULY

1977

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. . , , , . . , . . , q, , . . . , . . , . , , , . . , . .

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . , . , , . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . .

1

Adoption of the agel>diI . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . , . . . , . , . , , , , . , . . . . . , , . .

1

Statement by the rcprcsuntative of Panama . . , . . . . . , , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Admission of new Members:
Application of the Republic of Djibouti for admission to membership in the
United Natiom (S/l 2357) . , . . . . . , . . . , , . . . . , . , , . . . . , , , . , . , . .

2

Provisional ngendn (S/Agenda/2020)

S/PV.2020

us
.m

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capita1 letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
of the Official Records of the Security Council, The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
Supplements

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2020TH

MEETING

Held in New York on Thursday,
President: Mr. CHEN Chu (China).
fieserzr: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of,
India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2020)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Admission of new Members:
Application of the Republic of Djibouti for admission
to membership in the United Nations (S/ 12357)
The meeting was called to order at 11.10 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese): First, I
wish to take this opportunity as President of the Security
Council to express to Ambassador Barton of Canada, on
behalf of all the members of the Council, our appreciation
for the services he performed during his tenure as President
for the month of June and for the effective way he
conducted the proceedings of the Council during that
month. I request Mr. Lapointe to transmit to him this
expression of gratitude for his efforts.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Statement by the representative of Panama
2. The PRESIDENT (translation? from Chinese): Tile
representative of Panama has asked to be allowed to speak
at this stage, Accordingly, I call on him.
3. Mr. ILLUECA (Panama) (interpretation from Spanish):
It is a matter of particular pleasure for the Panamanian
delegation to extend to you, Mr. President, most cordial
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of July.
4. We consider it an extremely good augury for effective,
friendly and peaceful achievements this month that your
term as President is beginning with the consideration of the
application of the Republic of Djibouti for admission to
membership in the United Nations. We believe that your

7 July 1977, at 10.30 a.m,
well-known
talents as a statesman, politician and diplomat
are the best guarantee that our meetings this month will be
very fruitful, and, hence, we anticipate that as President
you will be able to count on the positive and friendly
co-operation of the delegation of Panama,
5. 1 should like also to express my delegation’s gratitude
for the most important work done, Sir, by your predecessor
in the Chair, Ambassador Barton of Canada. Under the
Canadian presidency, the Council considered some extremely difficult, and even explosive, items and, thanks to
Ambassador Barton’s serenity, devotion, experience and
good humour, it was able to adopt resolutions opening the
road to understanding and the peaceful settlement of
existing conflicts.
6. I think it is appropriate, and of benefit to the future
work of the Council, to bring to the attention of members
the importance that the presentation of information on the
Council’s activities has for national and international public
opinion, The information should be substantial and timely
and, moreover, there should be the necessary instruments
to ensure that it is brought to the attention of the masses
both in the developed and in the developing countries.
7. Much to my regret, I must point out that the latest
issue of the Weekly News Summary published by the Office
of Public Information as document WS/821 of 1 July 1977
does not meet these essential requirements for good
information. Tile Weekly News Summary to which I am
referring is supposed to be a summary of the principal
events in the United Nations for the week from 24 to
30 June and starts with the title: “Security Council condemns Southern Rhodesia, urges Material Aid to Mozambique”. In its third paragraph this document states that
“the Council’s resolution, sponsored jointly by Benin,
India, Libya, Mauritius, Pakistan, Panama and Romania,
was approved by consensus”, I stress the words “by
consensus”. That is a gross inaccuracy, and it nullifies the
impact of the historical fact that the resolution adopted by
the Council at its meeting of 30 June [2019th meeting]
received 15 affirmative votes, that is, it was adopted
unanimously [resolution 41 I (1977)). The members of the
Council and, indeed, the entire United Nations family,
know what a difference there is between a consensus and
the affirmative votes of 15 members of the Council.
Unanimity is not a frequent occurrence. It has historical
significance, especially in the light of the growing impatience in the world about the intolerable situation in
southern Africa. The last time tilere were 15 votes in favour
on an item that was really not controversial was six months
ago, when Western Samoa was admitted to membership in

10. In our judgement, it is not enough that the press
release in question contains a well-presented submission of
the views of the five permanent members of the Council
and the illustrious spokesmen of the African countries.
Public opinion requires something more and, for the Latin
American continent, the Asian continent and the countries
of other latitudes, it is of particular importance to make
known the united and firm position which showed itself in
this vote of the 15 members of the Council and which is
necessary in order to promote more effective ways of doing
away with the racist-minority rCgimes in southern Africa,
and that it may be known that colonialism, racism,
apartheid, the activities of mercenaries and all those ills
which arise from violations of the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations have been equally
condemned in all parts of the world.

the United Nations by resolution 399 (1976) of 1 December 1976. As I have said, that was not a controversial
question; there was no conflict. But the last time there was
an affirmative vote of I.5 members on a controversial item
was on 6 April 1976, when the Council adopted resolution
388 (1976), precisely with regard to the application of
sanctions against Southern Rhodesia, My delegation would
like to refer to this phenomenon in a positive way.
8. When the International Conference in Support of the
Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia met at Maputo, the
Latin American delegations that were present-particularly
the delegations of Colombia, Venezuela and Panama-took
a strong position in favour of public information on the
United Nations as one of the means for creating conditions
of peace, understanding and goodwill among all peoples of
the world. We believe that one of the weaknesses of the
United Nations is that the Organization’s information
centres are, through an incomprehensible paradox, much
stronger in the highly developed countries than in the
developing countries. That is why, at Maputo, the Latin
American delegations laid so much stress on the necessity
of increasing the United Nations budget for information, in
order to promote causes like that of the peoples of
southern Africa but not to support situations which are in
violation of the Charter.

11. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese): Tile
questions raised in the statement of the representative of
Panama will certainly be noted by the appropriate units of
the Secretariat.
Admission of new Members:
Application of the Republic of Djibouti for admission to
membership in the United Nations (S/l 2357)

9. There is also an unpardonable omission in the Weekly
News Summary: it has failed to record the fact that the
chairmen and spokesmen of important regional groups
spoke in the debate in support of the best interests of the
indigenous peoples and the vast majority of the populations
in southern Africa. Although the press bulletin in question
quite rightly mentions the statements of.Mr. ChBrif Bachir
Djigo of Senegal, who spoke on behalf of the African
Group, and the Minister of Transport
of Gabon,
Mr. Georges Rawiri, who spoke on behalf of the President
of the Organization of African Unity, it is unpardonable, to
say the least, that the same press bulletin openly ignores
such important statements as that made by Ambassador
SBrgio Corr&a da Costa of Brazil, on behalf of the Latin
American Group, that of Ambassador Mustafa Medani of
the Sudan, President of the Arab Group, and that of
Ambassador Ion Datcu of Romania who, when he spoke,
necessarily did so in his dual role of representative of his
country and Chairman of the Group of Eastern European
States. It is also inexcusable that no reference is made to
what my delegation believes to be the most important
statement made at the 2018th meeting, that of Ambassador
Rikhi Jaipal, one of the most prestigious voices of Asia and
the third world. I think it was the most important
statement, because Mr. Jaipal made the point that it was
necessary to eliminate the Ian Smith regime and this should
be done, if need be, by military means. It was a very
important statement, an extremely significant one, and it
has been ignored in this press release.

12. The PRESIDENT (translation jkom Chinese): On
6 July 1977, the Secretary-General, acting in accordance
with rule 59 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council, circulated in document S/12357 the
application of the Republic of Djibouti for admission to
membership in the United Nations. Under the further
provisions of rule 59, unless the Council decides otherwise,
such applications shall be referred by the President of the
Council to the Committee on the Admission of New
Members. Accordingly, unless I hear a proposal to the
contrary, I shall refer the application of the Republic of
Djibouti to the Committee on the Admission of New
Members for examination and report.
13. As there has been no other proposal, I take it that the
Council agrees to follow the usual procedure.
It wus so decided
14. The PRESIDENT (translation .from Chinese): In accordance with the decision just taken, I propose that the
members of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members should meet immediately following adjournment
of this meeting. 1 request the Committee to prepare its
report to the Council at a meeting I intend to schedule for
3.30 p.m. today.
The meetingroseat 11.25 a.m.

2
“,
LItho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

77-70001-April

1978-2,200
