United Nations

S/PV.6731

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6731st meeting
Wednesday, 7 March 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Sir Mark Lyall Grant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Briens
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Mashabane
Mr. Menan
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (S/2012/129)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-25357 (E)

*1225357*

S/PV.6731

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.

Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS), was killed
while carrying out mine clearance operations near
Daphnia. This tragic incident demonstrates the hazards
that will still be faced by the Libyan people for a long
time to come, as well as the courage of the mine action
teams that are working diligently to reduce this
contamination.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (S/2012/129)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Abdurrahim El-Keib, Prime Minister of
Libya, and request the Protocol Officer to escort him to
his seat at the Council table.
Mr. Abdurrahim El-Keib, Prime Minister of
Libya, was escorted to a seat at the Council
table.
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Ian Martin, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/129, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya.
I now give the floor to Mr. Martin.
Mr. Martin: Although it was only a week ago
today that I briefed the Council on the situation in
Libya, it is a privilege to do so again in the presence of
the Prime Minister of Libya, Mr. Abdurrahim El-Keib.
I do not need to repeat aspects of my last briefing,
since the Council has the Prime Minister to inform it of
the latest developments and their context, although I
will of course be pleased to update my own assessment
in informal consultations.
I will open by referring to just one sad event of
the past week. On 3 March, an international colleague
from the non-governmental organization Danish
Church Aid, an implementing partner of the United

2

Since the Council extended the mandate of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
on 2 December last year for an additional three
months, UNSMIL has engaged in a comprehensive
planning process, following the integrated mission
planning guidelines that include consultations across
the United Nations system and with the Libyan
authorities, civil society organizations and international
partners. The results of this process are outlined in the
report of the Secretary-General that is now before the
Council (see S/2012/129). The planning process and
the consultations with Libyan interlocutors reaffirmed
the continuing relevance of UNSMIL’s mandate, as set
out in resolutions 2009 (2011) and 2022 (2011), but it
has also helped to define the areas in which we need to
engage more deeply in the coming 12 months.
From the outset, we have pursued a phased
approach and have not sought to apply any template.
This has helped us to explore in Libya and with
Libyans what the United Nations should do and how
we should do it. I believe that we are thus now well
able to recommend a mission concept tailored to the
needs of Libya and to its uniqueness. I have
highlighted this uniqueness in previous briefings.
Libya is a country rich in resources and does not need
traditional donor support. It is a country with skilled
personnel ready to lead their nation in many fields.
But 42 years of dictatorship and long periods of
international isolation have left Libya weak in the
institutions of a modern, democratic State. The people
of Libya now look forward to free elections, a
democratic constitution, transparency, accountability,
and the rule of law, including security forces subject to
civilian control and protecting the people, not a regime.
They are determined to maintain national ownership of
their future, but they are hungry to learn of
international experience and best practices. The role of
the United Nations must be to support their efforts,
where and when needed, in a flexible manner that does
not impose a heavy international presence.

12-25357

S/PV.6731

The Secretary-General’s report proposes that in
the coming 12 months, UNSMIL should focus on five
areas: the democratic transition and electoral
processes; public security; arms proliferation and
border security; human rights, transitional justice and
the rule of law; and coordination of international
assistance. Those proposals are fully consistent with
the request of the transitional Government of Libya, as
set out in the letter to the Secretary-General from
Prime Minister El-Keib.
Our support to Libya’s democratic transition
would focus primarily on the organization of the June
2012 elections for a national congress and the
subsequent constitutional process, which is to
culminate in a referendum. This will require sustained
and predictable support from UNSMIL’s integrated
electoral section, with the participation of the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the
United Nations Office for Project Services, not only in
technical areas, but also in order to ensure civic
awareness and informed participation in the elections.
This support began already in 2011, and it must not
only be continued but increased as we get closer to the
elections.
UNSMIL’s support would then be extended to
Libya’s subsequent electoral and constitutional
milestones. The electoral staff thus needs to constitute
the largest component of UNSMIL for the next 12
months. At the same time, UNSMIL would provide
support to reconciliation efforts at the national and
local levels, when requested.
As regards public security, UNSMIL would
support Libyan efforts to develop an effective and
accountable security sector that respects human rights,
upholds the rule of law and has the confidence of
Libya’s people. To this end, the Mission’s role would
include the provision of strategic and technical advice
to national stakeholders on security sector-wide issues,
including those pertaining to the integration or
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants, the
control of weapons, and civilian oversight and
management.
One of the critical tasks over the year ahead will
be to establish an accountable and professional police
service throughout the country that performs a range of
policing functions in accordance with human rights
principles and that enhances the confidence of the
Libyan people in the State’s ability to provide security

12-25357

and justice. To that end, by deploying a range of
specialists and police experts, UNSMIL would provide
strategic and technical advisory services to the
Ministry of the Interior on issues of oversight and
management, command and control, strategic and
operational planning, training, the integration of
ex-combatants into the police, and elections security.
Stability within Libya and the region also hinges
on the ability of the Libyan authorities to account for
and control the large quantities of arms, including
heavy weaponry, man-portable air defence systems and
related materiel, and to address the threat of arms
trafficking
and
proliferation
through
close
collaboration with neighbouring countries, as well as
the relevant regional and international institutions and
mechanisms. UNSMIL would therefore continue to
support them in their efforts to counter arms
proliferation. In this regard, the Mission would
continue to facilitate the engagement of international
bodies, such as the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons and the International Atomic
Energy Agency. UNSMIL’s work against arms
proliferation would be implemented through an
integrated United Nations structure, leveraging
expertise in UNMAS, UNICEF and UNDP.
Preventing arms proliferation is of course closely
linked to the security of Libya’s borders, but the issue
of border management cannot be reduced to this aspect
alone. Working with the European Union in particular,
UNSMIL would therefore support the implementation
of a comprehensive border management approach that
would involve several ministries and require
cooperation with neighbouring countries. Since the
Council gave UNSMIL a specific mandate to undertake
this work, a senior adviser has spearheaded our efforts,
and it would be important to intensify cooperation with
Libya’s neighbours, which the Government is seeking
to promote through the regional security conference it
will convene in Tripoli next week.
As outlined in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, moving from the 42 years of human rights
violations in Libya to the full protection of human
rights will be a major indicator of success of the
democratic transition. Recent events and reports have
demonstrated that this is a task that requires strong
support and constant vigilance. UNSMIL therefore
plans to give high priority to supporting the Libyan
authorities and civil society in ensuring that the
transition, including the transitional justice process, is

3

S/PV.6731

anchored in solid rule of law systems, institutions and
practices, and in respect for human rights.
This support would be provided by an enhanced
component of the Mission, as well as through the
mobilization of specialized expertise. It would include
building the capacity of the Libyan institutions in the
judicial and corrections system, with UNSMIL
addressing the most immediate issues in partnership
with longer-term capacity development through UNDP
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
Our plans are fully consistent with the specific
recommendations for the role of UNSMIL made in the
report of the International Commission of Inquiry on
Libya (A/HRC/19/68), with which we have had a
continuing dialogue in the course of its important
work.
Finally, the past months have demonstrated the
need for the coordination of international assistance to
Libya in all those and other areas. While I have
reiterated the uniqueness of the Libyan context, as in
other transitional contexts, multiple offers — and
especially multiple visits — can present significant
transaction costs for national authorities. The Libyan
Government is under acute pressure to meet urgent
priorities. In all of its mandate areas, UNSMIL would
continue to support Libyan efforts to coordinate
international engagement with a view to ensuring that
offers of assistance are focused on Libyan-defined
needs and implemented with minimum demands upon
Libya’s already stretched capabilities. Where
appropriate and as the Government requests, UNSMIL
would facilitate the development of partnerships
between Libya and international actors, including in
areas where the United Nations lacks the mandate or
the comparative advantage to respond directly to
Libyan needs. The imminent establishment of
representation in Libya of the African Union and the
League of Arab States will be helpful in drawing upon
regional expertise.
Before concluding, I would like to emphasize two
points that cut across all the proposed future activities
of UNSMIL. First, it is important that the involvement
of women in the revolution translate into fuller
participation in the democratic transition. UNSMIL
would have a dedicated capacity to support women’s
empowerment in all areas of the mandate. Secondly,
one must remember that the Libyan revolution, like all
the movements of the Arab Spring, was the expression
of the aspirations to change of the youth of the country.

4

The young people of Libya expect to be fully involved
in the transition, and this would be a constant concern
of our efforts over the next 12 months.
In delivering this proposed mandate, UNSMIL
would maintain a light footprint, aiming to provide
flexible, responsive and high-quality expertise to
support the democratic transition and help the Libyan
authorities to navigate the challenges associated with
it. We recommend that this support be provided in the
form of a structurally integrated mission to maximize
the impact of the entire United Nations system.
The proposed structure of UNSMIL would be
based on a relatively small, high-level core staff, who
would have advisory and coordination roles in their
respective areas and would be able to mobilize
additional support when needed. The additional
expertise mobilized throughout the year would come
from several sources, including Member States,
regional and other organizations, and of course the
United Nations country team. However, it would also
be important for UNSMIL to have its own capacity to
meet short notice requests for deployment. It is our
intention to build on the conclusions of the report of
the Secretary-General on civilian capacity in the
aftermath of conflict (S/2011/527) to design new and
more flexible ways to mobilize civilian expertise in
support of the Libyans. Maintaining a capacity to
respond to emerging needs is a key part of our mission
concept.
The year ahead will be one of the most important
in Libyan’s history. The first time I addressed the
Council as the Secretary-General’s Special Adviser to
coordinate post-conflict planning for Libya, last June, I
said that it was clear that, despite Libya’s financial and
human resources, the post-conflict challenges would be
substantial after decades in which it had been a matter
of policy not to develop any of the institutions of a
democratic, accountable State; and that the legacy of
human rights violations and the absence of the rule of
law would be a heavy one.
The Council is about to hear from the first Prime
Minister who has assumed the responsibility of
addressing those challenges. It is a privilege for me and
my colleagues to work with those Libyans who have
committed themselves to building the future of their
country, and I ask for the support of the Council in
agreeing to the Government of Libya’s request and the
Secretary-General’s recommendation that the mandate

12-25357

S/PV.6731

of UNSMIL be extended for 12 months in the manner
set out in the report.
The President: I thank Mr. Martin for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Prime Minister El-Keib.
Mr. El-Keib (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): Permit
me at the outset to extend to you, Sir, our
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I wish also to
thank the Council for having invited me to speak
before it today.
It is a great honour for me to appear before the
Council as the representative of the new Libya, free of
the tyrannical regime that had strangulated its people
for 42 years. I take this opportunity to express the
gratitude of my people to the United Nations in general
and the Security Council in particular for their
courageous stand at the side of the Libyan people in its
eight-month plight, and for their ongoing support in the
transitional phase, which we hope will lead us to our
goal of building a free, democratic State of institutions,
the rule of law, respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms, and a multilateral system
imbued with the spirit of tolerance, conciliation and
justice. That is the State for which tens of thousands of
martyrs sacrificed themselves, and we have taken it
upon ourselves, in the eyes of Allah, not to betray their
blood and to fulfil their aspirations.
I take this opportunity once again to emphasize
the commitment of the transitional Government to its
international obligations, including those provided for
under the United Nations Charter.
Members of the Council are well aware that my
country is suffering the legacy of a dictatorial regime
that has adversely affected the various sectors of the
State and deprived our young people of hope and the
Libyan people of its right to development and
prosperity. My country also suffers under the vestiges
of a war of liberation that destroyed our remaining
institutions and a significant part of our infrastructure.
A great number of pro-Al-Qadhafi elements, whose are
hands are stained with Libyan blood and who
plundered the public treasury, have yet to be brought to
justice.
Therefore, the ongoing transition is facing
significant external and internal challenges. Concerted
national efforts and the support of the international

12-25357

community are necessary if we are to meet those
challenges and, by the end of the transition, reach
safety with the adoption of a permanent constitution
and the election of a parliament and a Government.
These in turn will lead the country in the following
phase towards the achievement of our people’s
ambitions for progress and prosperity.
Despite the domestic challenges and the rising
expectations of our people, the transitional
Government has achieved much in less than four
months. The transitional Government has made the
objective of restoring justice and strengthening
sovereignty its highest priorities in the belief that the
cardinal concern of the State and citizens alike is
security. While some isolated incidents erupted in
recent months in various pockets around the country,
our security authorities managed to contain them. The
entrenchment and stability of the State were manifest
in the great celebrations in which the Libyan people
voluntarily came out in the cities and villages to
commemorate the first anniversary of the 17 February
revolution. Nothing happened to disturb security or
cause turmoil.
Our Government has an integrated policy to
reintegrate and absorb the revolutionaries. It has
formulated a plan to involve the revolutionaries in
State institutions. Some 10,000 revolutionaries have
been integrated into the Ministry of the Interior and
6,000 in the Ministry of Defence. More than 12,000
revolutionaries will be integrated into that Ministry.
Another 10,000 will be sent to training seminars in
brotherly States. The Government has also established
an
authority
on
ex-combatants
to
provide
revolutionaries an opportunity to enter various
professions.
We attach particular attention to disarmament and
to the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and man-portable air defence systems (MANPADS),
given the threat they pose to national and international
security alike. We cooperate closely with the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya and with the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
I would like to take this opportunity to reassure the
international community that the chemical weapons
hidden by the former regime that have been found are
under control. In cooperation with the Secretariat and
various brotherly States, we are trying to destroy those
weapons in accordance with an agreed time frame.
With regard to the yellow cake nuclear material, it too

5

S/PV.6731

is under control. International Atomic Energy Agency
inspectors have visited storage sites and have made
sure that they are safe.

various crimes, except assassination, murder,
abduction, torture and the theft of public and private
money.

With
regard
to
conventional
weapons,
ammunition and MANPADS, strenuous efforts are
under way to cooperate with international partners to
collect, control and prevent the smuggling across the
border of such weapons. In that connection, my
Government has called for the holding of a regional
ministerial conference on border security, to be held in
Tripoli on 11 and 12 March. The meeting will include
defence and interior ministers and heads of security
agencies from Algeria, Chad, Egypt, Mali, Morocco,
Niger, the Sudan and Tunisia. The purpose of the
conference is to coordinate efforts to control and
monitor borders, address illegal immigration, prevent
weapons smuggling, combat drugs and address the
activities of pro-Al-Qadhafi elements, who still operate
freely in some neighbouring States and continue to
pose a grave threat to the security of Libya and of its
neighbours.

With regard to pro-Al-Qadhafi elements who
committed grave violations against the Libyan people,
they will be brought to justice. In that connection, the
so-called Saif Al-Qadhafi will be tried in accordance
with the principles of justice and fairness.

In support of our efforts to achieve internal
security and stability and to protect our long borders,
we call upon the Security Council, with all due respect,
to lift the embargo on military equipment and
weaponry so that we can re-equip our military forces
and police so that they can carry out their duties.
There is no doubt that national reconciliation is a
prerequisite for the restoration of social harmony and
stability. It is a sine qua non for the building of the new
Libya based on respect for human rights. Laws on
transitional justice and national reconciliation have
recently been put in place. In accordance with Libya’s
social heritage, reconciliation committees have also
been established, which include political and religious
leaders and social and civil institutions that contributed
to the settling of many differences among the tribes,
which led to the return of displaced persons to their
villages and cities.
Genuine reconciliation can be achieved only by
trying the criminals, speeding up trials and meting out
punishment to the guilty. Efforts are also being made,
in cooperation with international civil organizations
and partners, to strengthen the concept of national
reconciliation and transitional justice.
With a view to fostering transitional justice, an
amnesty law has been enacted for certain crimes
committed prior to 17 February 2011. The law covers

6

On behalf of the Libyan people, through the
Council we call upon the international community to
seriously cooperate with us in ensuring justice by
surrendering pro-Al-Qadhafi elements who committed
crimes against the Libyan people, including returning
the money in their possession. We hope to cooperate
with the various parties. Many fugitives are still at
large, and pose a grave threat to the security of Libya
and the region.
The human rights situation in Libya is one of our
main concerns, as well as a national priority. In that
connection, Libya has cooperated with the Human
Rights Council International Commission of Inquiry
during its field visits to various Libyan cities and
regions. The Government has adopted numerous legal
and practical measures to restore judicial and police
control over many jails. The laws that restricted
freedoms and hindered the spread of a culture of
human rights have been annulled. The State has
established the National Council for Public Liberties
and Human Rights to monitor violations and receive
complaints.
We acknowledge that there have been some
violations of human rights. However, I would like to
emphasize that those were isolated rather than
systematic incidents. They were due to the fact that
some revolutionaries were not aware of the principles
of international law and international humanitarian law.
A ministerial committee led by the Minister of Justice
has been set up to look into those violations.
The Transitional Government is committed to
determining the destiny of the people who went
missing during the revolution. The Ministry for
Assistance to the Families of Martyrs and Missing
Persons has taken many important steps, including the
setting up of national committees to determine the
destiny of the missing, without distinction. The
Transitional
Government
therefore
urges
the
international community and our partners to provide us

12-25357

S/PV.6731

with technical expertise and financial support in this
endeavour.
The Government is doing its best to improve the
situation regarding the displaced by providing them
with adequate shelter that meets standards of human
dignity,
including
providing
the
necessary
humanitarian assistance.
The Government has also paid considerable
attention to treating the wounded and the sick. We have
sent more than 30,000 wounded for treatment outside
the country.
The complete legitimacy of the executive and
legislative authorities in Libya can only be achieved
through elections. Strenuous efforts are therefore being
made to develop a legal framework to ensure the
transition from the revolution to the State. The
electoral law has been adopted and the Higher National
Electoral Commission has been established. Electoral
constituencies will be defined within the set time
frame. An institutional authority that represents all
sectors of society will be elected. We promote the role
of women in social, political and economic life to
enable them to assume decision-making positions. In
that regard, the electoral law provided for competitive
listings to ensure the equality of men and women in the
elections.
In order to promote multilateralism in the new
Libya, we have laid the foundations for the
establishment of parties and civil society organizations.
Individual and joint initiatives are being taken in civil
society organizations working in various fields. The
Transitional Government is committed to taking the
necessary measures for transparent elections to be held
in a secure environment and on time. The Higher
National Electoral Commission is therefore receiving
full support with regard to its independence. We hope
that it will continue its work and complete the work of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) in that connection. We look forward to
strengthening those efforts in coordination with the
international community.
I would like to express our thanks for the recent
international efforts to release frozen Libyan assets. We
appreciate the Sanctions Committee’s agreement to
delist the Central Bank of Libya and the Libyan Arab
Foreign Bank. To that end, we call for the adoption of
resolutions providing for the confiscation of funds of
the Al-Qadhafi family and the remaining elements of

12-25357

his regime who are betraying Libya. We have taken
positive and concrete steps to restore transparency in
administering State resources.
With regard to our foreign investments, I would
like to express our deep concern that some States are
not protecting Libyan investments despite the fact that
the Security Council, in coordination and consultation
with the Libyan Government, delayed freezing Libyan
assets until they had been monitored, assessed and
rationalized following the establishment of a new body
to administer Libyan investments.
We call on the international community to allow
that institution to receive the assets. We appreciate the
valuable and considerable cooperation with UNSMIL,
as well as the advice that it provided to various Libyan
authorities on such aspects. Libya’s signing of the
agreement on the Mission demonstrates our
appreciation, and we hope that such cooperation will
continue.
We seek to establish bilateral and multilateral
relations on the basis of mutual respect and
non-interference in the internal affairs of States in the
belief that peaceful means are the only way to solve
international conflicts, to put an end to terrorism and
violence in all its forms, to respect human rights and
fundamental freedoms, and to promote international
peace and security, with the participation of
constructive actors and other States.
We look forward to establishing a free and open
economy that fosters individual entrepreneurship and
in which there are opportunities for all in line with
their abilities, while not ignoring the State’s obligation
to promote the prosperity of its citizens. Despite the
fact that only a year has passed since the toppling of
the despotic regime, there has been concrete progress,
even if it has been achieved at the high cost of our
people’s blood. Despite the fact that the first
anniversary of the revolution was a time of happiness
and celebration, we remember the killing and the
sacrifices of our people as the price of freedom.
Allow me to say that, as part of the Libyan
people, I am extremely proud of their achievements.
The Libyan people recognize and appreciate the extent
of the contributions of the international community, in
general, and of the United Nations towards the success
of the revolution. We look forward to continued fruitful
work with the United Nations over the coming year.

7

S/PV.6731

The President: I thank His Excellency Prime
Minister El-Keib for his statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to welcome the Prime
Minister of Libya to the Security Council Chamber. He
faces great challenges, and we would like to wish him
every success in overcoming them. In the presence of
the Prime Minister, we would like to mention three
issues that were not raised in the briefing.
The first point is about the civilian casualties as
result of the NATO airstrikes on Libya. The Security
Council gives the issue great importance because the
civilian deaths were caused by actions that it had
sanctioned, whereas they were intended to protect
civilians. On 3 November, the Secretary-General of
NATO stated that Libya had no confirmed civilian
casualties as a result of the airstrikes and that no
further
investigation
was
therefore
needed.
Nevertheless, there was an International Commission
of Inquiry of Libya of the Human Rights Council. On
2 March, there was a report (A/HRC/19/68) that
mentioned the deaths of dozens of civilians as a result
of the airstrikes. But what we have, instead of a direct
and honest reaction from NATO, is that things have
gone back to square one.
On 5 March, it was announced that no statement
could be made about the casualties because “it was
unable to verify the figures”. As we can see, NATO is
coyly attempting to avoid responsibility with regard to
a highly sensitive humanitarian matter. We expect
NATO to recognize the existence of civilian casualties,
to apologize and to say that it is ready to pay the
appropriate compensation. We believe that the matter
should have been properly resolved and that
responsibility lies not only with NATO and the
Security Council, but also with the new Libyan
authorities. Their consideration of the matter of civilian
casualties as a result of the airstrikes will show their
commitment to the protection of human rights and will
contribute towards national reconciliation. We call on
the Secretary-General to work for a joint statement of
the United Nations and NATO in order to bring the
issue of civilian casualties as a result of the NATO
airstrikes to a close.
Secondly, we have expressed concern about the
uncontrolled proliferation of Libyan arms in the region.
However, it is not only weapons that are going abroad.
There is information that there is a special training

8

centre for the Syrian so-called revolutionaries in Libya,
supported by the authorities. Its cadets are being sent
to Syria to attack the legitimate Government. That is
completely unacceptable on any legitimate grounds.
That action is undermining stability in the Middle East.
Given the fact that Al-Qaida is active in Syria, the
question arises of whether the export of revolution is
turning into the export of terrorism. Colonel
Al-Qadhafi said that he was involved there as well, but
surely issues need to be dealt with in their respective
countries.
It is clear that the transition period in Libya has
been very difficult. Just a few days ago, in the east of
the country, there were signs of separatism and the use
of the force. We support the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Libya. Nevertheless, we are
convinced that all issues must be dealt with by political
means through dialogue. Otherwise, the situation in
Benghazi is going to turn into a tragedy.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): We in the
Security Council welcome the Prime Minister and are
delighted to have him in our presence. We are grateful
for his very helpful and constructive statement. I regret
that our Russian colleague has found it necessary to
raise the old canard yet again in the Security Council
regarding NATO, but since he has, allow me to
respond.
The International Commission of Inquiry into the
human rights situation in Libya concluded that NATO
“conducted a highly precise campaign with a
demonstrable determination to avoid civilian casualties”
(A/HRC/19/68, summary). It also recognized that
NATO’s objective was to take all necessary precautions
to avoid civilian casualties entirely. In addition, we note
NATO’s exceptional cooperation to assist the
Commission of Inquiry in its work.
NATO conducted operations in Libya to a
standard exceeding what was required under
international humanitarian law and in full accordance
with the United Nations mandate to protect civilians
and civilian-populated areas from attacks and the threat
of attacks. The Commission’s mandate was to review
all alleged violations of international human rights law.
The Commission found no violation of international
law on the part of NATO.
NATO cooperated fully with the International
Commission of Inquiry on Libya and provided a

12-25357

S/PV.6731

significant amount of information, much of which had
to be declassified to assist the Commission in its work.
NATO has looked into every credible allegation of
harm to civilians that had been brought to its attention.
That has involved a thorough assessment of NATO’s
record, from target selection to any data gathered after
a strike. The review process has confirmed that the
targets NATO struck were legitimate military targets
consistent with the United Nations mandate and
international humanitarian law, with great care having
been taken in each case to minimize risk to civilians.
No target was approved or attacked if there was
evidence or reason to believe that civilians were at
risk. Hundreds of possible targets were passed up and
others were aborted at the last minute to avoid any risk
to civilians. Ultimately, it is up to the Libyan
authorities to determine a way forward to review
claims of civilian casualties. We will continue to
coordinate with them on these efforts.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to welcome the Prime Minister of Libya and
to assure him of our full support in the current crucial
phase that his country is going through. I was not
planning to take the floor but since the representative
of the Russian Federation has done so, I will make a
statement.
The International Commission of Inquiry of the
Human Rights Council has submitted its report on
Libya (A/HRC/19/68), which is serious and
comprehensive. It is above all a damning report for the
forces of Al-Qadhafi that committed crimes against
humanity, torture and other degrading treatment.
With regard to NATO, as the representative of the
United States has just pointed out, the report concludes
that the alliance’s campaign was very precise and
underlined its determination to avoid civilian losses
and the effectiveness of the very strict procedures
applied in the use of force. The truth is that, confronted
with an adversary that was directly attacking its
population and that did not hesitate to operate from
mosques, schools and hospitals, NATO showed great
restraint and was very discriminating in its use of
force.
Once the Commission was established, NATO
fully cooperated with it and sustained an open and
transparent dialogue. The information provided by
NATO is annexed to the Commission’s report.

12-25357

Mr. Wittig (Germany): I would like to warmly
welcome the Prime Minister of Libya and thank him
for his statement. I want to assure him of Germany’s
support for his Government and for the Libyan people.
I want to respond to my Russian colleague about
the NATO operations. As is well known, my country
did not participate in the NATO operations undertaken
in implementation of resolution 1973 (2011), but as my
country is a member of NATO, I feel that I have to
respond to my Russian colleague.
The report of the International Commission of
Inquiry of the Human Rights Council (A/HRC/19/68)
covers NATO operations. As a member State of NATO,
we took the allegations of civilian casualties very
seriously. NATO fully cooperated with the
International Commission of Inquiry on Libya and
provided a significant amount of information, much of
which had to be declassified to assist the Commission
in its work. The Commission’s mandate was to review
war crimes and violations of international humanitarian
law, and its findings are that NATO’s operations do not
fall in that category.
I wish to highlight that the Commission has
concluded the NATO “conducted a highly precise
campaign with a demonstrable determination to avoid
civilian casualties” (A/HRC/19/68, summary). The
Commission also recognizes “NATO’s objective to take
all necessary precautions to avoid civilian casualties
entirely” (ibid, para. 89). NATO conducted operations
in Libya in full accordance with the United Nations
mandate to protect civilians and civilian-populated
areas from attacks and threats of attacks.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): On
behalf of the Chinese delegation, I should like to
welcome the Prime Minister of Libya to today’s
meeting and to thank him for his statement.
I wish to make two points. First, the Libyan
conflict led to the massive return of people to their
homelands and to the proliferation of weapons,
impacting the socio-economic development of Libya’s
neighbours. That impact may continue for some time.
We therefore believe that the Security Council should
draw lessons from the way the Libyan issue was
addressed. The Prime Minister of Libya said earlier
that his country intends to convene a regional
conference on the proliferation of weapons. We
appreciate and welcome that effort.

9

S/PV.6731

Secondly, the Human Rights Council recently
established the International Commission of Inquiry.
The Commission’s report (A/HRC/19/68) explicitly
states that NATO’s airstrikes in Libya caused civilian
casualties and that certain targets were not military
facilities. The Commission also suggests that further
investigations should be conducted. This finding is also
in line with a number of media reports.
China expresses its deep concern in that regard.
These events bear on the correct implementation of
NATO’s mandate under the Security Council’s
resolutions and on the authority and gravity of those
resolutions. The Council must therefore understand the
situation as a whole. China supports the efforts of the
Security Council to remain seized of the situation and
to undertake further investigations of this case.
The President: I call on Prime Minister El-Keib
to make a further statement.
Mr. El-Keib (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to thank the representatives of the Russian

10

Federation and China for their statements, and to
inform them that the matter at hand, which concerns
the blood of Libyans, should not be fodder for political
propaganda on the part of any country against others.
The Libyan Government has investigated the
circumstances of the deaths of each and every Libyan
civilian, and has enjoyed the cooperation of NATO
with regard to certain excesses that may have taken
place and led to the deaths of some civilians.
I hope that the reason for raising this matter is not
to impede or prevent the international community from
intervening in situations in other States where the
people are being massacred by their own rulers.
The President: There are no more names
inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4 p.m.

12-25357
