S/PV.7941

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7941st meeting

Tuesday, 16 May 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rosselli. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uruguay)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Kandeel
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Fesko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Tachco

Agenda
Security Council mission
Briefing by Security Council mission to Colombia (3 to 5 May 2017)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-13917 (E)
*1713917*

S/PV.7941

Briefing by Security Council mission to Colombia

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

the process and the Council’s potential contributions to
it were also discussed there.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council mission
Briefing by Security Council mission to
Colombia (3 to 5 May 2017)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Colombia to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the two co-leads of the Security Council
mission to Colombia, which took place from 3 to 5 May,
namely, the United Kingdom and Uruguay.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Uruguay.
The Security Council mission to Colombia, which
Uruguay had the honour of co-leading with the United
Kingdom, took place from 3 to 5 May. The purpose
of the visit was to express the support of the Council
for the implementation of the Final Peace Agreement,
as referred to in the terms of reference of the Security
Council mission, as well as to hear from all stakeholder:
the Government, the people of Colombia, the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia — Ejército
Popular (FARC-EP), the United Nations Mission in
Colombia and the country team, and to ascertain the
progress made in and the difficulties of the process.
The visit took place over two days. I shall report on
the activities conducted on 4 May before handing over
to my colleague, Ambassador Matthew Rycroft, who
will describe the activities of the second day.
On 4 May, we held institutional meetings in the
city of Bogotá. Those took place in three key instances.
The first was a meeting of the Council members with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Colombia and Head of the United Nations Mission in
Colombia, Mr. Jean Arnault, who stressed the timeliness
of the visit, given that the parties were working to
complete the process of laying down of arms within the
180-day term set out in the agreement. Other aspects of
2/6

16/05/2017

Council members also met with the Resident
Coordinator and all the bodies, funds and programmes
of the United Nations country team. During the visit,
we were able to appreciate the excellent work of
Special Representative Jean Arnault and the United
Nations Mission in Colombia, and we thank them for
all of the support that they provided to the Security
Council mission.
Also of great importance were the meetings with
Government authorities.
The President of the Republic, Juan Manuel
Santos, received us as members of the Security Council
and then held an extended meeting with the highest
authorities, including, besides the President himself,
the Vice-President, the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
the High Commissioner for Peace and several other
senior officials of the Government of Colombia.
In addition to thanking us for the visit, the President
also expressed gratitude for the support that the Council
is extending to the peace process in Colombia. We also
heard from the Congressional Peace Commission,
which brings together the entire Colombian political
spectrum. Its representatives stressed the importance
of safeguarding the achievements made as part of the
peace process.
Another key moment was an exchange with the
National Commission for Follow-up, Impulse and
Verification of the Implementation of Peace Agreement,
in which Mr. Sergio Jaramillo Caro, High Commissioner
for Peace, and Mr. Iván Márquez, Commander of
the FARC-EP, also participated. At that meeting,
Mr. Jaramillo referred to the progress on the issues that
are being worked on as peace is implemented, such as,
inter alia, the gender perspective, indigenous peoples
and comprehensive economic recovery strategies. The
FARC-EP referred to the importance of reconciliation, to
the system of truth, justice, reparations, non-repetition,
and guarantees, especially in the areas of security and
legal and political matters.
We also held a meeting with members of civil
society. Several organizations expressed their concern
about insecurity and killings in local communities.
The Council also heard the same concern from the
Government and the FARC. We share that concern
and call for institutional protection measures to be
17-13917

16/05/2017

Briefing by Security Council mission to Colombia

implemented to respond to the threat of armed groups.
Women’s organizations pointed out the disproportionate
harm suffered by women in conflict and post-conflict
environments. We acknowledged the fundamental
importance of the gender perspective in peace processes.
Members of civil society suggested the establishment
of a successor United Nations mission that should be
deployed throughout the territory of Colombia. During
the visit, we witnessed the commitment of the parties,
the goodwill and the hope that Colombians have for the
results of this peace process.
As a general assessment of those meetings, I would
like to highlight the commitment of all participants in
the peace process to continuing their best efforts to
move the process forward, with the awareness of the
difficulties that were raised and knowing that further
difficulties will arise in future, as is normal for such
processes. Several of these difficulties derive from the
difficult conditions in relation to building the federal
zones, which are in very rural and distant areas, where
highways and all the other infrastructure that is needed
for their installation still need to be built. Another
factor that has had a negative impact is the climate,
with heavy rains making tasks extremely difficult.
Another difficulty relates the pace of the adoption of
legal and administrative measures for the purpose of
reintegrating former combatants in civilian life. In all
cases, these points were brought up not as complaints
but to indicate the difficulties for which efforts must be
made if they are to be resolved.
I now give the floor to my colleague Ambassador
Matthew Rycroft.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank the
President for organizing, presiding over and co-leading
our highly successful visit to Colombia 10 days ago.
It was a great privilege to co-lead it with you, Sir. I
also want to thank all of the Permanent Representatives
around the table for taking part and for participating so
energetically. I think we all got a lot from the visit.
As the President said, my job is to brief the Security
Council on the second day of the visit, when the Council
travelled to the Vista Hermosa, municipality in the
Meta department in the south. It was approximately one
hour by airplane, plus an hour by helicopter, south of
Bogotá. We visited the La Reforma local transitional
zone, where the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia — Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) are laying
down their arms. We were accompanied by Jean Arnault,

S/PV.7941

Special Representative of the Secretary-General, by
senior Government officials, including the Colombian
Foreign Minister and the Colombian Permanent
Representative, and by the High Commissioner for
Peace, plus members of the FARC-EP secretariat,
including Iván Márquez and Pastor Alape.
There were three key elements to the day. First
of all, when we arrived, we received a fascinating
briefing from leaders of the Tripartite Monitoring and
Verification Mechanism. They gave us a tour of their
site, which gave us an insight into the challenging
terrain that they have to operate in but also the unique
character of the Mechanism and the remarkable joint
working between the United Nations, the Colombian
Government and the FARC members of that Mechanism.
Then we went on to a town hall-style meeting
at a community centre with members of the local
community and the Governor of the Meta department.
The rain by then was beating down on the corrugated
iron roof of the hall, and we were absolutely crammed
in shoulder to shoulder. There were many community
leaders, women, children, teachers and others present,
who gave us fascinating insights into what peace means
for that community.
Thirdly, and in a way even more remarkably, we
had an opportunity to meet members of the FARC-EP
at one of the newly built reception centres, just outside
their camp area, along with the Special Representative,
the Foreign Minister, the Permanent Representative and
the High Commissioner for Peace. It was a fascinating
site to see, at very short notice, all of these families
coming to us, carrying their chairs with us to this new
place to sit down together and really overcome the
conflict, which, until recently, had driven the country
apart for 52 years.
I mentioned before the challenging weather
conditions. Our bus did get stuck completely in
the mud on our way back to our helicopter, but we
managed to navigate that challenge successfully. I
think we all left confident that the parties — between
them — can navigate all challenges that the peace
process is speeding up.
I wantto leave the Council with the three main
conclusions that I think we came away. First of all, it is
remarkable how much has already happened since the
Peace Agreement was signed. Yes, we heard a lot about
the challenges. We heard about the difficulties and the
obstacles, but, actually, when we consider how much

17-139173/6

S/PV.7941

Briefing by Security Council mission to Colombia

has been done, it is very impressive, particularly given
the challenging terrain and so on.
Almost 7,000 members of the FARC-EP have
arrived smoothly in the transition zones, and they
have begun their process of laying down of arms. That
Tripartite Monitoring and Verification Mechanism,
led by the United Nations, is working well. Twenty
per cent of those observers are women. And the local
community spoke powerfully about the positive results
that they hoped to see as a result of the peace process.
It was fascinating to hear FARC members pay tribute
to the leadership of the military and the police of
Colombia. That is the first point: how far the parties
and the people of Colombia have come.
Secondly, I think we heard vividly about the impact
of the conflict on the communities most affected by it,
particularly away from the big cities, and the challenges
ahead. We heard about killings of community leaders,
as illegal armed groups moved into new areas. We heard
about the importance of sustained implementation of
all parts of the Agreement, not just the bit about the
laying down of arms, and that is going to be crucial,
particularly for those communities most affected by
the conflict.
Thirdly, I think that we were all impressed by the
commitment of both parties to stay the course, to see
this through, to make sure that every single part of the
Agreement is implemented, with continued support
from the international community. I think we heard
that both on the first day and on the second day, out in
the field. As I said, yes, they are real challenges ahead,
but I think that having that united view that peace is
now irreversible was a strong message for us all to
take home.
In conclusion, I think it is worth noting again in
this Chamber the strength and the unity of the Security
Council support for Colombia, for the people of
Colombia, for the Government of Colombia and for the
FARC as they continue to implement this crucial Peace
Agreement. The issue, I think, is still a ray of sunlight
on our agenda, and I hope that we all feel privileged
to be able to lend our support to the implementation of
the Peace Agreement. As we said in our presidential
statement (S/PRST/2017/6) upon our return, we all
remain fully committed to the peace process and are
determined to play a constructive and active role in the
months ahead.
4/6

16/05/2017

Finally, I would like to thank the United Nations
Mission for supporting the visit and for its tireless work
in challenging conditions, as well as the Secretariat
for all of its efforts during their visit. I also thank
Ambassador Mejía Vélez for everything that she and her
colleagues and the Government of Colombia have done.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now give
the floor to members of the Security Council who wish
to make statements.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I
will be brief. I want to thank you, Mr. President, and the
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom for
their briefings on the Security Council visit to Colombia.
We also welcome the Permanent Representative of
Colombia to the United Nations, Ambassador María
Emma Mejía Vélez.
The Security Council’s visit to Colombia is historic
for the Council. We meet in the Council almost daily
to meet the fundamental responsibility entrusted to us
by the States Members of the United Nations — the
maintenance of international peace and security. On
some occasions, that sacred duty leads us down difficult
paths, but on others like this one it unites us in a
fraternal bond.
Today, Colombia symbolizes the importance of
the Council for the world by maintaining unity while
respecting the sovereign decisions of States and firmly
supporting the peacebuilding process. The frank
dialogue with President Juan Manuel Santos Calderón,
his Ministers and Government representatives at all
levels allowed us to fully understand both the great
achievements that have been made in the process
as the challenges to the implementation of the Final
Peace Agreement.
You, Mr. President, have identified many such
challenges, and we agreement with your assessment.
Some of those challenges include meteorological
conditions, the remoteness of certain locations and the
building of sites for depositing weapons. Additionally,
listening to the leaders and members of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia — Ejército
Popular (FARC-EP) has allowed us to understand
their concerns and fears for the future, as well as their
decision to abandon armed resistance, lay down their
weapons and take up their struggle in the political
arena instead. Throughout, the Government and the
FARC-EP have put their doubts behind them, and the
commitment, determination and courage of both sides
17-13917

16/05/2017

Briefing by Security Council mission to Colombia

is evident. We note with great satisfaction the amicable
interactions and environment between the parties.
I recall that during our meeting with members of
Congress, we all pointed out the importance of political
leadership during peace processes. I must commend both
the political leadership of President Santos Calderón
and the leadership and political resolve of the FARCEP to embark upon this difficult path. During the same
meeting, one of the congresswomen noted that there is
a third party to the peace process — the victims, the
third vertex of the virtuous triangle. The forgiveness of
victims that have opted for the peace process, despite
its difficulties, is fundamental. That virtuous triangle
is the secret to the success of Colombia’s peace process.
The Final Peace Agreement is a comprehensive
and complex agreement that establishes a framework
of responsibilities and measures to ensure effective
reintegration and reconciliation. It also creates
opportunities for resolving the structural issues that led
to the armed conflict, such as integrated rural reform.
One of the most concerning consequences, as was
mentioned, is the assassination of community leaders.
We applaud the decision of President Santos Calderón
of creating a commission to ensure the safety of the
population, but also of presiding over it himself and
personally overseeing its success.
Finally, I want to emphasize the support of the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
for the peace process and to highlight the efforts of the
United Nations team led by Mr. Jean Arnault. I also
want to pay a special tribute to Colombia’s Minister for
Foreign Affairs, María Ángela Holguín Cuéllar, and
to Colombia’s Permanent Representative to the United
Nations, Ambassador Mejía Vélez, two women who
have worked diligently to guide this difficult process.
We congratulate you, Mr. President, on the manner
in which you have led the Council on this mission. I
think I speak for everyone in saying that we stand behind
all that you have said. You have admirably discharged
the lofty duties of President of the Security Council,
and I would like to very sincerely thank you. I also wish
to thank the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom for having co-led the process. His support has
been invaluable to the success of our mission. We know
that the road ahead is difficult, but the Council is firmly
committed to supporting Colombia, upon their request.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.

S/PV.7941

Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the President, the United Kingdom Ambassador,
who co-led the mission, and all the members of the
Security Council. On behalf of my Government and on
my own behalf, I thank the Council for having gone to
my country to see first hand what is taking place, to
be informed by the “prime movers of Colombia” — to
quote Ambassador Rosselli — by the State, by civil
society, by ex-combatants, who, as we build peace
through the implementation of the Agreement, need
to be increasingly united. That was also the perceived
goal of the visit and of the Council’s message to
Colombia — one of unity and of seizing the enormous
opportunity of having reached a negotiated rather than
elusive peace.
The Council vote of confidence in the peace process
will bear fruit despite the specific difficulties that have
been voiced in the Chamber. We are at a crucial stage
in the peacebuilding process, one in which the support
of the Security Council and the Secretary-General
have been unwavering and, in which my Government
has asked that the process be verified and monitored
through this tripartite mechanism. We are faced with the
formidable challenge of maintaining the methodology
of work on three fronts, which must now transition to
a new process aimed at ensuring the economic, social
and political reintegration of ex-combatants.
I think that this stage of the implementation of
the political mission of the tripartite monitoring and
verification mechanism to ensure the ceasefire and
disarmament timetable has been critical. I will employ
the metaphor used by Ambassador Rycroft, that the
peace process is not longer the bus stuck in the mud but
rather a venture with tangible results. Considering that
the past eight months have resulted in no conflict-related
deaths, no wounded, no attacks on national structures
and no abductions, 2,670 lives have been saved by the
Peace Agreement — as President Santos Calderón
pointed out. Meanwhile, we continue the process of
providing reparations to the victims, which has been
a core issue since the beginning of the negotiations,
as well as land restitution. The degree to which the
victims feel compensated and taken into account will
determine how successfully the deep wounds left by the
protracted Colombian conflict will heal.
The Council’s visit to Vista Hermosa showed them
the progress in the laying down of arms, the ceasefire
and the monitoring of such activities. There will,
undoubtedly, be setbacks but we are confident that the

17-139175/6

S/PV.7941

Briefing by Security Council mission to Colombia

process will proceed according to the agreed timetable,
despite the enormous challenges it entails.
I want to share with the Council another major piece
of news that we heard about yesterday: that another
area in the Andes, in the department of Antioquia, El
Orejón, which over past decades experienced what may
be one of the worst wars ever and was infamous for
being the most heavily mined Colombian municipality,
was visited yesterday by the Foreign Minister and
representatives of the international community, who
certified it as being free of landmines, free of illegal
crops and free of clashes involving the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia — Ejército del Pueblo.
This model, in which agencies of the Colombian
Government, coordinated in the framework of the border
plan of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Colombia,
complemented by 17 social and infrastructure projects,
made it possible to deliver results to a community that
include what we hope will be Day D+181, namely, the
first 100 days post-conflict and of the laying down
of arms; to continue the task of rebuilding the first
50 municipalities with respect to their social fabric,
through reconciliation and the strengthening of the
security mechanisms that, as the Council has noted,
are of concern to many people; and to bring to all
Colombians — why not? — that rural prosperity that
has eluded them until now.

6/6

16/05/2017

Finally, the goals and challenges involved are many.
We acknowledge the Council’s concern over the murders
of certain social leaders and human rights defenders, as
reported in recent months. All of the relevant bodies of
the Colombian Government are working to investigate,
capture and bring those responsible to justice. The
authorities have noted that although some cases involve
killings associated with the defence of human rights,
the Government is aware of the damaging presence
of other factors outside the law. They are advancing
negotiations in the area of public security, an area that
we also have to address.
Lastly, as Ambassador Sacha would say, the
Council’s support is extraordinary. Truly, on behalf of all
Colombians, I want to say that it was extremely moving
to see its commitment, dedication and determination to
ensure that this exercise was a positive one. I should
like also to thank the Secretariat for all its work, and we
hope that this positive news will continue at this second
stage we as Colombians are beginning, with the support
of the Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list.
The meeting rose at 3.35 p.m.

17-13917
