206

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

creasing of resources for education and training, the efforts of the developing countries in the education and
training of national personnel needed in industry. agriculture and· other economic and social sectors;
6. Expresses its thanks to the Director-General of
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for the report on the right to education
prepared pursuant to General Assembly resolution
34/170; 121
7. Invites the Director-General of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
to include in the consultation he will be holding with
Member States and specialized agencies prior to the establishment of the draft medium-term plan for 19841989 such points as wiJI enable him to meet the desires
expressed by the General Assembly in paragraph 3 (b)
and (c) of its resolution 34/170;
8. Invites the Director-General of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, in the light of resolution 34/ 170, and of the experience of that organization in this field, to submit to
the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session a report
on the most appropriate measures to be taken by Member States, at the national and international levels, for
the effective implementation of the right to education in
the application of the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade.
96th plenary meeting
15 December J980

35/192.

Situation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in EI Salvador

The General Assembly,
Guided by the principles embodied in the Charter of
the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 122
Conscious of its responsibility to promote and encourage respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
Noting that all Governments have an obligation to
respect and promote human rights in accordance with
the responsibilities they have undertaken under various
international instruments,
Bearing in mind resolution 19 adopted on 30 July I 980
by the World Conference of the United Nations Decade
for Women, 123
Dismayed by reports of human rights violations in El
Salvador and especially by the death of thousands of
persons and the climate of repression and insecurity prevailing in the country, which favours terrorism by paramilitary groups and enables it to be engaged in with impunity,
Deeply shocked by the vile assassination of Archbishop Oscar Arnulfo Romero, a prestigious personality, outstanding for his defence of the human rights of
the Salvadorian people, and by the persecution of Salvadorian figures such as Monsignor Arturo Rivera
Damas, Apostolic Administrator of the Archdiocese of
San Salvador,
111

A/35/148, annex.
Resolution 217 A (Ill).
See Report of the World Conference of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, Copenhagen, 14-30 July
1980 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.80.IV.3 and corrigendum), chap. I, sect. B.
122

123

Gravely concerned about the unknown fate of many
persons detained by the authorities,
Profoundly indignant at the assassination of Mr. Enrique
Alvarez Cordova, President of the Revolutionary
Democratic Front of El Salvador, as well as of five other
members of the Executive Committee of that Front, perpetrated on 27 November 1980 in San Salvador,
Considering that the supply of arms and other military
assistance will serve to aggravate the situation in that
country,
I. Expresses its deep concern at the grave violations
of human rights and fundamental freedoms in El Salvador;
2. Deplores the murders, disappearances and other
violations of human rights reported in El Salvador and
requests the Salvadorian authorities to take prompt action to curb the reprehensible activities of paramilitary
groups;
3. Urges the Government of El Salvador to take the
necessary steps to ensure full respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms in that countr)' and to guarantee the safety of Monsignor Arturo Rivera Damas,
Apostolic Administrator of the Archdiocese of San Salvador, whose life is in danger;
4. Appeals for a cessation of violence and for the establishment of full respect for human rights in El Salvador;
5. Calls upon Governments to refrain from the supply of arms and other military assistance in the current
circumstances;
6. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
examine, at its thirty-seventh session, the situation of
human rights in El Salvador.
96th plenary meeting
J5 December J980
35/193.

Question of involuntary or enforced disappearances

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 33/ 173 of 20 December I 978,
entitled "Disappeared persons",
Bearing in mind Commission on Human Rights
resolution 20 (XXXVI) of 29 February 1980, 1i. Economic and Social Council resolution 1979 /38 of I O May
1979 and resolution 23 adopted on 30 July 1980 by the
World Co"nference of the United Nations Decade for
Women,' 2 ·'
Convinced of the need to take appropriate action, in
consultation with the Governments concerned, to. promote the implementation of the provisions of General
Assembly resolution 33 / 173 and other United Nations
resolutions relevant to the plight of missing or disappeared persons,
Expressing again its emotion at the anguish and
sorrow of the families of victims of involuntary or enforced disappearances,
I. Welcomes the establishment by the Commission
on Human Rights of the working group which has been
asked to examine questions relevant to involuntary or
enforced disappearances of persons and to submit to the
Commission at its thirty-seventh session a report on its
1
"
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council. 1980,
Supplement No. 3 (E/1980/13 and Corr. I), chap. XXVI, sect. A.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

activities, together with its conclusions and recommendations;
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
continue to study this question as a matter of priority
and to take any step it may deem necessary to the pursuit of its work on the question of involuntary or enforced disappearances when it considers the report to be
submitted to it by the working group at its thirtyseventh session;
3. Appeals to all Governments to co-operate with
the working group and the Commission on Human
Rights and to enable them to perform their task effectively and in a humanitarian spirit;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to draw the concerns expressed in the present resolution to the attention of all Governments, regional and interregional organizations and specialized agencies.

96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980

35/194.

Report of the Economic and Social Council:
services of the Secretariat concerned with human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/47 of 23 November 1979,
Recalling Commission on Human Rights resolution
22 (XXXVI) of 28 February 1980, 1 24
Recalling also Economic and Social Council decision
1980/132 of 2 May 1980,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral, 125
Noting that in his annual report on the work of the
Organization, submitted to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fourth session, the Secretary-General stated that
he was prepared to consider all useful suggestions for
strengthening the contribution of the Secretariat in a
field which is of fundamental importance to the future
development of our society, 12 •
Also noting that the Secretary-General states in his
report 125 that while the Division of Human Rights meets
the technical criteria for a Centre, as set forth in his report on organizational nomenclature in the Secretariat, 127 he believes that further consideration of the
matter is required,
Requests the Secretary-General to keep this question
under consideration with a view to redesignating the
Division of Human Rights as a Centre for Human
Rights when he deems it appropriate, taking into account the views expressed by Member States at the
thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly.
96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980

35/195.

International co-operation in drug abuse control

The General Assembly.
Recalling once more the resolutions on the problem of
drug abuse control adopted in recent years by the
'" A/35/607.

tl6
See Official Records of the General Assemhli·. Thirtv-fourth Session, Supplement No. I (A/34/ I). sect. VI I.
·

Ill

A/C.5/32/17,

207

General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council,
the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, the World Health
Organization and other relevant organizations,
Recalling, in particular, its resolution 34/ 177 of 17
December 1979, in which it pointed out the importance
of international co-operation in drug abuse control,
Recognizing the growing threat caused by the spread
of drug abuse, its serious impact on human health, its
adverse effects on social development (social disintegration. increasing criminality), economic advancement
and national security in a number of countries,
A ware that illicit traffic in drugs and the profits accruing therefrom to traffickers and criminal organizations
pose a threat to the socio-economic well-being of many
countries,

Referring to the relevant provisions of the Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, 12 x of that Convention as amended by the 1972 Protocol Amending the
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, 129 and of
the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of I 971, 1 ' 0
which form the basis of all international drug abuse control efforts.
Noting with satisfaction the positive results that have
been attained in a number of countries in the fight
against drug abuse and in the control of drug traffickConcerned that none the less many of the objectives of
drug abuse control set out in international conventions
on narcotic drugs and in the resolutions and documents
of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and other international bodies concerned with this question have not
yet been achieved,
Realizing the necessity of further concerted efforts by
the international community, particularly by the United
Nations, in addition to national measures, to resolve the
problem of drug abuse, in particular by the reduction of
the illicit supply, demand and traffic,
Conscious of the need for a five-year, continuously updated international programme of action in drug abuse
control, as called for in General Assembly resolution
32/ 124 of 16 December 1977 and Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolutions 8 (XXVIII) of 23 February
1979 1]] and 5 (S-VI) of 20 February 1980, 112 which
should be supplemented by a long-term strategy or programme,
Noting the report of the Economic and Social Council
on narc~tic drugs,' ;J
I. Takes note of the resolutions and decisions
adopted by the Economic and Social Council at its first
regular session of 1980 on the subject of narcotic drugs,
elaborated on the basis of the report of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs on its sixth special session, and
urges all agencies and organizations concerned with the
implementation of the resolutions referred to in the
preamble. as well as all States and organizations whose
assistance has been requested, to take the necessary
measures so that the contemplated programme for practical and dynamic drug abuse control can be completed
and implemented at the earliest possible date;
,.,, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 520, No. 7515, p. I 51.
'"' United Nations publication, Sales No. E.77.Xl.3, p. 13.
'"' United Nations publication, Sales No. E.78.Xl.3, p. 7.
'" See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, /979.
Supplement No 5 (E/ I 979 /35), chap. XIV, sect. A.
'" Ibid., 1980, Supplement No. 4 (E/1980/14). chap. XII, sect. A.
'" Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-fifth Session.
Supplement No. 3 (A 115/J/Rev.1), chap. XXIII.
