A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/173
22 February 1994

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 91 (d)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/48/717/Add.5)]
48/173. Cooperation between the United Nations and the Southern
African Development Community
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 37/248 of 21 December 1982, 38/160 of
19 December 1983, 39/215 of 18 December 1984, 40/195 of 17 December 1985,
42/181 of 11 December 1987, 44/221 of 22 December 1989 and 46/160 of
19 December 1991, in which, inter alia, it requested the Secretary-General to
promote cooperation between the organs, organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system and the Southern African Development Coordination Conference
and urged intensification of contacts in order to accelerate the achievement
of the objectives of the Lusaka Declaration of 1 April 1980, by which the
Conference was established, 1/
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 2/
Welcoming the transformation of the Southern African Development
Coordination Conference into the Southern African Development Community, which
is aimed at deepening and expanding the process of economic integration and
cooperation in the region, involving the full participation of all citizens of
the member States of the Community,
Commending States members of the Community for demonstrating their
support and commitment to deeper and more formal arrangements for cooperation
within the new Community,
__________
1/

See A/38/493, annex I.

2/

A/48/495 and Add.1.
/...

A/RES/48/173
Page 2

Noting the efforts made by the Community to implement its programme of
action,
Reaffirming that the successful implementation of the development
programmes of the Community can be achieved only if the Community has adequate
resources at its disposal,
Welcoming the endorsement by the Multi-party Negotiating Forum of South
Africa of the reintegration of Walvis Bay and the offshore islands into
Namibia and the agreement reached between the Governments of Namibia and South
Africa to complete the reintegration process by 28 February 1994,
Noting that the effects of war, drought, loss of life and destruction of
economic and social infrastructure in southern Africa demand the continuation
and strengthening of rehabilitation programmes to regenerate the economies of
the countries of the region,
Recognizing the positive developments that have taken place in South
Africa, including the decisions to establish a Transitional Executive Council
and to hold democratic elections on 27 April 1994,
Expressing grave concern at the unsettled and deteriorating political
and military situation in Angola, noting with continued concern the grave
humanitarian situation and emphasizing the importance of a continued and
effective United Nations presence in promoting a negotiated settlement in
Angola with a view to fostering the peace process,
Noting with satisfaction the progress made so far in the implementation
of the General Peace Agreement for Mozambique between the Government of
Mozambique and the Resistência Nacional Moçambicana, observing that, as a
result, life is gradually returning to normal in Mozambique, and emphasizing
the continuing need for positive action by all parties concerned,
Noting the progress made by some organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system in formulating mechanisms for cooperation with the
Community,
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General, 2/ in which he
describes progress made in the implementation of the resolutions of the
General Assembly dealing with cooperation between the United Nations and the
Southern African Development Community;
2.
Commends the Member States and organs, organizations and bodies of
the United Nations system that have maintained, enhanced and initiated
development cooperation with the Community;
3.
Calls upon the Member States and organs, organizations and bodies
of the United Nations system that have not yet established contact and
relationships with the Community to explore the possibility of doing so;
4.
Commends the members of the Community for the progress achieved so
far in implementing its programme of action and encouraging further such
efforts;

/...

A/RES/48/173
Page 3

5.
Renews its appeal to the international community to increase its
financial, technical and material support for the Community in order to enable
it to implement fully its programme of action and to meet the reconstruction
and rehabilitation needs;
6.
Appeals to the international community and relevant organizations
of the United Nations system to extend appropriate assistance to the Community
in order to enable it to advance the process of regional economic integration,
including the participation in the process of a democratic, non-racial South
Africa as soon as possible;
7.
Welcomes the economic and political reforms under way within the
Community, which are intended better to address the challenges of regional
cooperation and integration in the 1990s;
8.
Calls upon the South African authorities and all parties concerned
to redouble efforts to end the violence and build a stronger foundation for
the emergence of democracy in South Africa;
9.
Regrets the unbecoming actions of the National Union for the Total
Independence of Angola, which are increasing the suffering of the civilian
population of Angola, which is increasingly in need of help, causing an
intolerable refugee problem and damaging the Angolan economy, and demands that
the Union permanently cease such actions;
10.
Welcomes the steps taken by the Secretary-General to implement the
emergency humanitarian assistance plan for Angola, and appeals to Member
States to make generous contributions;
11.
Notes with appreciation the assistance and pledges made by Member
States in support of the peace process in Mozambique, and encourages the donor
community to provide appropriate and prompt assistance for the implementation
of all aspects of the General Peace Agreement for Mozambique;
12.
Reaffirms its appeal to the international community to continue
extending assistance to Namibia at this stage of its independence, to enable
it to implement its national development programme;
13.
Invites the donor community and other cooperating partners to
participate at a high level in the Annual Consultative Conference of the
Southern African Development Community, to be held at Gaborone from 26 to
28 January 1994;
14.
Commends the Secretary-General and members of the international
community for their timely response to the drought situation in southern
Africa, which has averted famine in the region and has initiated a process
that will ensure a rapid response to situations of a similar nature in the
future, and in this regard encourages the international community to assist
countries of the region in overcoming the effects of drought on a sustained
basis;
15.
Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Executive
Secretary of the Southern African Development Community, to continue to
intensify contacts aimed at promoting and harmonizing cooperation between the
United Nations and the Community;

/...

A/RES/48/173
Page 4

16.
Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly at its fiftieth session on the implementation of the present
resolution.
86th plenary meeting
21 December 1993
