General Auembly-Se1'enteenth Se11ion

42

1847 (XVII). Continuation of the Committee on
Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1700 (XVI) of 19 December 1961,
Considering that, by resolution 1654 (XVI)_ of 27
November 1961, it established the Special Co~m1ttee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of t?e
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Coloma!
Countries and Peoples,
Considering further that, in paragraph 8 of resolution
1654 (XVI), the General Assembly requested_ the Co11;mittee on Information from Non-Self-Governmg Territories to assist the Special Committee in its work,
Keeping in mind the principles and purposes contained
in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1%0 entitled "Declaration on the granting of independence to
colonial countries and peoples",
Recognizing that the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories continues to play a useful role in the attainment of the principles set forth in
Chapter XI of the Charter of the United Nations and
in the implementation of the mandates incumbent upon
the Special Committee,
1. Decides to continue the Committee on Information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories on the same basis
as that established by resolution 1700 (XVI), particularly paragraphs 2 to 5 of that resolution ;9
2. Decides, in the light of the rapid progress required
for the accession of Non-Self-Governing Territories to
independence, to review the situation at its eighteenth
session with a view to taking a decision on the further
continuation of the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories.
1198th plenary meeting,
19 December 1962.

1848 (XVII). Dissemination of information in the
Non-Self-Governing Territories on the Declaration on the granting of independence to
colonial countries and peoples
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1695 (XVI) of 19 December
1961,
Reiterating the view that it is essential that the peoples
of the Non-Self-Governing Territories should be widely
acquainted with the Declar3:tion on the granting c:f ind~pendence to colonial countries and peoples contamed m
its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
1. N ates with satisfaction the information contained
in the Secretarv-General's report on this snbject 10 to the
effect that a ri'umber of leaflets, wallsheets and radio
talks on the aforesaid Declaration have been disseminated in many local languages of the Non-Self-Governing Territories as well as in the languages of the
Administering Members;
2. Notes with appreciation that, in accordance with
resolution 1695 (XVI), certain Administering lVf embers
9 See

note on item 55, p. 44.
Scvl'ntccnth Session ..,Jnnexcs, agenda items 49, SO,
51, 52,
and 55, document A/5244 ancl Acld.l.

have extended to the Secretary-General their co-operation in the circulation and dissemination of the Declaration in many Territories;
3. Notes with regret that the Government of Portugal has not extended such co-operation_ and in:7ites ~t
to co-operate with the Secretary-General m the d1ssem1nation of the Declaration in the Territories under its
administration ;
4. Invites all the other Administering Members to
continue to co-operate with the Secretary-Gen~ral ~n the
circulation and dissemination of the Declaration m all
Non-Self-Governing Territories under their administration;
5. Further invites the Administering Members to
include the Declaration in the curricula of all educational
institutions in all Non-Self-Governing Territories;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts towards large-scale circulation and dissemination
of the Declaration through all the appropriate media of
mass communication in all the Non-Self-Governing Territories, and to prepare a report on further progress on
this subject for the General Assembly at its eighteenth
session.
1198th plenary mcrting,
19 December 1962.

1849 (XVII). Offers by Member States of study
and training facilities for inhabitants of
Non-Self-Governing Territories
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the granting of
independence to colonial countries and peoples,
Recognizing the importance of rendering assistance to
colonial countries and peoples in the field of general and
specialized education,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories
under General Assembly resolution 845 (IX) of 22
November 1954, 11
Expressing regret that, despite the increased interest
among inhabitants of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in such offers, a number of the scholarships offered
by Member States remain unutilized,
Further expressing regret that in several instances
students who have been granted scholarships have not
been accorded facilities to leave the Non-Self-Governing
Territories in order to take advantage of such scholarships,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on offers of study and training facilities under resolution
845 (IX);
2. Reaffirms its resolution 1696 (XVI) of 19 December 1961;
3. Urges Member States to continue to offer scholarships;
4. Requests the Member States offering scholarships
to take into account the necessity of furnishing complete
information abont the scholarships offered and, whenever

10 Ibid

53'

11 Jbid., document A/5242 and Add.I.

Reeolutione adopted on the report& of the Fourth Committee

possible, the need to provide travel funds to prospective
students;
5. Invites once again the Administering Members
concerned to take all necessary measures to ensure that
all scholarships and training facilities offered by Member States are utilized by the inhabitants of the NonSelf~Governing Territories and to render effective
assistance to those persons who have applied for or have
been granted scholarships or fellowships, particularly
with regard to facilitating their travel formalities;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its eighteenth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution;
7. Draws the attention of the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
1198th plenary meeting,
19 December 1962.
1850 (XVII). Racial discrimination in Non-Self.
Governing Territories
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1698 (XVI) of 19 December 1%1, whereby, inter alia, it urged the Administering
Members to include, among the measures that would
contribute to the imnlementation of the Declaration on
the granting of independence to colonial countries and
peoples, steps to ensure :
(a) The immediate rescinding or revocation of all
laws and regulations which tend to encourage or sanction, directly or indirectly, discriminatory policies and
practil:es based on racial considerations,
( b) The adoption of legislative measures making
racial discrimination and segregation punishable by law,
( c) The discouragement of such practices based on
racial considerations by all other means possible, including administrative measures,
(d) The immediate extension to all inhabitants of the
full exercise of basic political rights, in particular the
right to vote, and the establishment of equality among the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of resolution 1698 (XVI) 12 and
the report of the Committee on Information from NonSelf-Goveming Territories, 8
Noting with deep concern that racidl discrimination
in law and in practice, which is utterly repugnant to
humanity, has not been eradicated in Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Reiterating its view that racial discrimination and
segregation in Non-Self-Governing Territories can be
eradicated fully and with the greatest speed by the faithful implementation of the Declaration on the granting of
independence to colonial countries and peoples,
l. Solemnly reaffirms its resolute condemnation of
the policy and practice of racial discrimination in ='JonSelf-Governing Territories;
12 Ibid., document A/5249 and Add.l.

43

2. Urges the Administering Members to give immediate effect to the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples in the Territories under their administration so that an end will be
put to racial discrimination in all forms and in all fields ;
3. Decides to refer the report of the Secretary-General on racial discrimination in Non-Self-Governing
Territories and the summary records of the discussion
on that report to the attention of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples.
1198th plenary meeting,
19 December 1962.
1858 (XVII). Report of the Trusteeship Council
The General Assembly,
Having received the report of the Trusteeship Council
covering the period from 20 July 1961 to 20 July 1962, 13
l. Takes note of the report of the Trusteeship
Council;
2. Calls upon the Administering Authorities to take
account of the recommendations and observations contained in the report of the Trusteeship Council and bear
in mind those expressed by delegations during the debate
on the report at the seventeenth session of the General
Assembly.
1200th plenary meeting,
20 December 1962.
1859 (XVII). Dissemination of information on
the United Nations and the International
Trusteeship System in the Trust Territories
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1644 (XVI) of 6 K ovember
1961, in which it requested the Secretary-General to take
steps, in consultation with the Administering Authority
concerned, to establish without any further delay in
New Guinea in 1962 a United Nations information
centre in which responsible positions would be occupied
by indigenous inhabitants of the Trust Territory, and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventeenth session,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral14 prepared in accordance with resolution 1644
(XVI),
Takes note with satisfaction of the establishment at
Port Moresby, Territory of Papua and Kew Guinea, in
April 1962, of a United Nations Information Centre and
also of the training of qualified indigenous inhabitants
for positions of responsibility in that Centre.
1200th plenary meeting.
20 December 196:.
13 Ibid., Sei•.:ntcenth Session, Suf,plcment Xo. ·/

(A/52041.
Seventeenth Session, Annexes, agell(b items U, 58
and 59, document :\/5231.
14 Ibid.,
