82

General Assembly-Twenty-first Session

in the spirit of Article 58 of the Charter of the United
Nations and in the light of the agreements between them
and the United Nations,
1. Apprmies the report of the Ad H oc Committee
of Experts to Examine the Finances of the United
Nations and the Specialized Agencies and the recommendations contained therein;
2. Urges that the recommendations and comments
contained in the report be given the most attentive
consideration hy Member States and by the United
Nations organs and related bodies with a view to the
earliest implementation of the recommendations;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, as chief administrative officer of the United Nations, to take the appropriate measures to give effect to those recommendations
requiring his action, including the submission of proposals to the competent United Nations organs and
related bodies ;
4. Recommends to the specialized agencies and the
International Atomic Energy Agency that they give the
most attentive consideration to the recommendations
contained in the report and that they take appropriate
measures, within their respective areas of competence,
with a view to the earliest possible implementation of
those recommendations ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, as Chairman of
the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, to encourage the adoption of the appropriate measures by
the specialized agencies and the International Atomic
Energy Agency, particularly those requiring concerted
. action;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General to transmit the present resolution and the report of the Ad
H oc Committee to the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency;
7. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its twenty-second session a report
on the implementation of the recommendations of the
Ad Hoe Committee by the United Nations family of
organizations.
1458th plenary meeting.
4 November 1966.

•

•

•

At the 1501st plenary meeting, on 20 December 1966 the
President of the General Assembly announced that he' had
drawn up the list of countries mentioned in paragraph 67 of
the report of the Ad Hoe Committee of Experts to Examine
the Finances of the United Nations and the Specialized Agencies,9 dealing with the establishment of an inspection unit.10
That list comprises the following Member States: FRANCE,
INDIA, MEXICO, UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED
KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED
REPUBLIC OF TAN ZAN IA, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA and
YUGOSLAVIA.

2157 (XXI). Appointment to fill a vacancy in
the membership of the Board of Auditors
The General Assembly
Appoints the Auditor-General of Pakistan as a member of the Board of Auditors for a three-year term beginning on 1 July 1967.
1478th plenary meeting,
25 November 1966.
10 See A/6635.

As a result of the aboz•e appoint111cnl, the JJoard of Auditors
will be com/'osrd as follows: the First Prcsi,lent nf thr Audit
Office of llELGlUM, the Auditor-General of CoLOMBIA and
the Auditor-General nf PAKISTAN.

2168 (XXI). Appointments to fill vacancies in
the United Nations Administrative Tribunal
The General Assembly
1. Appoints the following persons as members of
the United Nations Administrative Tribunal:
l\fr. llector Gros Espiell,
Mr. Zenon Rossides;
2. Declares Mr. Gros Espiell and Mr. Rossides to
be appointed for a three-year term beginning on 1
January 1967.
1485th plenary meeting,
6 December 1966.

As a result of the above appointments, the United Nations
Administrative Tribunal will /;e composed as follows: Mrs.
Paul BASTID (France), the Right Honourable Lord (ROOK
( United Kingdom of Great Britai,i and Nor them Ireland)
1Ir. Hector GROS EsPIELL (Uruguay), Mr. Louis IGNACJ~
PINTO (Dahomey), Mr. Francis T. P. PLIMPTON (United
Stall's of A111crica), Mr. Zenon RossmEs (Cyprus) and Mr.
R VENKATARAMAN (India).

2176 (XXI). United Nations International School
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral11 and the report of the Board of Trustees of
the United Nations International School annexed
there~o! and_ the report of the Advisory Committee on
Adm1111strat1ve and Budgetary Questions thereon, 12
Noting tha~. the Secretary-General has accepted the
offer by the City of New York of a permanent site for
t~c School, as authorized by General Assembly resolution 2123 (XX) of 21 December 1965 and has entered
into a ninety-nine-year lease for this site,
Noting that contracts for the preparation of the site
detailed specifications for the new buildinrr and certai~
other preliminary steps in the constructiin have been
m~d_e possible by the generous contributions of $7.5
m1I11on from the For_d. Foundation to build and equip
the School and $1 millton from the Rockefeller family
to prepare the site,
Recalling that a major condition of the Ford Foundatioi:i gra~t is the establishment of a Development Fund
which will ensure the financial viability of the School
and promote its educational excellence,
Expressing its appreciation to the forty-four Governments which have made. pledges to the Development
Fund and to generous private donors, whose combined
contributions have now brought the total amount of the
Fund to $1,014,613,
Cognizant of the fact that the Board of Trustees of
th~ School and the Secretary-General believe that a
mmimum of $3 million must be raised to accomplish
the major purposes of the Fund,
11 pfficial Records of th~ Genera/ Assembly. Twenty-first
Session1 Annexes, agenda item 83, document A/6507.
1 2 Jbzd., document A/6536.
