UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1999/5
29 January 1999
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH AND FRENCH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3974th meeting of the Security Council, held on 29 January 1999 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "Letter dated
11 March 1998 from the Deputy Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/1998/223); Letter dated 27 March 1998 from
the Permanent Representative of the United States of America to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/1998/272)", the
President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the
Council:
"The Security Council expresses its deep concern at the escalating
violence in Kosovo, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. It underlines the risk
of a further deterioration in the humanitarian situation if steps are not
taken by the parties to reduce tensions. The Council reiterates its
concern about attacks on civilians and underlines the need for a full and
unhindered investigation of such actions. It calls once again upon the
parties to respect fully their obligations under the relevant resolutions
and to cease immediately all acts of violence and provocations.
"The Security Council welcomes and supports the decisions of the
Foreign Ministers of France, Germany, Italy, the Russian Federation, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States
of America (the Contact Group), following their meeting in London on
29 January 1999 (S/1999/96), which aim at reaching a political settlement
between the parties and establish a framework and timetable for that
purpose. The Council demands that the parties should accept their
responsibilities and comply fully with these decisions and requirements, as
with its relevant resolutions.
"The Security Council reiterates its full support for international
efforts, including those of the Contact Group and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe Kosovo Verification Mission, to reduce
tensions in Kosovo and facilitate a political settlement on the basis of
substantial autonomy and equality for all citizens and ethnic communities
in Kosovo and the recognition of the legitimate rights of the Kosovo
Albanians and other communities in Kosovo. It reaffirms its commitment to

99-02383 (E)

290199

/...

S/PRST/1999/5
English
Page 2

the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia.
"The Security Council will follow the negotiations closely and would
welcome members of the Contact Group keeping it informed about the progress
reached therein.
"The Security Council will remain actively seized of the matter."

-----
