S/2016/1009

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 December 2016
Original: English

Letter dated 1 December 2016 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I wish to refer to Security Council resolution 2313 (2016), in which the
Council took note of my intention to develop a package that would provide material
assistance and support to those Haitians directly affected by cholera. The present
letter lays out the details of the new approach. Further details are being provided to
the General Assembly in my report (A/71/620).
The United Nations has always been in Haiti for one reason: to assist the
people in building a better future and fulfilling their democratic aspirations. Since
2004, these efforts have been carried out in part by the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti, working alongside the United Nations country team.
The people of Haiti have faced many challenges during that time, including
endemic poverty, political instability and vacuums of governance. These challenges
have been compounded by the devastating earthquake in 2010 and, more recently,
by Hurricane Matthew. The United Nations has responded to these challenges in
solidarity with the people of Haiti.
One challenge, however, has cast a shadow. Cholera broke out in Haiti in
October 2010. Coming only nine months after the earthquake, this was an additional
blow for which Haiti was ill prepared. Only one quarter of the population has access
to decent toilets and one half to clean water, making it the country with the poorest
water and sanitation system in the western hemisphere. Cholera ultimat ely afflicted
nearly 800,000 people and may have caused more than 9,000 deaths.
From the outset, the United Nations, with support from the international
community, devoted considerable effort and resources to respond, providing
emergency health and humanitarian measures to reduce transmission. Over the
following six years, various initiatives were undertaken to mobilize the resources
and interventions necessary for the elimination of the disease from the country.
I visited Haiti several times to assess the situation and to demonstrate my
solidarity with the people. I appointed a series of high -level officials to raise the
profile of the issue and to bring in extra funding.
Thanks to such concerted international and Haitian efforts, the overall
incidence of the disease has been reduced by approximately 90 per cent since its
peak in 2011.

16-21168 (E)

051216

*1621168*

S/2016/1009

However, these efforts have not been enough.
Cholera continues to take a heavy toll on the lives of the people of Haiti, and
Haiti is still reporting the highest number of cholera cases in the world. Already in
2016, we have seen a rise in cases, directly attributable to reduced funding, which
has resulted in a deterioration in the capacity to respond to and treat cholera.
Convinced that we needed to do more, on 19 August 2016, I announced a new
approach to cholera in Haiti to concretely demonstrate deep regret for the suffering
of the Haitian people as a result of the epidemic. I will speak further on this when I
address the General Assembly on 1 December.
The new approach has two tracks. Track 1 consists of a greatly intensified and
better-resourced effort to respond to and reduce the incidence of cholera in Haiti.
This is the most meaningful contribution that the United Nations can make. The aim
is to significantly improve access to care and treatment and to address the longer term issues of water, sanitation and health-care systems. Work on track 1 is well
under way and is detailed in my report to the General Assembly.
Cholera can be controlled and eliminated with sufficient funds to ensure
proper and timely treatment. I have established the United Nations Haiti Cholera
Response Multi-Partner Trust Fund to provide a channel for funding for both tracks
of the new approach. To date, funding shortages have made it i mpossible to fully
treat or eliminate what is generally a treatable and preventable disease. Hurricane
Matthew, which destroyed much of the south-west of the country, has contributed to
a doubling of the number of suspected cholera cases per month, from a little more
than 2,000 in September to nearly 6,000 in early November 2016. Our fundraising
efforts therefore continue with great urgency.
In addition to the forward-looking steps under track 1, my new approach
includes a second track that focuses specifically on those Haitians most directly
affected by cholera, their families and communities, and will provide a package of
material assistance and support.
Track 2 would consist of a community-based approach whereby affected
communities would receive assistance and support through community-based
projects and initiatives that are responsive to priorities articulated by the
communities themselves and linked in general to and coordinated with work under
track 1.
Consideration was given to an individual approach for the households of those
who died of cholera; however, we discovered that there would be substantial
difficulties involved, including in identifying those who died and their family
members. Such an approach would require further exploration, in cluding through
on-the-ground consultations with victims and their communities, while recognizing
the challenges, risks and constraints.
I am committed to engaging affected communities in the design of track 2.
However, to engage in consultations, and thereby raise expectations, without any
assurance of funding would be counterproductive. The limited responses in
fundraising for the response to Hurricane Matthew and cholera elimination have
highlighted the reality in which we are working.

2/3

16-21168

S/2016/1009

The consensus view expressed during the preliminary consultations is that the
two overriding priorities for Haiti are to eliminate cholera and to respond to the
devastating effects of Hurricane Matthew. The new approach of the United Nations,
contained in my report to the General Assembly, is premised on the assumption that
sufficient additional voluntary funding will be made available to deliver on track 2
without detracting from track 1. However, the possibility that the incoming
Secretary-General may need to propose a multi-funded approach cannot be
excluded.
Eliminating cholera from Haiti and living up to our moral duty to those who
have been most directly affected is a collective responsibility of the Organization. It
will require the full commitment of the international community. Our response is a
test of our commitment to the most vulnerable of those whom we serve. It is also
important for the global reputation of peacekeeping.
The people of Haiti deserve this tangible expression of our solidarity and the
genuine support that comes with it.
I intend to proceed with the implementation of the new approach, to the extent
that it falls within my purview.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

16-21168

3/3
