S/PV.7114

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7114th meeting

Thursday, 20 February 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Murmokaitė . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Lithuania)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Errázuriz
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Lucas
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasana
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic

14-24045 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1424045*

S/PV.7114

The situation in the Central African Republic

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Central African Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Smaїl Chergui, Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I would like to warmly welcome His Excellency
Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon, and I now give him
the floor.
The Secretary-General: I thank His Excellency
Mr. Smaїl Chergui for his presence here today. I attach
the highest importance to close ties with the African
Union (AU). We at the United Nations will continue to
work hand-in-hand with the African Union to promote
development and lasting peace across the continent.
The crisis that continues to unfold in the Central
African Republic poses a test for the entire international
community. The situation in the country has been on
the agenda of the Security Council for many years now,
but today’s emergency is of another, more disturbing,
magnitude. It is a calamity with a strong claim on
the conscience of humankind. Over the past year we
have seen, in quick succession, the violent overthrow
of the Government, the collapse of State institutions
and a descent into lawlessness and sectarian brutality.
Over 2.5 million people — more than half the
population — need immediate humanitarian assistance.
The new acting Head of State, Ms. Catherine
Samba-Panza, is committed to building State authority,
and I commend her valiant efforts. But with no budget,
hardly any resources and faced with the country’s
pervasive poverty, her abilities are sharply constrained.
The path towards the restoration of State authority will
be a long one.

2/8

20/02/2014

Innocent civilians are being killed in large
numbers. Those victims are not so-called “collateral
damage” from fighting between rebel groups. They are
being killed purposefully, targeted for their religious
beliefs and for their community affiliation — for who
they are. Muslims in particular are being targeted, but
the ex-Séléka continue to attack Christians as well.
Almost 1 million people have been displaced, with
many homes burned to the ground with the purpose of
preventing their return. Whole populations are being
moved. A creeping de facto partition of the country is
setting in, with Muslims in one part and Christians in
the other. That separation is sowing the seeds of conflict
and instability for years, maybe generations, to come.
The African Union and France have deployed
troops to the Central African Republic to help stem the
violence. We owe those leaders and soldiers our gratitude
for saving so many lives and providing protection where
they can. We owe the African-led International Support
Mission in the Central African Republic (MISCA) and
Operation Sangaris our solidarity and assistance.
However, given the scale and geographic breadth of
the violence, the security requirements far exceed the
capabilities of the number of international troops now
deployed. In places where there are no international
forces, the choice for far too many civilians is to flee
or be killed.
The human family must not shy away from what
is happening today in the Central African Republic,
or from our responsibilities — both the Council’s and
mine — under the Charter of the United Nations. Events
in the Central African Republic have implications
across the region and summon us to defend universal
values. This complex security, humanitarian, human
rights and political crisis demands a comprehensive and
integrated response.
The United Nations is working with the African
Union, the Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS), the European Union and the World
Bank to address the country’s diverse challenges. But
those efforts will prove fruitless unless we do more to
end the atrocity crimes, the destruction of communities
and the mass displacement of populations.
The Security Council has asked for my
recommendations for a future United Nations
peacekeeping operation. I will soon report to the
Council on the outlines of a mission with a robust

14-24045

20/02/2014

The situation in the Central African Republic

mandate to protect civilians and promote stability.
But the deployment of a peacekeeping operation, if
authorized, will take months; the people of the Central
African Republic do not have months to wait. The
international community must act decisively now to
prevent any further worsening of the situation and
to respond to the dire needs of the country’s people.
In that spirit, today I propose a six-point initiative to
address the greatest risks being faced by the people of
the Central African Republic.
First, and most important, I call for the rapid
reinforcement of the African Union and French troops
now on the ground, with additional deployments of at
least 3,000 more troops and police. That new personnel,
including formed police units, should deploy as soon
as possible, in the coming days and weeks, and have
the necessary mobility, including air mobility, to be
able to operate wherever required. AU Commission
President Zuma has informed me that she will propose
an expansion of MISCA to the AU Peace and Security
Council. I welcome her initiative and urge members of
the Peace and Security Council to endorse it. President
Hollande of France has announced that Operation
Sangaris will be reinforced by some 25 per cent, to a
total of 2,000. In addition, the European Union is poised
to increase its planned deployment from 500 to 1,000,
with an initial operating capacity on the ground in
early March. I am grateful for those commitments. But
more are needed, quickly, and the broader international
community must share the burden.
Secondly, I propose that all international forces
in the Central African Republic be brought under a
coordinated command and that the mission of those
forces be focused on the most urgent priorities, that is,
containing the violence, protecting civilians, preventing
further displacements, creating a secure environment
for the delivery of humanitarian assistance and laying
the groundwork for the handover to a United Nations
peacekeeping force as soon as possible.
Thirdly, I propose that the African troops that join
that force be provided with logistic and financial support,
including rations, water and fuel and reimbursement
for their major non-lethal military equipment. The
estimated cost of that package, consisting of the
bare essentials, would be $38 million for a six-month
bridging period.
Fourthly, I call for rapid, tangible support to the
Government of the Central African Republic to help it

S/PV.7114

establish a minimum capacity to function. That support
should include the financial assistance necessary
to get police back on the streets, judges back in the
courtrooms and prison guards back on the job. I am
pleased to announce that today Denmark confirmed
a contribution of $2 million to that initiative. I intend
to see those resources put to use quickly. Norway has
also confirmed today that it will make a donation to the
effort.
Fifthly, I call for the acceleration of a political and
reconciliation process to prevent a further fraying of the
communal bonds and to lay the groundwork for an end
to the conflict. Community and religious leaders will
have an especially important role to play in promoting
tolerance, peaceful coexistence and non-violence.
A political process will also require the dynamic
engagement of ECCAS, the AU and the international
community. I would like to pay particular tribute to the
tireless efforts of the ECCAS Chief Mediator, President
Denis Sassou Nguesso of the Republic of the Congo.
The United Nations is reinforcing the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African
Republic’s analytical and operational capabilities so
that we can help the national authorities to put the
transition back on track, expand State authority and
establish credible institutions throughout the country.
Accountability and justice measures must be key
elements of any peace and reconciliation process.
More immediately, such measures will contribute to
the prevention of ongoing human rights violations.
I am pleased to announce that the Chairperson of
the commission of inquiry mandated by the Security
Council, along with an advance team, will arrive in the
Central African Republic to take up their important
work.
Sixthly and finally, I appeal for urgent funding for
humanitarian aid, which is currently insufficient to
address the crisis. Only 15 per cent of the resources
needed for this year have been received, despite generous
pledges made at last month’s funding conference
in Brussels.My Emergency Relief Coordinator,
Ms. Valerie Amos, is in the Central African Republic.
She has expressed shock at what she saw in Bossangoa
today, and noted that tensions between communities are
high and that people fear for their lives. She stressed the
need for more troops on the ground to provide security
and protection across the country.

14-240453/8

S/PV.7114

The situation in the Central African Republic

Over the past few days, my senior colleagues and
I have reached out to dozens of Member States to seek
their support for my proposals. I have been encouraged
by the positive response. Some are considering sending
additional troops and police; others have pledged to
provide budget support for the Government. Those
commitments will bring tangible dividends in the
coming days.
The United Nations, for its part, thanks to generous
support from Canada and others, has allocated
$5 million from the MISCA trust fund to provide
essential communications equipment to African troops,
and those items are being delivered in Bangui as I
speak.
The six-point initiative I have just put forward aims
to support and complement the hard work now being
carried out by a range of actors. It is designed to achieve
the most pressing objectives, namely, stabilizing the
security situation and saving lives that would otherwise
be lost to senseless sectarian hatred. The proposals
call for contributions from many quarters. They also
compel us to avoid a piecemeal approach in which some
proposals receive more support than others. To succeed,
the proposals must be embraced and implemented as an
integrated whole.
We know what is happening in the Central African
Republic. We know why it is different from previous
outbreaks of violence. We know why it matters to all of
us and what we must do.
Knowledge is not all we have. Through collective
action, as envisaged by the Charter of the United
Nations, we have the power to stop the killing and
save the Central African Republic from its current
nightmare.
I urge the Council to support my proposal, and I
urge Member States to take the action necessary to
implement it. Let us show the people of the Central
African Republic that the United Nations stands with
them and that the support they so urgently need is on
its way. This is our shared responsibility. The people of
the Central African Republic have asked for our help.
I urge the Council to join me and respond to their call.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Chergui.

4/8

20/02/2014

Mr. Chergui (spoke in French): We are meeting
here to discuss a serious situation that is receiving
increasing international attention. We fervently hope
that this meeting will mark a new and decisive stage in
the international mobilization for the Central African
Republic.
I thank the Security Council for its ongoing followup of this issue. I wish in particular to convey the African
Union’s (AU) gratitude to the President of the Council
for having been kind enough to change the timing of
this meeting so as to allow our delegation to participate.
Let me also reiterate, on behalf of Nkosazana Dlamini
Zuma, Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
the appreciation of the AU to the Secretary-General for
his continued commitment and personal involvement
to alleviate the suffering of the people of the Central
African Republic.
In recent days, the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission have
been in regular contact with respect to what should be
done to help strengthen international action to assist
the Central African Republic. These exchanges also
show their common concern about this tragedy and
their conviction that an effective international response
must necessarily be based on a shared vision of the
actions required, in line with the close and innovative
partnership that the United Nations and the AU are
building in the field of peace and security.
As the Council is aware, the situation in the
Central African Republic has for several years been at
the heart of the priorities of the AU. At the time of the
resumption of hostilities in that country in December
2012, and precisely because we feared that the situation
might lead to generalized violence, with disastrous
consequences for the Central African Republic and its
people, we called for coordinated international action
in support of the efforts of the countries in the region,
under the leadership of Presidents Idriss Deby Itno of
Chad and Denis Sassou Nguesso of the Republic of the
Congo.
I take this opportunity to reiterate our gratitude for
the willingness of the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS), the personal commitment of
the leaders of the region and the sacrifices made in the
quest for peace, security and stability in the Central
African Republic.
Those preventive efforts have not succeeded. We
must draw lessons from this for our future activities

14-24045

20/02/2014

The situation in the Central African Republic

aimed at promoting peace, security and stability on
the continent, as the international community cannot
continue to wait for disastrous situations to develop
before taking the necessary speedy, robust actions.
Today we face a difficult and complex situation
requiring that we be diligent, effective and flexible. Our
actions must be based on a comprehensive assessment
of current efforts and the challenges ahead. They must
deliver tailored responses to the problems we are facing.
On 19 December 2013, the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic (MISCA) took over from the Mission of the
Economic Community of Central African States for the
Consolidation of Peace in the Central African Republic.
The handover took place in an extremely challenging
context marked by the attacks against Bangui in early
December 2013, acts of extreme violence against the
civilian population, forced displacements that affected
both national and foreign communities, as well as
community and religious hatreds and tensions, which
so deeply undermine the future of the country and its
social cohesion.
Given the challenges on the ground, one of the
first measures taken by the AU was reinforcing the
contingents on the ground. We were thus able to
deploy in the month following the transfer of authority,
thanks to the United States, two additional battalions
of 850 personnel each. Just yesterday, in Kinshasa,
a Commission team finalized discussions with the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
with a view to the effective integration of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo contingent in the Mission.
As I speak to the Council, I can confirm that the
Mission has almost reached its authorized level of 6,000
uniformed personnel. Thanks to this reinforcement
and to the support of the French Operation Sangaris,
as well as other measures, especially the division into
sectors of the city of Bangui, the situation in the capital
has improved considerably. The number of security
incidents has been reduced significantly. Obviously,
much remains to be done to ensure a full return to
normalcy.
Unacceptable crimes continue to be committed
against innocent civilians. Acts of vandalism and
looting, explained in part by the social poverty
afflicting Central Africans, especially youth, have not
yet ceased. Many displaced persons, including those
living in subhuman conditions at the airport, have not

S/PV.7114

been able to return to their homes, and fear is a reality
that we cannot deny.
MISCA, with the support of Operation Sangaris,
is working to meet those challenges by establishing
checkpoints and by carrying out patrols round the clock.
The Mission is about to reach its deployment
plan inside the country; a total of 4,000 military
personnel should be positioned in various areas of the
countryside. That operation is under way even as we
speak. That presence, together with that of Sangaris,
has made it possible to avert many atrocities, to reassure
communities and to facilitate humanitarian action.
Once again, we must do a lot more, act more quickly
and be more effective in our action. MISCA is resolved
to meet those challenges.
I wish also to refer to other functions of MISCA.
They include the task of protecting the transitional
leaders, which is essential so that they can, in the present
security context, accomplish their onerous task. They
also include facilitating the delivery of humanitarian
assistance under the escort and protection of convoys,
which travel along the vital corridor connecting the
Central African Republic to Cameroon. I would add
that 500 trucks and other vehicles have benefited
from this protection, which has also contributed to the
resumption of trade flows and the effective collection
by the Central African Republic of customs duties and
related taxes on merchandise and other goods headed
for the Central African Republic, so that it may have the
resources necessary to carry out its functions.
Those efforts have been supported by the
encouraging developments that have taken place in
the political process as a result of the decisions of
the extraordinary summit of ECCAS, held on 9 and
10 January. The election of Ms. Catherine Samba-Panza,
the new interim Head of State, and the subsequent
appointment of a new Prime Minister and the formation
of a Government helped to relaunch the transition.
The main security threat we face relates to the socalled anti-Balaka militias. In response, MISCA, with
the support of Operation Sangaris, is implementing a
series of practical measures to neutralize those militias.
Those efforts, which started a few days ago in Bangui,
have been intensified and expanded to the rest of the
territory of the Central African Republic.
Within the framework of periodic reports to the
Security Council, we will be able to provide more

14-240455/8

S/PV.7114

The situation in the Central African Republic

detailed information about the efforts made and the
difficulties encountered. I wish to mention in that respect
some of the challenges that are hampering МISCA’s
activities, which relate to an insufficiency of logistical
and communication means, despite the considerable
support of international partners whose contributions
I wish once again to commend. They relate also to the
current limited capacities of the Government of the
Central African Republic. The absence of a judicial
system makes it very difficult to restore law and order,
as those arrested by the international forces cannot
be brought to justice. With the support of the United
Nations Development Programme, we have been able
to establish a transitional arrangement that is currently
in operation.
At this meeting, the Secretary-General has
submitted proposals on what he believes should be
undertaken with regard to the current situation in the
Central African Republic. In his letter of 17 February,
which we have requested be transmitted to members
of the Security Council for information and action, as
needed, the President of the Commission identified a
series of measures, which, rapidly implemented, will
allow us to significantly strengthen the effectiveness
of our action. I could not list those measures in detail
in this statement, but allow me quickly to go through
them.
First is the pressing need to strengthen MISCA.
That involves increasing both the troop strength of the
Mission, in particular in terms of police personnel,
and the equipment. As we have said before, African
countries are ready to contribute additional personnel.
Also, for that reason and others, related in particular to
the launching of the European operation, we are not in
favour of deploying any coalition of the willing, which
would only deflect us from the urgent and imperative
task of strengthening MISCA. While awaiting the
deployment of additional troops and in response to the
concerns expressed by the Secretary-General over the
distribution of food aid to the interior of the country,
MISCA is ready to escort the humanitarian convoys
headed to the places concerned.
The second step is to undertake additional measures
to consolidate the gains already made and to speed
up the lasting restoration of security throughout the
Central African Republic. In that regard, I refer to the
payment of civil servant salaries and retiree pensions,
as well as support for the resumption of basic public
services, including re-forming core security forces and

6/8

20/02/2014

restoring the judicial system and prison facilities. In
our view, those are not medium-term problems to be
addressed once security is restored but, instead, they
are urgent issues on which immediate action is required.
Let us not be mistaken: no international force, whatever
its size, will be able to ensure the degree of security
needed without the active involvement of the Central
African side. The financial cost of such measures is
a tiny fraction of what should be mobilized for a new
military operation.
The third measure is consolidating the progress
made in the political process thanks to the decisive
action of ECCAS leaders. It goes without saying that
there will be no lasting security benefit without a viable
political track. The leaders of the region are showing
exceptional willingness and commitment. We must
better support their action, in particular through the
International Contact Group on the Central African
Republic, which, I hope, will be convened soon.
The last step is the rapid and effective
implementation of the relevant provisions of the
resolutions recently adopted by the Security Council.
That involves ensuring the implementation of the
targeted sanctions against individuals and entities that
are undermining the current efforts, and accelerating
the work of the international commission of inquiry
into the violations of human rights and humanitarian
law. Such measures will certainly significantly help to
prevent further atrocities. I congratulate the SecretaryGeneral on his statement to us today. I can ensure that
commission of the full attention and cooperation of
MISCA and the African Union.
At this stage, I would like to underscore that the
approach that we are proposing will make it possible
to better support the African efforts. That is essential
because there will certainly not be lasting solutions to
the challenges to peace and security on the continent
without African ownership. Where there is a strong
African political will, as is undeniably the case of the
Central African Republic, it must be supported and
nurtured. Our partners, whatever their goodwill, could
still not compensate for our shortcomings.
The proposed approach therefore is part of a
comprehensive approach that makes it possible to
combine the respective comparative advantages of the
African Union and the United Nations. In the current
stabilization phase, a peace support operation by the
African Union is the best proposed option. Its success

14-24045

20/02/2014

The situation in the Central African Republic

will open the way for the deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation to support the recovery process
of the Central African Republic in the long term.
We therefore see MISCA as an essential stage for
stronger involvement by the United Nations and, in
truth, of the entire international community. With that
in mind, in order to leave the United Nations a strong
mission to lead the next phase of the peace process, the
Council must support the establishment of a logistical
support model for MISCA, as the Secretary-General
has just proposed, financed by the contributions made
for the recovery. We thank the Secretary-General for
his commitment to work for that goal.
We are at a crucial stage in our efforts to
successfully overcome the challenges in the Central
African Republic. The priority is clear: to protect
the civilian population, to facilitate the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and to establish conditions
for a successful transition. As the Secretary-General
has so rightly said, the challenges that we face require
the involvement of all. They go beyond our individual
capacities. The effort must be collective in order for it
to succeed.
It is also urgent to decide how to best combine the
respective advantages of each of the actors concerned,
while promoting our common objective for Africa’s
greater empowerment in managing the problems
facing the continent. We sincerely believe that the
proposals made by the President of the Commission,
Mrs. Zuma, will allow us to satisfactorily meet the
current challenges.
In a few years, when we look back at the Central
African Republic and the way in which we managed the
current situation, we should be in a position to say that
we responded to the Central African people’s appeal for
help while advancing the international partnership for
peace, security and stability in Africa. Members should
not add to the frustration of Africa, the only continent
not to have a permanent representative on this very
important body of the Security Council, by strengthening
today and forever the necessary prior consultation of
the African Union for the consideration of any issue
concerning Africa. Our three non-permanent members
are already ready to perform that task, if not as a pen
holder at least as the adviser on conflict situations on
the continent.
I could not conclude without expressing our deep
appreciation to all our international partners that

S/PV.7114

support MISCA. The donor conference held in Addis
Ababa on 1 February marked the occasion for a true
expression of solidarity with Central Africans and of
support for MISCA. May this meeting of the Council
strengthen that momentum, thereby bringing us still
closer to achieving the noble common objectives that we
are pursuing together in the Central African Republic.
The President: I thank Mr. Chergui for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Central African Republic.
Mr. Dembassa Worogagoi (Central African
Republic) (spoke in French): Allow me, first of all, to pay
tribute to the international community’s commitment
to the pursuit of lasting solutions to the Central African
crisis. That commitment has shown itself in recent
months through the adoption of resolutions 2121
(2013), 2127 (2013) and 2134 (2014), authorizing the
deployment of the African forces of the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic (MISCA), supported by French and European
troops, with a robust mandate under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations.
The presence of the African forces of MISCA,
supported by the French troops of Operation Sangaris,
helped to prevent the Central African Republic from
descending into complete chaos. I would like to express
the deep gratitude of the Central African people to the
countries that committed troops on the ground, who
paid a heavy price in human lives during the operations
to secure the cities of Bangui and Boassangoa, which
were at the heart of the crisis.
However, even if the worst has been avoided in
Bangui, the capital, the situation remains volatile. The
capital still faces the problem of maintaining public
order, which should be the responsibility of the police
supported by a functional judiciary. That is forcing
much of the population to remain in camps for internally
displaced persons on the outskirts of the airport and in
churches and mosques.
In the rest of the country, where the majority of the
4.5 million Central Africans live, the security challenge
is enormous. Taking advantage of the State’s collapse in
this vast country of 623,000 square kilometres — which
is the size of France and Belgium combined — hordes
of criminals of all kinds are murdering, raping, looting
and committing other serious violations of human
rights. The civilian population is forced to flee into the
bush, where they fall prey to hunger and disease. We

14-240457/8

S/PV.7114

The situation in the Central African Republic

20/02/2014

fear the worst, with the imminent arrival of the rainy
season.

violations of human rights, combating impunity and
restoring the State’s capacities throughout the country.

Beyond the security issues, there is a State to rebuild
in the Central African Republic. The task is huge, as the
administration of the State must be relaunched, civil
order restored and elections prepared for.

Finally, it would lend credibility to the process
of disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation.

In order to help meet those challenges, the Central
African authorities have formally requested from the
Secretary-General, in a letter dated 27 January 2014
and transmitted to the Secretariat on 3 February 2014
(S/2014/83, annex), the rapid deployment of a United
Nations peacekeeping operation. The deployment of a
multidimensional peacekeeping operation in Central
African Republic seems to be the best solution to the
current challenges for three main reasons.
First, it would provide the troops involved with the
means for sufficient mobility, namely, vehicles and air
transportation, to operate in an area with few roads.
Secondly, such a deployment would provide access
to the resources and expertise required to deal with the
situation in the Central African Republic while relying
on United Nations experience in managing complex
crises. In that regard, I am referring to the challenges
in the humanitarian sphere and in terms of monitoring

8/8

The establishment of a peacekeeping operation in
the Central African Republic must be decided upon
as quickly as possible, given the time required for its
effective deployment and the extreme volatility of the
security situation in the Central African Republic.
I would like to conclude by highlighting that there
is no contradiction between deploying a United Nations
peacekeeping operation and the work of the troops of
the African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic (MISCA). I believe they can
only complement each other, as MISCA’s purpose is
to become the core of a peacekeeping operation in the
Central African Republic.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.

14-24045
