A /71/PV.48

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

48th plenary meeting

Monday, 21 November 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Zamora Rivas
(El Salvador), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 115 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(e) Appointment of members of the Independent
Audit Advisory Committee
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/71/593/Add.1)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): In
paragraph 3 of document A/71/593/Add.1, the Fifth
Committee recommends that the General Assembly
reappoint Ms. Maria Gracia Pulido-Tan of the
Philippines as a member of the Independent Audit
Advisory Committee for a three-year term of office
beginning on 1 January 2017.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes
to reappoint Ms. Maria Gracia Pulido-Tan of the
Philippines as a member of the Independent Audit
Advisory Committee for a three-year term of office
beginning on 1 January 2017?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
conclude its consideration of sub-item (e) of agenda
item 115?
It was so decided.

(h) Appointment of members of the Joint
Inspection Unit
Note by the Secretary-General (A/71/596)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): As
indicated in the note by the Secretary-General, as a
result of the resignation of Mr. George Bartsiotas of the
United States of America during its current session, the
General Assembly is required to appoint one member
of the Joint Inspection Unit who will serve for a full
term, beginning on 1 January 2017 and expiring on
31 December 2021.
In accordance with the provisions of article 3,
paragraph 1, of the statute of the Joint Inspection
Unit and after consulting with the regional group
concerned, I have requested that the United States of
America propose a candidate to replace Mr. Bartsiotas.
In accordance with resolution 59/267, of 23 December
2004, the candidate should have experience in at
least one of the 13 following fields: oversight, audit,
inspection, investigation, evaluation, finance, project
evaluation, programme evaluation, human resources
management, management, public administration,
monitoring and/or programme performance, as well as
knowledge of the United Nations system and its role in
international relations.
Document A/71/596 also indicates that, as a result
of the consultations that were held in accordance
with article 3, paragraph 2, of the statute of the Joint
Inspection Unit, in particular consultations with
the President of the Economic and Social Council
and with the Secretary-General in his capacity as

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-39494 (E)

*1639494*

A/71/PV.48

Chair of the United Nations System Chief Executives

Board for Coordination, I am authorized to submit to

the Assembly the candidature of Ms. Eileen Cronin

21/11/2016

Agenda item 126
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
Report of the Secretary-General (A/71/160
and Add.1)
Notes by the Secretary-General (A/71/171
and A/71/207)
Draft resolution (A/71/L.17)

of the United States of America as the candidate for

appointment as a member of the Joint Inspection Unit

for a five-year term beginning on 1 January 2017 and

(a) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union
(b) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(c) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Asian-African Legal Consultative Organization
(d) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States

expiring on 31 December 2021.

May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to

appoint the proposed candidate?

It was so decided.

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May

I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly

to conclude the current stage of its consideration of

Draft resolution (A/71/L.6)
(e) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Latin American and Caribbean Economic System
(f) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of American States
(g) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe
(h) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Caribbean Community
(i) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Economic Cooperation Organization
Draft resolution (A/71/L.14)
(j) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Organization of la Francophonie
(k) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization
(l) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Council of Europe

sub-item (h) of agenda item 115?

It was so decided.
2/33

Draft resolution (A/71/L.15)
(m) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Economic Community of Central
African States
16-39494

21/11/2016

A/71/PV.48

(n) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons

has the honour to submit draft resolution A/71/L.5,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Commonwealth of Independent States”.

(o) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization

Established in 1991, the Commonwealth is made up
of 11 member States and is celebrating its twenty-fifth
anniversary this year. The Commonwealth is aimed
at developing mutually beneficial cooperation among
member States in political, economic, humanitarian,
cultural, environmental and other areas. In line with
resolution 48/237, of 24 March 1994, the Commonwealth
was accorded observer status in the General Assembly.

Draft resolution (A/71/L.16/Rev.1)
(p) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Southern African Development Community
(q) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Pacific Islands Forum
(r) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(s) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Eurasian Economic Community
(t) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(u) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
Draft resolution (A/71/L.11)
(v) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Collective Security Treaty Organization
Draft resolution (A/71/L.7)
(w) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Central European Initiative
Draft resolution (A/71/L.9)
(x) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for Democracy and Economic
Development — GUAM
Draft resolution (A/71/L.12)
(y) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Commonwealth of Independent States
Draft resolution (A/71/L.5)
(z) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the International Organization for Migration
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the representative of Kyrgyzstan to
introduce draft resolution A/71/L.5.
Ms. Moldoisaeva (Kyrgyzstan) (spoke in Russian):
The delegation of the Kyrgyz Republic, as Chair of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) this year,

The central event of the year for the CIS was the
meeting of the Council of Heads of State in September
in Bishkek. It is worth noting the four declarations
adopted at the summit: a statement on the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the CIS, which assesses the activities of
the Commonwealth and considers the need to improve,
develop and enhance the organization; a statement
on the outcome of the special session of the General
Assembly on the world drug problem; a statement on
future joint efforts to combat international terrorism;
and a statement on the seventieth anniversary of the
completion of the Nuremberg trials. Pursuant to the
decision of the CIS Heads of State, those statements
were circulated to the United Nations by the Kyrgyz
chairmanship of the CIS as official documents.
Cooperation between the CIS and the entities of
the United Nations system continues to develop. The
CIS Executive Committee liaises with a number of
the specialized agencies of the United Nations system,
in particular the Economic and Social Commission
for Asia and the Pacific and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. The
executive bodies of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development and the Economic Commission
for Europe, as well as the United Nations Office at
Geneva and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, have established contractual relations with the
CIS. Since July 2013, the CIS Executive Committee
has acted as a contact point for cooperation with the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1540 (2004). That list is far
from complete.
On 28 October, the Russian presidency convened
a debate of the Security Council (see S/PV.7796) on
the issue of cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations, such as the Collective
Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), the Shanghai

16-394943/33

A/71/PV.48

Cooperation Organization (SCO) and the CIS with a
view to supporting international peace and security.
Most of those who spoke at that debate agreed that
the United Nations could not afford to try to cope
with contemporary threats to peace and security on its
own. It is necessary instead to establish a collective
approach that requires the consistent enhancement of
the cooperation capacity of the United Nations, as well
as that of regional and subregional organizations, which
have a clearer understanding of both the overall and the
local political situations on the ground. The CIS, the SCO
and the CSTO were recognized for their contribution
to ensuring peace and security at the international and
regional levels. Speakers noted in particular the success
of operations to combat terrorism, drug trafficking and
illegal migration, and joint initiatives with the United
Nations in Central Asia and Afghanistan.
As Chair of the CIS for 2016, Kyrgyzstan is
grateful to the Secretary-General for his report on
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and other organizations (A/71/160). The report covers
the two-year period from 2014 to 2016 and assesses the
progress of cooperation between the United Nations
and the relevant regional organizations, including the
CIS. The activities and achievements outlined in the
report demonstrate the scale and breadth of United
Nations cooperation with its regional partners in the
maintenance of international peace and security, in
providing humanitarian assistance and in promoting
development and human rights.
In recent years, the solid cooperation between the
United Nations and CIS has focused on addressing
common problems relating to social, economic and
humanitarian issues at various levels. In order to
enhance the practical component of that cooperation
and increase its effectiveness, we need to strengthen the
relevant basis for such cooperation in order to promote
the development and deepening of relations between
the CIS and the agencies of the United Nations system.
We therefore submit for consideration the draft
resolution entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Commonwealth of Independent States”
(A/71/L.5). The draft resolution invites the specialized
agencies and other organizations, programmes and
funds of the United Nations system, as well as the
international financial institutions, to develop their
cooperation with the CIS. Kyrgyzstan is convinced
that developing the cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
4/33

21/11/2016

including the CIS, will make it possible to completely
and effectively address a wide range of areas, exchange
best practices in various fields and bring them into
practical application.
In conclusion, on behalf of the Kyrgyz delegation, I
would like to express our thanks to the States involved
for their participation in the work on the text of the
draft resolution submitted today.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the representative of Belarus to
introduce draft resolution A/71/L.7.
Mr. Dapkiunas (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
Belarus, as the current Chair of the Collective Security
Treaty Organization (CSTO), has the honour to submit
to the General Assembly draft resolution A/71/L.7, on
cooperation between the United Nations and the CSTO.
The sponsors are Armenia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
the Russian Federation, Tajikistan and Belarus.
The CSTO is an important partner of the international
community in promoting peace, security and progress
on the path towards sustainable development. Today,
the CSTO is a multifaceted organization with a wide
range of capabilities to address contemporary threats
and challenges. Cooperation between the CSTO and
the United Nations is based on a number of documents,
including the joint declaration of 2010 on cooperation
between the secretariats of the two Organizations and
the 2012 memorandum of understanding between the
CSTO secretariat and the United Nations Department
of Peacekeeping Operations.
The draft resolution welcomes the contribution of
the CSTO in areas of international cooperation such
as combating terrorism and organized transnational
crime, the fight against drug and weapons trafficking,
illegal migration, human trafficking and dealing with
the consequences of natural and man-made disasters. It
also highlights the development of CSTO peacekeeping
capacities. Collective actions taken in those areas are
in line with the principles of the United Nations and
contribute to the achievement of its goals.
The CSTO is ready to initiate mechanisms for
cooperation on all those issues. I should like to cite
one example of such cooperation in practice. Last
year, in order to address the drug-distribution channels
emanating from Afghanistan, the CSTO conducted
operations that involved 25 non-CSTO States Members
of the United Nations. Such collaboration confirms the
16-39494

21/11/2016

practical contribution of the CSTO to strengthening
regional and international security.
The draft resolution calls for both organizations
to continue exploring potential ways to increase
cooperation in the field of peacekeeping. We look
forward, during the Belarus chairmanship of the CSTO,
to the qualitative development of such cooperation,
including on the basis of new ideas, for harnessing the
peacekeeping potential of CSTO member countries
together with United Nations peacekeeping operations.
We are grateful to the delegations of the countries
that participated in the consultations on the draft
resolution and look forward to future constructive
cooperation in the building of partnerships between
the United Nations and regional organizations,
including the CSTO.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to introduce draft resolution A/71/L.9.
Mr. Vukašinović (Bosnia and Herzegovina): As
the country currently holding the chairmanship of
the Central European Initiative (CEI), Bosnia and
Herzegovina has the honour to introduce, under agenda
item 126, the draft resolution entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and Central European
Initiative”, contained in document A/71/L.9.
The draft resolution submitted today reaffirms
our strong commitment to regional and subregional
cooperation as the vital precondition for successful
international cooperation. Addressing many challenges
in today’s ever-changing world requires constantly
renewing partnerships among regional organizations
and between regional organizations and the
United Nations.
The Central European Initiative — the largest and
oldest forum for regional cooperation in Central, East
and South-East Europe — has always considered crossborder, regional and interregional cooperation to be
the most valuable instruments for ensuring regional
stability and security and for exploring the potential
for trade and economic partnerships. The CEI focuses
particularly on the areas of common interest between its
member States such as agriculture, transport, energy,
assistance to small and medium-sized enterprises,
municipal infrastructure and services, banking,
insurance, institution-building and capacity-building.

A/71/PV.48

By focusing on sustainable development and
interconnectivity at the regional level, the Initiative is
contributing to the realization of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. That was confirmed during
the June 2016 annual meeting of ministers for foreign
affairs of the CEI member States held in Banja Luka
and organized by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. At that meeting, the Ministers
reiterated their full commitment to good-neighbourly
relations, the rule of law, a free market economy and
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
which are preconditions for stability, security
and development.
The continuing commitment of the European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) in
supporting the economies of CEI countries and their
regional integration is living proof of the importance
of the partnership between the CEI and the EBRD. The
CEI member States express their great appreciation for
the contributions of the Central European Initiative
Trust Fund, financed entirely by Italy, as well as the
Know-how Exchange Programme, financed by Austria
and Italy.
The CEI is placing new emphasis in its cooperation
with the most important European institutions and
organizations, above all the European Union, as
well as the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development, the Council of Europe and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
I would also like to underline that the CEI continues
to strengthen its cooperation with other regional
initiatives, such as the Adriatic and Ionian Initiative,
the Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization,
the Council of the Baltic Sea States, the South-East
European Cooperation Process and its operational
arm, the Regional Cooperation Council. The focus
is on identifying the most efficient and productive
action, avoiding duplication and properly managing
resources in order to reach our shared goals. In that
sense, the Initiative is confirming its role as a bridge
between macroregions.
Allow me to express our sincere thanks to the
CEI secretariat and the CEI member States for their
assistance and cooperation in preparing the draft
resolution. Finally, I would like to call on the States
members of the General Assembly to adopt the draft
resolution on cooperation between the United Nations
and the Central European Initiative without a vote.

16-394945/33

A/71/PV.48

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the representative of Kazakhstan to
introduce draft resolution A/71/L.11.
Mr. Kamaldinov (Kazakhstan): As we commence
this important meeting, I welcome the recent release of
the Secretary-General’s report on cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and other organizations
(A/71/160), which provides insights into the latest
trends in the collaborative efforts of the United Nations
to fulfil the mandates of its Charter.
Today, on behalf of the States members of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) — the
People’s Republic of China, the Republic of Kazakhstan,
the Republic of Kyrgyzstan, the Russian Federation,
the Republic of Tajikistan and the Republic of
Uzbekistan — I have the honour to submit for the
Assembly’s consideration draft resolution A/71/L.11,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization”. The
draft resolution is based on resolution 64/183, of
18 December 2009; resolution 65/124, of 13 December
2010; resolution 67/15, of 19 November 2012; and
resolution 69/11, of 11 November 2014.
This year, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
celebrates its fifteenth anniversary. In the decade and
a half of its existence, the organization has enjoyed
12 years of observer status in the General Assembly.
During that time, the SCO has attained a commendable
profile in its standing as a reputed international and
regional organization. The SCO is an influential
and effective factor in strengthening mutual trust
and ensuring security and stability in contemporary
international relations. Its activities are also aimed at
sustainable development, particularly in the spheres of
economy, education, energy, environmental protection,
information and communication technologies and other
areas. The organization contributes to effective counterterrorism cooperation, including through the regional
anti-terrorist structure, and promotes the fight against
drug trafficking and other forms of transnational crime.
SCO member States support the swift attainment
of peace and stability in Afghanistan — an important
factor in maintaining and strengthening security in
the region. The draft resolution before us is the result
of informal consultations convened by the Republic
of Kazakhstan in its capacity as a current chair of
the organization.
6/33

21/11/2016

Finally, I would like to thank all of the delegations
that participated in the deliberations with sincere
commitment and engagement. Their constructive
contribution to strengthening the existing ties between
the United Nations and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization has been significant.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the representative of Azerbaijan to
introduce draft resolution A/71/L.12.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): In our capacity as 2016
chair of the Organization for Democracy and Economic
Development — GUAM, the delegation of Azerbaijan
has the honour to introduce, on behalf of the sponsors
and under agenda item 126 (x), draft resolution
A/71/L.12, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Organization for Democracy and
Economic Development — GUAM”.
GUAM is an international regional organization
consisting of four member States, namely, Azerbaijan,
Georgia, the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine. This
multilateral format of cooperation was established on
10 October 1997, when the Presidents of the four States
signed a joint communiqué. Since then GUAM has been
transformed into a full-fledged international regional
organization, with a well-institutionalized structure
and permanent secretariat, as well as with a distinct
vocation of promoting democracy and the economic
development of its member States.
GUAM has established and continues to develop
mutually beneficial cooperation and dialogue with
other international organizations and partner countries.
In resolution 58/85, of 8 January 2004, the General
Assembly granted observer status to GUAM. On
17 December 2012, at its sixty-seventh session, and
on 2 April 2015, at its sixty-ninth session, the General
Assembly adopted by consensus resolutions 67/109
and 69/271, respectively, each entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization for
Democracy and Economic Development — GUAM”.
Over the period since the adoption of the latest
resolution, further efforts have been undertaken to
continue cooperation with the relevant United Nations
agencies, as well as to explore further opportunities
for dialogue and interaction across a broad agenda
of mutual interest and concerns. This year’s draft
resolution, which is based on the previous resolutions
of the General Assembly on the topic, acknowledges
the efforts of the Organization for Democracy and
16-39494

21/11/2016

Economic Development — GUAM aimed at developing
partnership relations with the United Nations and its
Member States. It also takes note of the activity of
GUAM targeted on promoting regional cooperation in
various areas.
The draft resolution emphasizes the importance of
strengthening dialogue, cooperation and coordination
between the United Nations system and GUAM,
and urges the specialized agencies, components,
organizations, programmes and funds of the United
Nations to cooperate and develop direct contacts
with GUAM for the joint implementation of projects
aimed at the attainment of common objectives. We
are confident that the adoption of the draft resolution
will further contribute to developing cooperation
between the United Nations and GUAM, promoting the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations, and implementing the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
The draft resolution has been discussed in the
course of informal consultations in an open and
transparent manner. I would like to thank delegations
for their constructive approach and support for the
draft resolution as well as those delegations that have
sponsored it. I look forward to the adoption of the draft
resolution by consensus.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the representative of Algeria to
introduce draft resolution A/71/L.6.
Mr. Bessedik (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): It is
a pleasure, on behalf of the League of Arab States,
to introduce draft resolution A/71/L.6, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States”, sponsored by Algeria, Bahrain,
the Comoros, Djibouti, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, Somalia, the Sudan, Tunisia, the United
Arab Emirates and Yemen, as well as El Salvador,
Poland, Spain and Sweden.
The draft resolution is based on the important
collaborative principle reflected in Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations, whereby the United
Nations is encouraged to cooperate with regional and
international organizations in areas of common interest,
in particular the maintenance of international peace and
security. Furthermore, the draft resolution welcomes
the amendment to the cooperation agreement between
the League of Arab States and the United Nations, dated

A/71/PV.48

September 2016, and appeals for cooperation between
the United Nations and the League of Arab States. In that
context, a meeting was held in 2015 in Cairo in which
the League of Arab States focused on the repercussions
of undervaluing human rights. A thirteenth meeting,
held in Geneva in May 2016 between the United Nations
and the League of Arab States, considered in detail the
challenges to international peace and security and the
current regional and international difficulties that need
to be overcome, particularly in the recent period, and
require enhanced cooperation.
Because that cooperation needs to be broadened, the
draft resolution calls for enhanced cooperation between
the United Nations and the League of Arab States,
which is most important. Indeed, the draft resolution
calls for broader cooperation at all levels between the
United Nations, its specialized agencies and the League
of Arab States in order to achieve our joint goals. For
that reason, I call on the General Assembly to adopt the
draft resolution without a vote.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, who will introduce draft resolution
A/71/L.14.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour, on behalf of the members of the Economic
Cooperation Organization (ECO), to introduce draft
resolution A/71/L.14, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Economic Cooperation
Organization”, dated 14 November 2016, which is based
on resolution 69/111, on the same topic.
Regional cooperation is now a prevailing paradigm
and a phenomenon of interest in international
relations. Cooperation among neighbouring and
regional countries within the context of institutional
frameworks such as the ECO has proved its value for
the economic development and prosperity of peoples.
The ECO, which was established in 1964, has become
a dynamic and outward-looking regional organization
and has been successful in forging a range of economic
and non-economic cooperation arrangements.
As one of the largest groups in the world, the
Economic Cooperation Organization spans a territory of
8 million square kilometres, with more than 450 million
inhabitants. The ECO regions cover 10 countries in
West and East Asia, as well as Central Asia and the
Caucasus, connecting Europe to China and Russia
to the Persian Gulf. ECO is now functioning on two

16-394947/33

A/71/PV.48

tracks, namely, as a regional cooperation framework to
complement the individual development efforts of its
member States and as a platform to translate the global
agenda into actions at the regional level.
In accomplishing those two functions, the ECO
has been expanding partnerships and cooperation
arrangements with potential partners. The United
Nations system has always been the prime target of
ECO outreach policy to help to implement the global
agenda in our part of the world. That is why we are of
the view that the United Nations-ECO relationship, as
consolidated by the draft resolution before us, not only
helps the ECO to utilize the capacities, resources and
knowledge of United Nations agencies in the interests of
ECO member States, but also offers the United Nations
system the regional capacities, networks and platforms
developed by the ECO during the past three decades.
The ECO will soon begin to implement its
new vision for the next 10 years, which has been
drafted in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. The new vision, guided by regional needs
and requirements, as well by the global development
agenda, will focus on cooperation in areas such as
economic growth and productivity, trade expansion,
enhanced connectivity, energy efficiency, and human
development and social welfare. It is encouraging to
note that the draft resolution will be in place during
the first two years of the new ECO vision, enabling the
ECO and its member States to benefit from an enhanced
relationship with United Nations funds, programmes
and specialized agencies while implementing our
visions, plans and programmes.
The draft document has been prepared after
continuous engagement with and receiving input from
ECO member States. The document is based on the
lessons learned from the implementation of ECO Vision
2015, adopted in 2005 in Astana. The draft Vision 2025
aims to address the emerging needs and requirements
for economic development of the ECO, its member
States and the region as a whole, endeavouring to focus
on core matters such as trade, transport, connectivity
and energy as called for by the needs and aspirations
of member States. A comprehensive framework for
implementation and periodic review has been included
so as to ensure its optimal implementation.
In conclusion, I wish to take this opportunity
to express, on behalf of ECO member States, our
sincere thanks to all States Members of the United
8/33

21/11/2016

Nations that participated actively and constructively
in the consultations on the draft resolution and showed
flexibility throughout the process, without which no
agreement would have been possible. In view of that, I
would like to request that all Member States lend their
continued support to this year’s draft resolution and
adopt it by consensus, as in previous years.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the representative of Estonia to
introduce draft resolution A/71/L.15.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): In accordance with the
mandate given by the Committee of Ministers of the
Council of Europe to the chairmanship of the Council of
Europe, I have the honour to introduce draft resolution
A/71/L.15, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Council of Europe”.
Estonia assumed the chairmanship of the Council
of Europe in May and concludes it tomorrow, so it is
symbolic to present this draft resolution to the General
Assembly at the end of our term. The draft resolution is
sponsored by the 52 countries listed in the document,
which to our knowledge is the highest number for this
draft resolution on cooperation.
Cooperation between the Council of Europe and
the United Nations started as far back as 1951 with
the agreement between the secretariats of the two
organizations. In 1989, the General Assembly granted
the Council of Europe an invitation to participate as an
observer in its sessions. Today, the Council of Europe
works closely with a large number of United Nations
bodies. Since 2000, and every second year since 2004,
a resolution on cooperation between the United Nations
and the Council of Europe has been adopted. Those
resolutions have demonstrated that the collaboration
between the United Nations and the Council of Europe
is well established and has evolved and deepened
over time.
The draft resolution under consideration today
includes important updates with regard to the work
undertaken by the Council of Europe and the United
Nations in the areas of common interest since the
adoption of resolution 69/83, in 2014. The draft
resolution encourages further cooperation in the
fields of the protection and promotion of human
rights, fundamental freedoms and the rule of law;
the fight against discrimination and intolerance; the
advancement of gender equality and the fight against
violence against women; the prevention of torture,
16-39494

21/11/2016

inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment; the
protection of the rights of children; the fight against
terrorism, transnational organized crime, cybercrime,
corruption and trafficking in human beings; as well as
in the fields of Internet governance, the information
society and fostering intercultural dialogue. The draft
resolution also recognizes the effective implementation
of the outcomes of relevant international conferences
and legal instruments.
Let me assure members that the Council of Europe
remains committed to the promotion of its three main
pillars: human rights, democracy and the rule of law.
It stands ready for dialogue and partnership aimed at
advancing its core values and achieving greater synergy
with the United Nations.
To conclude, I would like to thank all members
of the Council of Europe and the observer States for
their support during the Estonian chairmanship,
as well as all delegations here in New York for their
constructive engagement and the flexibility shown
during consultations on the draft resolution. We hope
that the draft resolution will be adopted by consensus.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the representative of Serbia to introduce
draft resolution A/71/L.16/Rev.1.
Mr. Milanović (Serbia): On behalf of the States
members of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation
Organization (BSEC), I have the honour to introduce
draft resolution A/71/L.16/Rev.1, submitted under
sub-item (o) of agenda item 126 and entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the Black
Sea Economic Cooperation Organization”. I wish to
thank all BSEC member States for agreeing on a joint
text of the draft resolution, which will further contribute
to enhancing cooperation with the United Nations and
its specialized agencies, funds and programmes, as
well as to strengthening the relevance and visibility of
the activities undertaken for the benefit of the countries
of the wider Black Sea area.
I also wish to thank the sponsors of the draft
resolution for their valuable support for the noble
aims and objectives of the oldest, most representative
and institutionally mature organization promoting
multilateral economic cooperation in the region. BSEC
will mark its twenty-fifth anniversary in 2017.
The draft resolution — which I sincerely hope will
be adopted without a vote again this year — is aimed at

A/71/PV.48

building on a relationship that is fully complementary
to the purposes of the United Nations in achieving
international cooperation in solving problems of an
economic, social or humanitarian nature, and is in
accordance with the promotion of the purposes and
principles of the United Nations in terms of regional
cooperation, as set out in the relevant Articles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
It also seeks to promote the interest of the Black
Sea Economic Cooperation Organization in the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, bearing in mind the interconnectivity and
mutually beneficial and supporting role that regional
and subregional frameworks can play in facilitating the
effective translation of sustainable development policies
into concrete action at the national level. Furthermore,
it will also help to promote fruitful cooperation in
developing practical and goal-oriented projects with
the aim of implementing sustainable development
strategies based on a balanced and harmonious
relationship linking social needs, economic activities
and environmental protection.
In implementing regional projects for the
sustainable development of the region, it will, inter alia,
strive to focus on renewable energy, energy efficiency,
green technologies, developing small and mediumsized enterprises, improving regional and municipal
infrastructure, and increasing the export potential
of the region’s States. It will also support numerous
ongoing projects with a variety of partners from the
United Nations family in areas as diverse and broad as
strengthening transport infrastructure, the preservation
of the environment, enhancing criminal justice systems
and fostering common values through the promotion
of understanding and reconciliation among cultures
globally and regionally.
As Chairman-in-Office of BSEC, Serbia has
endeavoured to contribute to the improvement of
economic cooperation among the countries of the region
in areas of mutual interest, building on the activities
and projects of the previous chairmanships. Its main
priorities have been the development of economic
cooperation, particularly in the areas of trade and
tourism; cooperation in the area of transport, on which
a ministerial meeting was recently held in Belgrade; the
strengthening of cooperation with other international
and regional organizations and initiatives, striving to
achieve synergies wherever possible; and reform of the
organization, which is aimed at making it more project-

16-394949/33

A/71/PV.48

oriented, efficient and functional. It has also sought
to foster cooperation in various other areas, such
as energy, tourism, education, science, technology,
culture, environmental protection, customs, health care,
pharmaceuticals and combating crime, among others,
in the context of the interrelatedness of those issues
and their importance for the economic development of
BSEC member States. Serbia has remained open to new
ideas and suggestions by other BSEC member States,
observers and sectorial-dialogue partners on modalities
to further enhance cooperation.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the hope
that the draft resolution will garner the support of the
members of this body, as has been the case in previous
years, and that, once adopted, it will contribute to
the strengthening of cooperation between the United
Nations and BSEC.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the representative of Rwanda to
introduce draft resolution A/71/L.17.
Ms. Feza (Rwanda): I am grateful for the
opportunity to introduce draft resolution A/71/L.17,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the International Criminal Police Organization”.
Rwanda has been a member of INTERPOL since
1974, and Australia, as a co-facilitator, has been a
member of INTERPOL since 1948. Both countries
have worked closely with INTERPOL over the years,
with Rwanda having successfully hosted INTERPOL’s
General Assembly in Kigali this year. Given our close
cooperation with INTERPOL and our strong belief in
INTERPOL’s activities, goals and objectives, we are
pleased to introduce the draft resolution to the General
Assembly, which we believe to be the next rational
step in the history of cooperation between the two
organizations. The INTERPOL Secretary General,
Mr. Jürgen Stock, who is present here today, will be
addressing representatives in due course. However,
I would like to take a few minutes of members’
time to provide them with some of the background
information on the relationship of long date between
the two organizations.
The INTERPOL Liaison Office to the United
Nations in New York was established in October
2004 to raise awareness of INTERPOL’s services
within the United Nations community and encourage
the use of its available tools and networks, as well as
identify areas of common interest and opportunities
10/33

21/11/2016

for increased cooperation and coordination. Indeed,
since its inception, the Office has taken the lead role
in further enhancing INTERPOL’s cooperation with
United Nations entities directly involved in activities
related to law enforcement. INTERPOL carries out
all its activities in accordance with its own rules and
regulations in full respect of member States’ sovereignty
and consistent with each member State’s domestic laws
and regulations.
The goal of the draft resolution on cooperation
between the United Nations and INTERPOL is to
formally acknowledge the cooperation between the
United Nations and INTERPOL in assisting States
Members of the United Nations that are also INTERPOL
member countries to prevent and respond to crime and
improve their law-enforcement capabilities upon their
request and within the framework of their respective
mandates. It also fully recognizes and encourages
the strengthening of cooperation in areas of common
interest — as mentioned in the third preambular
paragraph — namely,
“tackling terrorism, including preventing foreign
terrorist fighter travel and combating transnational
crime, in particular transnational organized crime,
including smuggling of migrants, trafficking in
persons, drug trafficking, intentional and unlawful
destruction of cultural heritage and trafficking in
cultural property, piracy, illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons, illicit trafficking in nuclear,
biological, chemical and radiological materials,
cybercrime, corruption and money-laundering and
crimes that affect the environment, such as illicit
trafficking in wildlife”.
To date, the General Assembly has adopted specific
resolutions involving 23 observer organizations, such
as the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, the Council of Europe, the Economic
Cooperation Organization, the African Union and the
League of Arab States, among others.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity
to thank members of the core group that have been
working closely with Australian and Rwanda in
drawing up the draft resolution. I also extend my thanks
to all 1smun that actively participated in the series of
negotiation meetings and to those that sponsored the
draft resolution. Their valuable contributions, guidance
and support on the first draft resolution on cooperation
16-39494

21/11/2016

between the United Nations and INTERPOL have been
greatly appreciated.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP), the member States of which are
Angola, Cabo Verde, Guinea-Bissau, Equatorial
Guinea, Mozambique, Portugal, Sao Tome and Principe,
Timor-Leste and my own country, Brazil.
The Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
held its eleventh summit meeting on October 31 and
1 November in Brasilia. On that occasion, CPLP Heads
of State and Government welcomed the selection
of António Guterres as the next Secretary-General
in the most transparent process in the history of
the Organization. We also highlighted that the
Secretary-General-designate is the first citizen of
a Portuguese-speaking country to occupy such a
distinguished position.
We were honoured that Secretary-General-designate
Guterres accepted the invitation of President Michel
Temer of Brazil to attend the eleventh CPLP summit
meeting in Brasilia. We concur with SecretaryGeneral-designate Gutteres that the CPLP has a
positive role to play globally in that it is committed
to the same general principles as those that underlie
the functioning of the United Nations. Indeed, as
enshrined in its founding document, the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries shares a commitment
to the primacy of peace, democracy, the rule of law,
human rights and social justice.
The year 2016 marks the twentieth anniversary of
the CPLP, which we celebrated on 17 July. Over the past
20 years, the Community has managed to consolidate
itself as a platform for dialogue and political and
diplomatic cooperation among Portuguese-speaking
countries and between the CPLP and the rest of the
world. Looking ahead, CPLP members believe that
mobility is an essential tool for progressively building a
sense of CPLP citizenship.
The implementation of the Agenda 2030 for
Sustainable Development — the central theme of
this session of the General Assembly — will require
concerted cooperation among all relevant stakeholders.
That is an area where the CPLP and the United Nations
can be strategic partners. The CPLP is ready to promote
political dialogue and the exchange of experiences
and cooperation to support the full implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in all

A/71/PV.48

Portuguese-speaking countries. The very theme of the
eleventh CPLP summit meeting, in Brasilia, “CPLP
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”,
reflects that priority.
Allow me to emphasize the important role of
regional and subregional groups in peacebuilding
efforts. As Member States are aware, Angola, a member
of our Community, co-facilitated, with Australia,
resolution 70/262, entitled “Review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture”, and Security
Council resolution 2282 (2016), on the same subject,
which acknowledge the importance of enhanced
partnerships and cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations.
Brazil currently holds the chairmanships of both
the CPLP and the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission. We intend to increase
cooperation between those two bodies, in line with
the mandate established in resolution 70/262 and the
principles of the CPLP. The CPLP has long been engaged
in peacebuilding efforts. The Community is part of the
forum on Guinea-Bissau that includes representatives
of the United Nations, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
European Union and works to promote a constructive
dialogue between the Bissau-Guinean authorities
and national and international stakeholders. In that
regard, we commend the valuable work carried out by
the former Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Miguel Trovoada.
CPLP members are confident that the current Special
Representative, Mr. Modibó Touré, will effectively
discharge his responsibilities.
As highlighted by the Peacebuilding Commission,
the swift implementation of the six-point agreement,
brokered by a high-level ECOWAS mission to GuineaBissau on 10 September, is urgently needed. The
relevant regional and subregional actors should remain
united in supporting the diplomatic efforts undertaken
by ECOWAS and in supporting Guinea-Bissau in its
endeavours to achieve stabilization. The Executive
Secretary of the CPLP will continue to follow up on
the political situation in Guinea-Bissau and promote
consultation and interaction with that country’s
authorities and international and regional partners.
As mentioned in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (A/71/160), the CPLP and the International
Labour Organization (ILO) have cooperated closely

16-3949411/33

A/71/PV.48

with regard to the ILO International Programme on
the Elimination of Child Labour. Following the CPLP
declaration of 2016 as the Year against Child Labour,
a number of workshops were held with a view to
undertaking joint activities aimed at preventing and
eliminating that practice.
The Secretary-General also recalls in his report
CPLP cooperation with the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime on the implementation of the
CPLP Lisbon Action Plan for Establishing Common
Measures to Prevent and Combat Trafficking in
Human Beings, and its partnership with the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations for the
implementation of a technical cooperation programme
in support of the CPLP Regional Strategy for Food
Security and Nutrition.
We welcome the adoption, on 6 July 2015, of
resolution 69/311, on cooperation between the United
Nations and the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries. This year’s draft resolution stresses the
importance of continuing to strengthen cooperation
between the United Nations, its agencies, entities,
programmes and other international, regional and
subregional organizations.
Around 280 million people speak Portuguese
in the world today, which makes it the fifth most
spoken language in the world, the third most spoken
in the western hemisphere and the most spoken in the
southern hemisphere. Our goal is to continue promoting
the Portuguese language, including within the United
Nations, as a means to promote cultural diversity
among the Portuguese-speaking peoples and as a means
of projecting their cultural values internationally in an
open and universal fashion. In that context, we wish
to highlight the work of the Portuguese Unit of United
Nations Radio in broadcasting issues of concern to the
United Nations and Portuguese-speaking people.
In my concluding remarks, I wish to reiterate that
the CPLP is ready to engage with the United Nations
system, its programmes, funds and agencies in order to
strengthen mutual collaboration.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Van Den Akker (European Union): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
and its member States. The candidate countries the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
12/33

21/11/2016

Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidate
Bosnia and Herzegovina; and the European Free
Trade Association country Liechtenstein, member of
the European Economic Area as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.
We welcome the coming adoption today of draft
resolution A/71/L.15, entitled “Cooperation between the
United Nations and the Council of Europe”, which aims
to enhance cooperation between the two institutions.
Since the signing in 1951 of the agreement between the
Council of Europe and the Secretariat of the United
Nations, the cooperative arrangements between the
respective secretariats in 1971 and resolution 44/6, of
1989, the Council of Europe has continued to contribute
to the protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms. Moreover, the Council of Europe has striven
to improve the synergy between its work and that of the
United Nations.
The draft resolution before us contains an
operational paragraph on questions relating to
human rights. In the informal consultations, several
delegations called for an end to the use of the death
penalty. Unfortunately, we note with regret that that
call has once again not been taken on board and that
the paragraph on that issue was not retained. The new
inclusion of a call for the prevention of torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
is but a small improvement. The Council of Europe,
together with the European Union, its member States
and many other European and non-European countries,
have been engaged in the campaign on that subject for
a long time.
On the occasion of the World Day against the Death
Penalty on 10 October, the Council of Europe and the
European Union made a joint declaration appealing for
a global moratorium on the use of the death penalty
and urging States Members of the United Nations to
support the draft resolution on a moratorium on the
use of the death penalty when it is put to a General
Assembly vote in December. We hope to build on the
momentum created by the call for a global moratorium
by all participating members of the sixth World
Congress against the Death Penalty in June of this year.
We therefore strongly urge that, in future, that issue be
included in the draft resolution on cooperation between
the United Nations and the Council of Europe.
16-39494

21/11/2016

Furthermore, we would like to draw representatives’
attention to the platform to promote the protection
of journalism and the safety of journalists. That new
instrument was set up by the Council of Europe in 2015
and has been well accepted as a useful tool by persons
working for various media in Europe.
Mr. Suriboonya (Thailand): Partnership is
indispensable for addressing the myriad global
challenges. The cooperation between the United
Nations and other international organizations is at
the heart of such international partnerships. Various
organizations contribute to that collective effort
through their respective strengths and comparative
advantages. Thailand recognizes their valuable
contributions in addressing such challenges. This
year, my delegation would like to focus our statement
specifically on the cooperation between the United
Nations and INTERPOL.
First, Thailand is proud to have been one of the core
group members and sponsors of the draft resolution
on the cooperation between the United Nations and
INTERPOL (A/71/L.17). Undoubtedly, we have all
gathered here for the same reason, namely, to eradicate
all kinds of threats from our society, no matter which
region those threats find themselves in, and lead the
people of the world towards ultimate and sustainable
peace. The critical threats that are now undermining our
well-being, destroying our economies, jeopardizing our
democracy, human rights and human dignity, impairing
the potential of our generation as well as hindering our
efforts to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals,
comprise terrorism, transnational crime and, last but
not least, cybercrime.
Everyone here knows very well how hard the United
Nations has continuously fought the aforementioned
threats. That effort has significantly intensified
since the beginning of the twenty-first century, or,
more specifically, since we adopted the Convention
on Transnational Organized Crime in 2000. Despite
the hard work and efforts of the United Nations and
its machinery, especially the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, those threats — and I believe
all would agree — have not only increased but have
also rapidly expanded to every corner of the world.
Even more so, they have become more complex and
sophisticated, and that has made it very difficult for
law-enforcement agencies to conduct investigations
and bring the perpetrators to justice.

A/71/PV.48

Physical connectivity has led to a new paradigm
in travelling in which people can go around the globe
by multiple means of transportation. Wireless and
cyberconnectivity have also enhanced the capabilities
of transnational crime and its networks. Such
technological advances can also enable an individual,
even without an organized criminal network, to wreak
havoc around the world.
In such a situation, we need intelligence-led
policing and law enforcement. That means that it is
no longer enough for intelligence to come only from
security agencies. Police and law-enforcement agencies
and the public sector alone cannot fight effectively
against crime and terrorism without the participation
of the private sector and, most importantly, that of
people in the community. In short, we need a publicprivate-people partnership to fight crime in this
century, often called the century of transnational crime
and terrorism.
In order to engage the people in the fight against
crime, we need to raise awareness. The United Nations,
through the convening of international conferences and
the adoption of the appropriate resolutions, has the power
to raise public awareness. However, the challenge lies
in how to make the work of the United Nations trickle
down to the people and be relevant for the frontline
officers in the performance of their daily duties. We
should therefore bring the United Nations closer to the
people. It is time for us to tell the frontline officers that
the United Nations is relevant for them. It is also time
that the discussions and exchanges at meetings like this
one be made known not only to leaders and politicians,
but also directly and effectively to frontline officers as
well as to the people in the community.
INTERPOL’s communication system, also known
as the I-24/7, which has already expanded to frontline
officers in some countries and is being expanded
in many others, will be the key to raising awareness
among the people and connecting the United Nations to
frontline officers. With databases that frontline officers
can immediately access, international best practices
and guidelines, as well as valuable information, can be
made readily available to them.
Please allow me to cite an example in my country.
More than 40 million foreigners came to Thailand
between June 2015 and August 2016. Their information,
and their passport numbers in particular, were checked
against INTERPOL databases, in particular the Stolen

16-3949413/33

A/71/PV.48

and Lost Travelling Documents database. Nearly
1,300 foreigners were found to be using lost and stolen
passports. We provided that information to our frontline
officers around the country, which resulted in 55
fugitives with INTERPOL red notices being arrested,
the highest number of arrests in Asia.
Thailand believes that a public-private-people­
partnership will lead to effective and smart
intelligence-led policing, which means better and
more accurate anti-criminal and counter-terrorism
operations. Strengthening the cooperation between
the United Nations and INTERPOL will no doubt
contribute to that objective, as well as to sustainable
peace. Once again, it is time that we connect the United
Nations with the frontline officers and our people. It is
time for the people to see and understand the impact
of the United Nations work on countering transnational
crime and terrorism. It is time for people to realize that
they are part of the solution and to engage themselves
in the fight against transnational threats.
INTERPOL is a key partner for Member States
and the United Nations in making that happen. This
year’s adoption of the first General Assembly draft
resolution on cooperation between the United Nations
and INTERPOL is a remarkable step in that direction.
Mr. Rao (India): I wish to refer to the report of the
Secretary-General (A/71/160) on agenda item 126, on
cooperation between the United Nations and the AsianAfrican Legal Consultative Organization (AALCO),
and thank him for it.
The Asian-African Legal Consultative Organization
was established in 1956. Its inception was a tangible
outcome of the historic Afro-Asian Conference in
Bandung, Indonesia, in 1955. AALCO is now composed
of 47 member States from Africa and Asia, with several
States from other parts of the world participating in
its activities as observer States. AALCO is the only
interregional organization combining the interests of
two major continents for focused and serious discussions
on matters of international law. It was one of the first
organizations to which the General Assembly granted
permanent observer status, in 1980. Pursuant to its
main objective, which is to promote and disseminate
international law, AALCO closely follows the work
of the Sixth Committee — the Legal Committee
of the General Assembly — the International Law
Commission and the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law (UNCITRAL).
14/33

21/11/2016

As to the contribution of AALCO to the discipline
of international law, a noteworthy development
is the concept of the exclusive economic zone, an
important element in the field of the law of the sea.
Similarly, the organization’s member States use the
Bangkok Principles on the status and treatment of
refugees, adopted by AALCO, for guidance on those
issues. AALCO’s work, which is of great value to its
member States, includes studies and deliberations,
inter alia, on the principles related to the extradition
of fugitive offenders, the model text for bilateral
arrangements on mutual assistance in civil matters and
the model agreement for the promotion and protection
of investments.
India is proud to have been the host country for the
organization since it was established, having provided
land and a building for its headquarters in New Delhi.
I am pleased to inform the Assembly that the current
AALCO Secretary-General is from Tanzania. Regional
rotation in leadership is a healthy practice, as it draws
on the values and enrichment provided by diverse
cultures and perspectives. In May, in New Delhi,
AALCO held its fifty-fifth session, at which such topics
as counter-terrorism, customary international law,
sustainable development, the law of the sea, climate
change and cybercrime were considered. The results of
its deliberations have been published. AALCO has also
established several regional arbitration centres in Asia
and Africa. These centres apply the arbitration rules
promulgated by UNCITRAL, and these arbitrations
have been well received.
At United Nations Headquarters, the Permanent
Observer of AALCO has regularly organized seminars,
workshops and informal discussions on international
law topics of common interest. These events are open
to all missions, delegations and the Secretariat, with
inclusive and open discussion as the objective. Judges,
jurists, scholars and practitioners visiting New York are
invited to take an active part in these activities.
Ms. Ng Boon Yian (Singapore): At the outset, I
would like to extend our appreciation to the President of
the General Assembly for convening today’s important
debate. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report on cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and other organizations
(A/71/160).
I would like to begin with an obvious proposition.
The United Nations cannot work alone. Regional and
16-39494

21/11/2016

other organizations must be engaged to complement
and support the work of the United Nations and uphold
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. Many global challenges that we face today,
from climate change to terrorism, are complex and of
a transnational nature. A close partnership between the
United Nations and regional and other organizations is
necessary to address such challenges effectively.
Regional organizations are able to work in concert
with the United Nations to develop customized
strategies to implement our collective goals, such as
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change, and to do so in
ways that take into account their unique circumstances
and needs. International organizations, on the other
hand, with their functional expertise can be tapped to
enhance our capabilities to achieve our collective goals.
In that regard, Singapore welcomes the adoption of the
various draft resolutions on cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and other organizations
today. The significant number of resolutions to be
adopted this year attests to the broad network of
partnerships that the United Nations has forged. This
network should be deepened and broadened.
Of note, Singapore strongly supports the adoption
of a new draft resolution entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the International Criminal Police
Organization” (A/71/L.17), which we have the honour
of co-sponsoring. The adoption of the draft resolution
is timely and relevant. The threat of transnational
crime has increased, as criminal networks exploit
technological advances and connectivity to further
illicit activities that have grown in sophistication. For
example, cybercrime is becoming more prevalent and
pervasive. We have also witnessed an increasingly
strong nexus between organized crime and terrorism,
as terrorists resort to criminal activities to finance,
plan and carry out their nefarious activities. Tackling
these fast-evolving threats therefore requires much
stronger cooperation among Member States and with
key partners, such as INTERPOL.
With its long history, INTERPOL has played a
key role as the world’s largest international police
organization. Singapore has been a proud member of
INTERPOL since 1968 and is privileged to be able to
play our part to support international law enforcement by
hosting the INTERPOL Global Complex for Innovation.
The Global Complex in Singapore aims to equip police
all around the world with the tools and capability to

A/71/PV.48

confront increasingly sophisticated crime. The Global
Complex focuses on digital security, including how
to strengthen cybersecurity and counter cybercrime,
providing capacity-building and operational and
investigative support. Situated in the heart of Asia,
the Global Complex has broadened partnerships
between INTERPOL and relevant stakeholders in
Asia. Singapore looks forward to working closely with
INTERPOL and the United Nations to explore ways to
enhance cooperation through the Global Complex.
As a member of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN), Singapore also looks forward
to the adoption of a draft resolution on cooperation
between the United Nations and ASEAN later this
year. It is encouraging that cooperation between the
United Nations and ASEAN has continued to grow
and strengthen over the years. The new five-year Plan
of Action (2016-2020) that we recently adopted to
implement the Joint Declaration on Comprehensive
Partnership between ASEAN and the United Nations
will be a useful road map for our collaboration in the
years ahead. An area that both sides should focus on is
how to enhance complementarities between the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the ASEAN
Community Vision 2025. As ASEAN continues to press
ahead with its regional integration efforts, we are eager
to deepen our partnership with the United Nations to
further the goals of the Charter of the United Nations
and create a better and safer world for our citizens.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome presence here today
of the Secretary General of INTERPOL, Mr. Jürgen
Stock, on this important occasion.
My country, Jordan, is honoured to be among the
sponsors of draft resolution A/71/L.17, on cooperation
between the United Nations and INTERPOL. We
truly believe in the importance and effective role of
INTERPOL in achieving cooperation among lawenforcement agencies in different countries to make our
world safer and more secure. We would like to thank
all the Member States that participated in informal
discussions on the draft resolution last month. Their
suggestions and other contributions are reflected in the
draft resolution we have before us today.
The draft resolution confirms INTERPOL’s
neutral, non-politicized role, which was designed to
respect the sovereignty and national legislation of States
in combating organized crime, transnational crime,

16-3949415/33

A/71/PV.48

human trafficking, drug trafficking, the destruction of
cultural heritage, trafficking in cultural property, the
illicit trade in small arms and biological, chemical and
radiological materials, money laundering and crimes
that affect the environment and wildlife. The draft
resolution also points out the important cooperation
between INTERPOL and United Nations agencies in
combating terrorism by assisting States Members of
the United Nations in implementing the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy whenever they
request such assistance, including information-sharing
on foreign terrorist fighters and border control.
In that regard, I would like to point out that
Jordan, through its participation in efforts to enhance
cooperation in combating trafficking in nuclear,
biological, chemical and radiological materials, has
underscored IN many forums how important it is to
exchange information to combat threats in that regard.
We have also emphasized the importance of enhancing
cooperation between INTERPOL, the International
Atomic Energy Agency and law-enforcement agencies.
We encourage countries to benefit from INTERPOL
databases, especially the I-24/7 global police
communications system, which allows authorized
law-enforcement agencies to share sensitive and
important information with their counterparts in
Member States around the world. Last week, under the
I-24/7 programme, the Public Security Directorate in
Jordan and INTERPOL installed new border-control
equipment, using funding from the European Union.
The project will be launched in the next few days.
States can also benefit from the Criminal Information
System, which supports the efforts of national agencies
in their investigations and operations. We encourage
countries that have not yet joined INTERPOL to do so
as soon as possible in order to benefit from the services
and information provided by INTERPOL to all of its
members free of charge.
At a time when the world is suffering from the
scourge of terrorism, THE swift and effective exchange
of information among countries and their security
agencies remains one of the most important means to
overcome this phenomenon and reduce its impact and
that of accompanying organized and transnational
crimes. As States Members of the United Nations,
we must therefore establish or enhance platforms
that allow us to fully carry out this role. Enhancing
complementarity among States Members of the
United Nations and INTERPOL, as an international
16/33

21/11/2016

organization, has proved to be highly effective in
linking law enforcement agencies around the world. As
countries seeking to create a better and more secure
world, we now see that cooperation is our duty.
We would like to stress the importance of
achieving complementarity and cooperation between
such specialized agencies as INTERPOL and the
United Nations in order to combat organized crime and
terrorist organizations, for such entities are impeding
sustainable development and social development in
many countries, especially those in the Middle East. The
most important pillar to stress in the draft resolution is
complementarity, the fulfilment of which will contribute
to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Mr. Sánchez Gil (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by expressing Spain’s support for the
adoption of draft resolution A/71/L.17, on cooperation
between the United Nations and INTERPOL, as well
as to thank Australia and Rwanda for their work
as facilitators.
We have before us a draft resolution that will
help to raise the level of cooperation between both
organizations, even though it has been at a high level
since it was formalized almost two decades ago. My
country, Spain, is aware of the importance of the draft
resolution for exploiting the great potential of the
coordinated work of both organizations to adequately
address the fight against terrorism and organized
crime. For that reason, it is also crucial to efficiently
use the capabilities that INTERPOL makes available to
its member countries to address security threats.
I would like to conclude by noting Spain’s
sponsorship of the draft resolution, of whose importance
and value we are, above all, convinced.
Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the pleasure to speak on agenda item 126, in particular
on the cooperation between the United Nations and
INTERPOL.
In that regard, Argentina expresses its satisfaction
at the imminent adoption of the first draft resolution
(A/71/L.17) of the General Assembly on that topic. As a
member of the Group of Friends of INTERPOL, we had
the honour of participating actively in the negotiations
on it. We thank the facilitators, Australia and Rwanda,
for the work they have carried out.
16-39494

21/11/2016

The text to be adopted today acknowledges and calls
for reinforced cooperation on a wide range of issues,
such as the fight against terrorism and international
organized crime, including, inter alia, the smuggling
of migrants, human trafficking, drug trafficking, the
destruction of cultural heritage, trafficking in cultural
property, piracy, illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, illicit trafficking in nuclear, biological,
chemical and radiological material, cybercrime,
corruption, money laundering and crimes that affect
the environment.
We underscore the fact that the draft resolution
is fully in line with resolution 70/291, on the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy review,
co-facilitated by my country and Iceland, whose
paragraph 47 notes with appreciation the activities
undertaken by INTERPOL to help Member States
that require assistance put the Strategy into practice.
Moreover, we believe that it is a balanced text and the
fruit of arduous negotiations, which afforded Member
States an opportunity to present and reconcile their
positions. The draft resolution is also a good basis on
which we can continue to build on over the next two
years, particularly following the submission of what
will be the first report of the Secretary-General on the
subject, during the seventy-first session.
Argentina expresses its intention to continue
cooperating with INTERPOL, both through the United
Nations and at the bilateral level, using the tools
that INTERPOL makes available to Member States.
Such cooperation includes the full support of the
regional office in Buenos Aires, which was recently
reflected in the INTERPOL General Assembly with
the appointment of the Head of the Argentine Federal
Police, General Commissioner Néstor Roncaglia, as one
of the two representatives of the American continent of
its Executive Committee for the period 2016-2017, as
well as with the appointment of Ambassador Leandro
Despouy, a human rights law expert, as a member of
the Commission for the Control of INTERPOL’s Files.

A/71/PV.48

INTERPOL in combating transnational crime and
other security challenges.
In today’s armed conflicts, it is becoming
increasingly difficult to distinguish one category of
actors from another. Terrorist groups, for example, rely
on criminal methods to appropriate financial resources.
Some of those involved in organized crime are also
involved in conflicts of a political nature. Moreover, new
issues, such as the intentional and illegal destruction
of cultural heritage, cybercrime and the involvement
of foreign terrorist fighters, have an overall impact on
security and stability at both the national and global
levels. Such threats concern all States.
Strengthening cooperation and coordination between
the United Nations and INTERPOL will serve the
goals and purposes of both organizations. That will
be achieved by taking advantage of existing synergies
whenever the opportunity arises. Using the resulting
resources more effectively will contribute to long-term
security improvements.
As a founding member of INTERPOL, Switzerland
has always played an active role in the development of
the organization’s activities. Since it became a Member
of the United Nations, our country has committed
to fostering closer cooperation between the two
organizations in order to better confront the challenges
I mentioned. In that regard, we consider the adoption of
this draft resolution as a decisive step in strengthening
that cooperation. Furthermore, we also attach great
importance to the report that will be submitted by
the Secretary-General to the General Assembly at its
seventy-third session, which should allow us to assess
the progress made.
Lastly, I would like to take this opportunity to thank
the representatives of Australia and Rwanda for their
excellent work in facilitating the preparation of this draft
resolution. Our thanks also go to the representatives of
the Office of the Special Representative of INTERPOL
to the United Nations for the valuable technical advice
they provided throughout the negotiations.

In the light of those considerations, my delegation
hopes that the General Assembly will adopt draft
resolution A/71/L.17 by consensus.

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): In
accordance with resolution 44/6, of 17 October 1989, I
now call on the observer of the Council of Europe.

Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland welcomes the imminent adoption of
draft resolution A/71/L.17, which will lead to a
closer cooperation between the United Nations and

Mr. Jagland (Council of Europe): This year, for
the tenth time, the General Assembly will adopt a draft
resolution (A/71/L.15) on the cooperation between
the United Nations and the Council of Europe. The

16-3949417/33

A/71/PV.48

first-ever such resolution, resolution 55/3, adopted in
October 2000, contained 11 paragraphs; this year’s
draft resolution has nearly 30. There have also been
qualitative developments, as we cooperate on many
more issues today.
The United Nations is a major partner of the Council
of Europe and an ideal platform for global outreach.
We work closely with a large number of United Nations
bodies. The universality of our values constitutes the
basis of our cooperation.
The relationships between our organizations are
focused on, but not limited to, human rights in a broad
sense. Emphasis is placed on cooperation with the
Human Rights Council, in particular in the framework
of the Universal Periodic Review, to which the Council
of Europe contributes regularly and actively with
respect to its member States. We see broad synergy
between the development of the jurisprudence of
the European Court of Human Rights and the quasijurisprudence of the United Nations treaty bodies,
as well as the guidance emanating from special
procedures mandate-holders and the Universal Periodic
Review. Despite slight differences, the overall direction
of the two organizations’ vectors is the same and
includes addressing new challenges arising from new
technologies, as in, for example, the area of information
technology. It also includes challenges that are emerging
owing to changes in our societies, for example, from
the terrorist threat and the need to respect human rights
while tackling terrorism, and a shared reflection on the
increasing sensitivity of the human rights community
for the rights of various groups at risk, such as the Roma,
persons with physical and intellectual disabilities or
migrants in an irregular situation.
After those general considerations, let me address
the particular issue of the death penalty. The Council
of Europe takes great pride in having been the driving
force in making the European continent a deathpenalty-free zone for more than 800 million people.
Two treaties have been central in that regard, namely,
Protocol No. 6 to the European Convention on Human
Rights, which prohibits the death penalty in times of
peace, and Protocol No. 13, which prohibits it in all
circumstances. In the last 19 years, no death sentence
has been carried out on the territories of our 47 member
States. Let me remind the Assembly that Belarus, the
only European State that carries out capital punishment,
is not a member of the Council of Europe.
18/33

21/11/2016

In 2010, the European Court of Human Rights
qualified the death penalty as inhuman and degrading
treatment, regardless of the circumstances under
which it is imposed or executed. We are proud of these
developments. However, three member States have still
to meet their accession commitments and ratify the
instruments I mentioned.
At the global level, we are pleased to note that
today 140 countries around the world have abolished
the death penalty either legislatively or in practice.
It is a gradual but still committed shift towards the
elimination of capital punishment. On the other hand,
there has been a spike in executions, albeit in a limited
number of countries. There has also been a resumption
of executions in several other countries and an increase
in executions for drug offences, including of minors.
That is why the Council of Europe will remain
attentive and proactive, and will do so in two general
directions. The first is with regard to our own member
States, and the second is at the global level. We think that
the legal framework adopted by the Council of Europe,
as interpreted by the case law of the European Court of
Human Rights, makes the abolition of the death penalty
legally irreversible. However, it is very important to see
how citizens will adopt and come to share the values
on the abolition of the death penalty. Therefore, we
should invest more in long-term education, especially
of children and young people, and present the case for
abolition as an integral part of the broader political
and social objective of a just, humane and democratic
society. The issue is one of fundamental human rights.
As to the global dimension, in September 2016,
the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
decided to emphasize its contribution to the biennial
draft resolution of the General Assembly on a global
moratorium on the use of the death penalty. We are
also continuing to work with the European Union in
that regard. I believe that there is scope to deepen
and expand this cooperation through concerted policy
action that support efforts for a global moratorium and
through actions that target particularly unacceptable
forms of capital punishment.
Finally, I thank the delegation of Estonia and
the other sponsors of draft resolution A/71/PV.15 for
promoting it.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Pursuant
to resolution 51/1, of 5 October 1996, I now give the
floor to the Secretary General of INTERPOL.
16-39494

21/11/2016

Mr. Stock (International Criminal Police
Organization): In January 1946, the United Nations,
then known as the United Nations Organization, held
its first General Assembly in London. Six months later,
INTERPOL, then known as the International Criminal
Police Commission, held its fifteenth General Assembly
in Brussels. After a difficult period for the world, the
meeting was called to restore the Commission, which
had not held any meetings since 1938. Records show
that even then INTERPOL’s member countries had
reflected on what its relations would be with the United
Nations. In the 70 years since then the global threat
landscape has evolved in many ways. The complexities
in tackling transnational crime are very grave. The
trends in criminal flows indicate ever-growing
challenges over the horizon. In this period, enhancing
cross-border law enforcement cooperation has become
critical, as has the need for Governmental leadership
worldwide to support such cooperation.
Serving as an independent, apolitical entity since
1923, INTERPOL connects law enforcement around
the globe in working together towards a safer world.
With neutrality enshrined in its Constitution, our
organization enables cooperation among police forces
of countries that do not even have diplomatic relations.
INTERPOL has well-developed policing capabilities
to assist its global membership, based strictly on its
neutral mandate and objectives. The organization
provides a unique, trusted and secure platform to enable
the exchange of police information across borders. This
continues to be at the core of INTERPOL’s mandate. In
fact, at the last INTERPOL General Assembly session,
held only two weeks ago, member countries voted
for new, additional measures to make INTERPOL’s
information-sharing system more robust.
We also provide capacity-building, analytical
expertise and 24/7 support to policing and law
enforcement, which includes the coordination of
cross-border operational efforts. Established in
every single member country, INTERPOL’s national
and central bureaus serve to facilitate international
police cooperation within an established institutional
framework. INTERPOL has three global programmes
focusing on countering terrorism, organized and
emerging crimes, and cybercrime. In these spheres of
criminal activities, cooperation between the United
Nations and INTERPOL is key to achieving our
common goals.

A/71/PV.48

Finally, as an independent and neutral entity serving
law enforcement, INTERPOL must and will remain
completely apolitical. However, given the existing
complex threat landscape, efforts at international
police cooperation require more support from the
political leadership. In the fight against twenty-first
century transnational crime, more emphasis should
be placed on the responsibility Governments can take
to facilitate the work of law enforcement globally
because, looking ahead, continued cooperation on
police and security matters is increasingly desirable
for bringing about global peace and stability. I recently
expressed this view to the outgoing Secretary-General,
under whose tenure our cooperation has deepened and
grown stronger. INTERPOL thanks Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his consistent support. We also look
forward to nurturing this relationship further under the
Secretary-General-designate.
Here, today, the introduction of draft resolution
A/71/L.17, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the International Criminal Police
Organization”, marks an important step forward in the
journey of our two organizations. With it, we move
closer to supporting INTERPOL’s vision of a safer
world for our member countries and for the States
Members of the United Nations.
In conclusion, I want to recognize the key role
that the Permanent Missions of Australia and Rwanda
played in facilitating the draft resolution. I would
also like to extend INTERPOL’s gratitude to the draft
resolution’s sponsors, in particular the Permanent
Missions of Argentina, Brazil, Jamaica, Jordan,
Thailand and Switzerland, which greatly assisted in
this important process.
In the end, it is in support of the efforts of lawenforcement agencies in 190 member countries that
we stand here today to foster synergies for a safer
world. On their behalf, let me assure the Assembly that
international police cooperation must positively look
forward to the ongoing cooperation of INTERPOL with
all relevant agencies in the United Nations system. With
that hope and purpose in mind, INTERPOL expresses
its gratitude to the General Assembly for giving us this
opportunity today.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): In
accordance with resolution 54/5, of 8 October 1999, I
now give the floor to the observer of the Organization
of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation.

16-3949419/33

A/71/PV.48

Mr. Christides (Organization of the Black Sea
Economic Cooperation): As the representative
of the Permanent International Secretariat of the
Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation.
(BSEC), I am honoured and privileged to address the
General Assembly for the first time in my 40-year
diplomatic career.
The BSEC organization is the oldest and most
institutionally mature international entity promoting
economic cooperation, in the broadest sense of the
term, among its 12 member States and in the wider
Black Sea region. Next year, we will celebrate our
twenty-fifth anniversary, which will culminate in a
summit conference to be held in Istanbul on 30 June.
We have come a long way since 1992. The
organization’s multifaceted activities have decisively
contributed to enhancing cooperation and better
understanding in a geostrategic region of the greatest
importance. It is a region that even today faces
welcome challenges, but also problems that sometimes
cast their shadow on BSEC efforts. Yet the added value
our organization provides is that it acts as a functioning
confidence-building mechanism and is an open window
for dialogue and understanding.
At the same time, BSEC remains an open
organization, seeking cooperation and synergies with
other international bodies and with individual States.
Over the years, we have come to highly appreciate
our cooperation with the United Nations and its
specialized agencies, funds and programmes in areas
of common interest.
Draft resolution A/71/L.16/Rev.1, which has been
introduced for adoption today, testifies to the increased
interaction between our organizations and provides
useful guidelines for our future joint endeavours. Today,
one of the BSEC priorities is to increase its efficiency
and effectiveness, enabling it to be more results- and
project-oriented for the benefit of the peoples of our
region. In increasing its project-development and
implementation capacity, BSEC can benefit even more
from deepening its interaction with the United Nations
system through concrete and focused collaborations.
Allow me therefore from this rostrum to invite the
specialized agencies, funds and programmes of the
United Nations system to strengthen their cooperation
with the BSEC family of organizations and create new
synergies based on existing cooperation agreements
and memorandums. The BSEC structure of related
20/33

21/11/2016

bodies has the knowledge and experience to help
United Nations agencies to effectively implement their
policies and programmes in this crucial region of our
small world.
Before I conclude, I would like to express our sincere
gratitude to the Republic of Serbia for its excellent
guidance and solid support for the activities of the
organization in its capacity as the Chairman-in-Office
of BSEC during the second half of 2016 and for
preparing the draft resolution, which we hope the
Assembly will adopt by consensus. I would also like
to express our appreciation to all BSEC member States
and to the other States Members of the United Nations
that have sponsored the draft resolution.
Allow me to take this opportunity to congratulate
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his strong
leadership of the United Nations in these most turbulent
times in world history and for being the friendly and
human face of the United Nations in promoting its work
around the world. We wish him health, happiness and
continued success in his future endeavours.
On behalf of BSEC, I would also like to congratulate
Mr. António Guterres on his election to the highly
prestigious and most challenging diplomatic duty of
leading the United Nations. I have no doubt that, with
his immense experience as the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Guterres will continue
to carry the torch soon to be handed to him by SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and that he will appeal to the
conscience of the international community in, inter alia,
trying to bring to an end the worst humanitarian crisis
since the Second World War, namely, the refugee crisis.
The BSEC organization will continue to assume its
responsibilities in contributing to peace, security and
stability in our part of the world through the effective
promotion of economic cooperation among our member
States and beyond.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): In
accordance with resolution 59/48, of 2 December
2004, I give the floor to the observer of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization.
Mr. Alimov (Shanghai Cooperation Organization)
(spoke in Russian): At the outset, I would like to express
my gratitude to all participants in today’s General
Assembly meeting for their support for draft resolution
A/71/L.11, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization”.
16-39494

21/11/2016

We consider this draft resolution to be part of the
comprehensive support of the international community
for our joint efforts to maintain peace and security and
provide the conditions for sustainable development.
This year, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(SCO) marked its fifteenth anniversary. Since its
founding, the organization has believed that the United
Nations has been, and will continue to be, a leading
universal international structure for maintaining global
security and a major platform for solving inter-State and
international issues, as it stands for strengthening its
central coordinating role in international affairs. In that
regard, we attach particular attention to furthering the
progressive development of the relationship between
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the United
Nations and its specialized agencies.
Since 2004, cooperation between the United
Nations and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization has
gradually developed to the point where it has become
a good example of effective cooperation between
universal, global and regional organizations. The draft
resolution opens new vistas for a broad spectrum of
cooperation, and it will help to fully implement the
multifaceted potential of the SCO in its interaction with
United Nations agencies.
Unfortunately, we have to acknowledge that the
contemporary world is not becoming more predictable
or safe. The challenges and threats are increasing
in number, while their essence is becoming more
complicated. The draft resolution calls for joining
together in cooperation to make efforts in a broad range
of areas. The key ones are mentioned in the programme
documents of the two organizations, including the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the SCO
Development Strategy until 2025, which are aimed at
solving similar tasks and promoting the well-being
of humankind.
The draft resolution will become a sound foundation
for broad interaction between the United Nations and
the SCO in all directions. Consolidating and developing
effective connections between the United Nations and
regional organizations not only facilitates development
of the regional structures, but to a great extent
strengthens the United Nations itself. This fully applies
to the cooperation between the United Nations and the
SCO. This topic was discussed during the Security
Council thematic debate on cooperation of the United
Nations with regional and subregional organizations,

A/71/PV.48

held on 28 October 2016, at the initiative of the Russian
Federation (see S/PV.7796).
We are convinced that the increasing synergies
of the multifaceted cooperation between the two
organizations will help to solve the most urgent
contemporary problems, including maintaining
global peace and security and ensuring sustainable
development. It is important to continue the United
Nations efforts to strengthen and broadening such
partnerships, including by elaborating well-directed
approaches to cooperation while fully taking into
account the needs, local specifics, mandates and
capacities of regional organizations.
The SCO is open to all forms of mutually
beneficial cooperation with the United Nations and is
ready to continue its close partnership in doing joint,
fruitful work.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): In
accordance with resolution 477 (V), of 1 November
1950, I now give the floor to the observer of the League
of Arab States.
Mr. Enani (League of Arab States) (spoke in
Arabic): First of all, allow me to congratulate the
President on his election to the presidency of the General
Assembly at its seventy-first session. We are certain
that, thanks to his experience, we will be successful
in our shared endeavours. The League of Arab States
wishes to express its support for the President as he
strives to serve the Organization.
I also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
his unstinting efforts to serve the Organization over the
past 10 years. I also wish to congratulate Mr. António
Guterres, the new Secretary-General-designate. We
wish him every success in his work, which will be full
of challenges when he takes up his mandate next year. I
also thank the Secretary General of INTERPOL.
The close cooperation between the League of
Arab States and the United Nations began in 1950,
when the General Assembly requested the United
Nations Secretary-General to extend an invitation to
the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States
to attend the fifth session of the General Assembly as
an observer. That invitation was extended pursuant
to resolution 477 (V), of 1 November 1950. Since
then cooperation between the two organizations
has increased.

16-3949421/33

A/71/PV.48

In 1981, a new era of cooperation was ushered in with
the adoption of resolution 36/24, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the League of Arab
States”. When the League of Arab States asked the
United Nations Secretary-General to take the steps
needed to bolster cooperation at all levels between the
two organizations, the 1981 resolution provided the basis
for evaluation. The assessment was conducted to extend
cooperation on a vast range of issues. Since that time,
cooperation has been multifaceted in nature in order
to respond to needs as they emerge, fulfil the vision of
the League of Arab States and meet the political and
economic challenges facing the Arab world.
In September 2016, at the margins of the general
debate of the General Assembly at its seventy-first
session, Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit, Secretary-General
of the League of Arab States, and the United Nations
Secretary-General signed a protocol amending the text
of the cooperation agreement. Cooperation between our
organizations will now change and touch upon such areas
as conflict resolution, conflict prevention, sustainable
development, crime prevention, peacebuilding, the
protection of human rights, and human development.
It will also cover issues relating to refugees, displaced
persons and human rights.
With a view to this increased cooperation between
the League of Arab States and the United Nations,
in October 2014, the second sectoral cooperation
conference between the two organizations, on the
ramifications of a lack of understanding of human
rights concepts, was held at the headquarters of the
League of Arab States, in Cairo. Furthermore, in May
2016, in Geneva, the sixteenth cooperation meeting
between the two organizations was held in order to
enhance cooperation between the two organizations
so as to develop an overarching vision that would
include the review of developments in the Arab world
and take into account the views of experts. During the
conference, we also reviewed the socioeconomic and
political concerns of the region. We adopted a series of
programmes to be implemented between 2016 and 2018
in the areas addressed during the meeting.
Our two organizations are strengthening their
partnership in a number of areas. We have built capacity
in elections and human rights as part of a project
that was launched together with the United Nations
Development Programme. Other initiatives include the
setting up of databases and a project among Arab States
to include Arab young people in debates on social
22/33

21/11/2016

issues. To the latter end, we have held dialogues in
various forums in order not to isolate people — young
people in particular — and to tap into their ideas and
find alternatives approaches to dealing with climate
change and other issues, including identity, the role of
young people and their participation in resolving these
issues. We have enjoyed fruitful cooperation with the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, as well as with the various specialized agencies
of the United Nations, with a view to implementing
the Sustainable Development Goals and properly
invest in young people. We must protect young people
during armed conflicts, ensure the non-proliferation of
weapons and strengthen human rights. Other activities
in that connection were also debated.
Given our commitment to properly respecting the
1945 Charter of the League of Arab States, and in the
light of the importance that we attach to the United
Nations, its various agencies and what those do to
protect refugees, we must leave no stone unturned in
finding a fair solution to the refugee crisis. We are
indeed doing everything we can in that connection. We
also reaffirm the importance of the appeal launched
by the Ministerial Council of the League of Arab
States, and we urge the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) and its donor countries to respond to
that appeal. Vast sums of money need to be collected
to support those refugees. In November, a high-level
meeting on a common strategy was convened to benefit
Palestinian children at the headquarters of the League
of Arab States, which brought together representatives
of UNRWA who work with Palestinian children.
Frustration reigns in the Middle East. That climate
serves to demonstrate the vast number of challenges
we face. There is currently a great deal of turbulence
in our region. The political climate is difficult and the
international community has not been able to respond to
our appeals to combat terrorism and violent extremism.
In order to continue the efforts undertaken by the League
of Arab States to meet all of the challenges we face
in the Arab world — terrorism in Yemen, Syria, Iraq
and Libya — and to implement and uphold the vision of
the League of Arab States, namely, finding a peaceful
solution to all Arab conflicts, the Secretary General of
the League of Arab States appointed a Special Envoy on
the issue of Libya in order to take stock of developments
in Libya, together with the African Union. Ending the
16-39494

21/11/2016

crisis in Libya is the ultimate aim, as well as tackling
the scourge of terrorism in the country.
The League of Arab States has now faced the
growing threat of terrorism for more than five years.
Indeed, the use of social networks to indoctrinate
young people has seen a six-fold increase. Extremists’
obscurantist ideologies and hate speech are disseminated
through social networks in order to sow the seeds of
an ideology that in no way fits hand in glove with
peace-loving religions and indeed has nothing at all to
do with any religion.
During its meetings with the Security Council, the
League of Arab States has therefore underscored the
importance of implementing the measures necessary to
stymie that hate speech, so as to remedy the problems
of terrorism and the indoctrination of foreign fighters
through social networks. Terrorist organizations and
their affiliates cannot sow the seeds of those extremist
ideologies using social networks and must not do so;
they must be stopped. They must also be stopped from
using the media to pursue similar aims, as the Internet
and the media are also used for those activities The
use of any medium to disseminate hate speech must
be outlawed.
What I have laid out here gives the General
Assembly an overview of our activities to further
cooperation between the League of Arab States and
the United Nations. There are programmes under way
in various political, cultural and legal spheres. To
conclude, I wish to thank all Member States that have
supported draft resolution A/71/L.6. I also wish to thank
the representative of Algeria for introducing it. I call
upon the General Assembly to adopt it by consensus.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): In
accordance with resolution 35/2, of 13 October 1980,
I now give the floor to the Observer for the AsianAfrican Legal Consultative Organization.
Mr. Lee (Asian-African Legal Consultative
Organization): I would like to refer to the SecretaryGeneral’s report (A/71/160) submitted under agenda
item 126, in particular as it pertains to the cooperation
between the United Nations and the Asian-African
Legal Consultative Organization (AALCO).
The Asian-African Legal Consultative Organization
includes 47 member States, as well as several observer
States from other regions of the world. It was one of
the first interregional organizations specialized in

A/71/PV.48

international law to be granted observer status by the
General Assembly. That step by the Assembly was in
part in recognition of its contribution to the concepts
of the exclusive economic zone, archipelago States
and the continental shelf, which took place during the
negotiations of the third United Nations Conference on
the Law of the Sea in the 1970s.
AALCO now has a new Secretary-General,
Professor Kennedy Gastorn of Tanzania, which follows
on from the organization’s healthy tradition of rotating
its management leadership. One of the main purposes
of AALCO is to promote and disseminate public
international law. That is why AALCO works very
closely with principal legal bodies, such as the Sixth
Committee, the International Law Commission and the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
(UNCITRAL). Much of the subject matter considered
by those core legal bodies is also considered and
studied by AALCO. Such topics include, for example,
the law of the sea, counter-terrorism, sustainable
development, climate change and cybercrime. Results
of the deliberations are published and are available on
the organization’s website. In that context, AALCO
would like to thank in particular the Secretary-General
and his Office and the Office of Legal Affairs for their
support and cooperation.
AALCO also has several regional arbitration
centres and uses the arbitration rules promulgated
by UNCITRAL. The results of the arbitration are
well received and form a firm basis for the conduct
of trade in the relevant regions. At United Nations
Headquarters, the Permanent Observer organizes
seminars, workshops and informal consultations on
topics of international law of common interest on a
regular basis with zero budget. Those events are open to
all missions, delegations and the Secretariat; inclusive
and open discussions are the objective. Judges, jurists,
scholars and practitioners visiting New York are invited
to actively take part in those activities. AALCO serves
as a forum for intellectual stimulation and the free
exchange of views.
The General Assembly has initiated many
significant activities, including the setting up of a
new management mechanism for marine diversity and
genetic resources. As it has done before, AALCO is
ready to assist in building a functional, competitive
and sustainable legal regime for managing such
resources in the international ocean area beyond
national jurisdiction.

16-3949423/33

A/71/PV.48

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker in the debate on agenda item 126
and its sub-items (a) to (z). We will now consider draft
resolutions A/71/L.5, A/71/L.6, A/71/L.7, A/71/L.9,
A/71/L.11, A/71/L.12, A/71/L.14, A/71/L.15, A/71/L.16/
Rev.1 and A/71/L.17.
Before giving the floor to speakers for explanations
of vote or position before we take decisions on the draft
resolutions, may I remind delegations that explanations
are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Kanchaveli (Georgia): I take the floor to
express my delegation’s position on draft resolution
A/71/L.5, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Commonwealth of Independent
States” (CIS), and draft resolution A/71/L.7, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization” (CSTO).
In the text of the draft resolution on the CSTO, the
General Assembly
“[n]otes with appreciation the significant
practical contribution and efforts of the Collective
Security Treaty Organization to strengthen its
peacekeeping capacities and the system of regional
security and stability” (A/71/L.7, para. 2);
while the draft resolution on the CIS suggests that
“strengthening cooperation between the United
Nations and the Commonwealth of Independent
States will advance the purposes and principles
of the United Nations” (A/71/L.5, seventh
preambular paragraph).
In that regard, Georgia wishes to recall the
ongoing illegal occupation of the Georgian regions
of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali Region/South Ossetia by
the Russian Federation, which is a member of both
the CIS and the CSTO, the continuous militarization
of those regions and the policy of factual annexation,
conducted in breach of international law, including
of the Charter of the United Nations, as well as the
misuse of the mandate of the CIS peacekeeping mission
both in Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali Region/South
Ossetia over the years. Therefore, my delegation cannot
endorse the draft resolutions mentioned and would like
to disassociate itself from the consensus. We request
that the Secretariat reflect this statement in the records
of this plenary meeting for both draft resolutions.
24/33

21/11/2016

Mr. Lupan (Republic of Moldova): I will speak
about draft resolution A/71/L.5, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Commonwealth of
Independent States” (CIS).
The Republic of Moldova supports the promotion
of cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in advancing the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. We believe that
regional organizations play an essential role in fostering
partnerships with a view to addressing economic and
development issues, in a more targeted and cooperative
way, among countries sharing common borders or
economic interests. The Republic of Moldova will
continue to promote and support initiatives aimed at
the modernization of economies in the Commonwealth
of Independent States region, in the development
of transport infrastructure, the free movement of
people and cooperation in the area of anti-terrorism.
We also expect the complete and non-discriminatory
implementation of the free trade agreement within
the Commonwealth of Independent States, signed in
October 2011.
As stated at the summit of CIS leaders held in
Bishkek in September, the Republic of Moldova is
strongly interested in, and calls for, the elimination
of all barriers to commercial activities for the benefit
of all participating countries in this regional forum,
as well as for meaningful inter-State cooperation in
the humanitarian, cultural and social fields. With
regard to the agenda item discussed today, we took
note of the activities outlined in the report (A/71/160)
of the Secretary-General regarding cooperation
between the United Nations and the CIS and which
provides information about the various exchanges and
contacts with the CIS secretariat in matters relating
to anti-terrorism measures, statistics and the crossboundary effects of industrial activities.
While joining the consensus on the draft resolution
regarding the cooperation between the United Nations
and the Commonwealth of Independent States, we wish
to reiterate the fact that, because of its reservations
about the regulations on the chairmanship of the
Commonwealth of Independent States, adopted on
10 October 2008, the Republic of Moldova does not
recognize the international legal personality of the CIS
and its relations with other international organizations.
Therefore, the adoption of this draft resolution shall not
be interpreted as a deviation from those reservations. I
16-39494

21/11/2016

would appreciate having this clarification reflected in
the records of this meeting.
Mr. Al Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): My country, the Syrian Arab Republic,
believes that dangerous and undemocratic practices
are marring the working methods in the League of
Arab States as a result of the illegal and illegitimate
policies and attitudes adopted by the Governments
of certain States members of that organization with a
view to controlling the election and decision-making
mechanisms and the working methods of that regional
organization. The League of Arab States has therefore
gone beyond its goals to respect the independence and
sovereignty of States, to safeguard the principle of
non-interference in their internal affairs, to pursue the
maintenance of regional and international peace and
security and to defend the interests of peoples, and is
instead exerting economic and humanitarian pressure
on them. For all those reasons, the delegation of the
Syrian Arab Republic would like to request that draft
resolution A/71/L.6 be put to a vote.
My country also believes that malpractice is
marring the working methods of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC) owing to the attempts by the
Governments of certain States to flagrantly interfere
in its election and decision-making mechanisms and
the working methods of that organization as well. That
has made the OIC face risks that jeopardize some of its
declared goals when it comes to justice and equality
between member States with regard to respecting
the independence and sovereignty of States and the
principle of non-interference in their internal affairs.
For all of those reasons, the delegation of the Syrian
Arab Republic would like as well for the draft resolution
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation” to be put to
a vote.
Mr. Yelchencko (Ukraine): Before the General
Assembly proceeds to the adoption of draft resolution
A/71/L.5, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Commonwealth of Independent States”
(CIS), I would like to make the following statement.
In general, Ukraine supports cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and other organizations
with regard to Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. We consider such cooperation to be
an important condition for the effective settlement
of conflicts and the promotion of peace and security.

A/71/PV.48

Unfortunately, that is not the case with the CIS. To
our disappointment, that organization demonstrated
its complete failure to take appropriate measures to
respond to the Russian aggression in Ukraine. The CIS
is still pretending that there is no Russian aggression,
no illegal occupation of Crimea and no war crimes
committed by the Russian Federation. At the same
time, I would like to make a short clarification.
I am speaking about the CIS as an organization.
We are very grateful to some of its members for their
non-recognition of the attempted annexation of Crimea.
Their voices are important in our common efforts aimed
at defending the Charter of the United Nations.
I would also like to remind the General Assembly
that Ukraine has not signed the decision of the Council
of Heads of State of the CIS of 24 December 1993,
concerning certain measures to ensure international
recognition of the CIS with regard to granting observer
status for the CIS at the General Assembly. In not
doing so, Ukraine acted on the basis of the statement
delivered on 20 December 1991 of the Parliament of
Ukraine concerning the conclusion of the agreement
on the CIS, which stated that Ukraine declined to
grant the Commonwealth the status of a subject of
international law.
The delegation of Ukraine must also draw attention
to the fact that the basic documents of the CIS — namely,
the Agreement on the Establishment of the CIS, the
Alma Ata Declaration and the CIS Charter — do not
qualify the status of the Commonwealth as one with
the features of a subject of international law. The CIS
is a special international, interregional formation that
not only lacks definite status, but actually includes a
military and political alliance established on the basis
of the Tashkent agreement on collective security of
15 May 1992, which binds only some members of the
Commonwealth.
My delegation would also like to draw the attention
of the Assembly to the fact that some provisions of the
draft resolution do not correspond in full to the realities
on the ground. In particular, paragraph 1 of document
A/71/L.5 notes that
“the activities of the Commonwealth of Independent
States to strengthen regional cooperation in such
areas as trade and economic development”,
while the Russian Federation has undertaken targeted
illegal and discriminatory steps on trade with Ukraine.

16-3949425/33

A/71/PV.48

With respect to Ukraine, it unilaterally suspended the
Free Trade Area Treaty of 18 October 2011 — concluded
within the CIS — as well as introduced prohibitions
and restrictions on imports of Ukrainian agricultural
products, raw materials and food supplies, prohibitions
and limitations on freedom of transit of international
cargo transit from Ukraine through the territory of the
Russian Federation to the territories of the Republic of
Kazakhstan and the Kyrgyz Republic. The prohibition
and limitation by the Russian Federation of the transit
through its territory of Ukrainian goods violate the
freedom of transit under article V of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994 and the
customs valuation of the World Trade Organization.
We must also draw attention to the provision of
paragraph 1 concerning the combating of terrorist
acts and manifestations of extremism. We express
our disappointment that, although the Commonwealth
positions itself as an active fighter against terrorism
and extremism, it has displayed a total absence of
response to the actions of one of its most influential
members — the Russian Federation, an aggressor and
occupier country that controls, finances and directs the
illegal armed groups in certain areas of the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions of Ukraine, supplying them
military equipment and weapons. That Russian policy
constitutes a serious threat to international peace
and security.
In those circumstances, Ukraine will abstain in
the voting on draft resolution A/71/L.5 exclusively
on the understanding that its adoption should
not be interpreted as a de jure recognition of the
Commonwealth as a regional arrangement, as defined
in Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter, bearing
responsibilities for dealing with matters relating to the
maintenance of international peace and security, in
particular for enforcement action under the authority of
the Security Council.

21/11/2016

Cyprus attaches particular importance to enhancing
the cooperation between the United Nations and
the Council of Europe in their shared endeavours to
promote and protect human rights and fundamental
freedoms in the world, and welcomes in that respect
the upcoming adoption of today’s draft resolution. The
assumption of the chairmanship comes at a time when
our world faces several challenges — war, economic
disparities, underdevelopment, poverty, migratory
flows, terrorism, the rise of populism, xenophobic
rhetoric and extremism — that test our democracies and
shake public trust in State and international institutions.
The chairmanship will be carried out under the general
theme “Reinforcing democratic security in Europe”
and will focus on rights and freedoms for all people
without any discrimination, democratic citizenship and
the prevalence of the rule of law.
Our priorities include the protection of cultural
heritage from wanton destruction and the illicit
trafficking of cultural goods, as we see more and more
incidents wherein antiquities are being targeted by
terrorism and violent extremism or are being stolen and
used to finance terrorism; the issue of migrants being
held in reception centres, and sometimes in detention
centres; the role of education in fostering democratic
citizenship; the role of youth in peacebuilding and
intercultural dialogue; the promotion of equal rights
and improving the quality of life and independence of
people with disabilities; dealing with homophobic and
transphobic hate crimes; and the protection of human
rights in the biomedical field.
In general, our focus will be on issues that have
been at the epicentre of recent and ongoing discussions
of the United Nations. We hope that we will encourage
and promote cooperation and synergies between the
United Nations and the Council of Europe, leading to
enhanced democratic stability and the promotion of
human rights.

Ms. Aristitelous (Cyprus): In relation to draft
resolution A/71/L.15, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Council of Europe”, Cyprus
aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of
the European Union and would like to add the following
in its national capacity.

Mr. Samvelian (Armenia): Armenia commends
the leadership and competence of the Estonian
delegation in negotiating draft resolution A/71/L.15,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Council of Europe”, and welcomes the consensus
reached on it.

Cyprus will assume the chairmanship of the
Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
from 22 November until 19 May 2017, for the fifth
time during its membership to the organization.

As a member of the Council of Europe, Armenia
reiterates the crucial role of the organization as an
important regional platform for cooperation and
a repository of legal and practical knowledge and

26/33

16-39494

21/11/2016

A/71/PV.48

expertise in promoting democracy, the rule of law and
good governance, and protecting human rights and
fundamental freedoms at the regional and national
levels. Since its independence 25 years ago, including
in the past 15 years of its full membership in the Council
of Europe, Armenia has been a strong beneficiary
of, and contributor to, such cooperation. The Council
of Europe has developed sound and effective legal
foundations, norms and standards for promoting the
declared objectives.

Strasbourg and New York. The choice of venues for
organizing cooperation forums has become a very
sensitive issue, especially when the venue turns out to
be a country that, although a member of the Council
of Europe and the United Nations, consistently violates
the human rights of its people, shuts out Government
opponents, imprisons journalists and human rights
defenders, and, furthermore, promotes hatred and
intolerance towards other nations and peoples at the
highest level.

Armenia underlines the valuable partnership
between the Council of Europe and the United Nations,
which in essence gives prominence to the universality of
human rights and the common objectives of promoting
democracy and the rule of law. We encourage continued
cooperation among the Council of Europe and various
organs of the United Nations, including the Human
Rights Council and its special procedures, the United
Nations human rights treaty bodies and the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights. The Council of Europe has firmly positioned
itself as a valuable contributor to the Universal Periodic
Review process of the Human Rights Council.

Such is the case with the choice of Baku as the host
of the first Global Forum on Youth Policies. The Baku
Commitment to Youth Policies was adopted without a
representative of Armenia attending the forum simply
because the presence of an Armenian in Baku represents
a serious physical security risk. That is a result of the
consistent Armenophobia promoted by the Government
of Azerbaijan, which glorifies all sorts of atrocities,
including the beheading of Armenians.

The Council of Europe, together with other regional
organizations in Europe, provides sound foundations
for effective and advanced regional cooperation in
the areas of human rights, democracy and the rule of
law and in assisting member States in promoting those
objectives at the national level. Such strong foundations
at the regional level should provide an opportunity for
due assessment of the effective and efficient division
of labour between regional and global frameworks of
cooperation and scope of engagement at the national
level by the respective organizations. This is important
for the effective use of the available resources of the
organizations, which are known to be limited, and for
avoiding the duplication of effort.
While engaging in negotiations on the draft
resolution under consideration, Armenia was guided by
the objective of fully retaining basic European values
reflected in the draft while maintaining full respect of
all human rights and fundamental freedoms, including
the freedom of expression and opinion and the freedom
of media, specification, inter alia, the promotion and
protection of journalism and the safety of journalists.
We regretfully note, however, that Armenia’s
proposals were not properly reflected in the text
during the negotiations of the draft resolution both in

Finally, the cooperation between the Council
of Europe and the United Nations is poised to be the
subject of added value and prominence in the light
of the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Within its respective areas of competence,
the Council of Europe is strongly positioned to
assist its member States in the implementation of the
2030 Agenda, including in particular Sustainable
Development Goal 16.
In reiterating its strong support for the continued
cooperation between the Council of Europe and the
United Nations, Armenia remains a perennial sponsor
of this draft resolution and calls upon all members to
adopt it by consensus.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker in explanation of vote or position
before we take decisions.
I now call on the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic on a point of order.
Mr. Al Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I just wish to clarify any possible confusion
or error with regard to the symbols of the two draft
resolutions. We are requesting votes on the draft
resolution on cooperation between the United Nations
and the League of Arab States and on the draft
resolution on cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

16-3949427/33

A/71/PV.48

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolutions
A/71/L.5, A/71/L.6, A/71/L.7, A/71/L.9, A/71/L.11,
A/71/L.12, A/71/L.14, A/71/L.15, A/71/L.16 and
A/71/L.17.
Draft resolution A/71/L.5 is entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Commonwealth of
Independent States”. May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to adopt it?
Draft resolution A/71/L.5 was adopted (resolution
71/10).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Draft
resolution A/71/L.6 is entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the League of Arab States”.
I give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of draft resolution A/71/L.6
and in addition to the delegations listed in the draft
resolution, the following countries have also become
sponsors of A/71/L.6: El Salvador, Italy, Poland,
Portugal, Spain and Sweden.
The present statement is made in accordance
with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly and will be made available in the
PaperSmart portal.
Under the terms of paragraphs 1 and 4 of draft
resolution A/71/L.6, the General Assembly would,
respectively, request the Secretariat of the United
Nations and the League of Arab States to consider the
possibility of forming a high-level working group to
follow up on the implementation of the provisions of the
protocol on amendment of the text of the cooperation
agreement between the two organizations until a
liaison office of the League of Arab States is opened
in Cairo, with the aim of improving and achieving
further coordination between the two organizations in
the fields addressed in the protocol; and emphasize the
importance of holding the thirteenth sectoral meeting
between the two organizations and their specialized
agencies, in 2017, concerning cooperation on the
preservation and management of water resources in the
Arab region, and the fourteenth general cooperation
meeting between the two organizations and their
systems during 2018, for which the dates and venue will
be agreed upon in due course.
28/33

21/11/2016

Pursuant to paragraph 1 of the draft resolution, it is
understood that a liaison office is expected to be opened.
In the absence of specific details on the establishment
of the liaison office, it is not possible at the present
time to estimate the potential cost implications of the
requirements for the liaison office. Upon the decision
on the establishment of the liaison office and the related
staffing and operational requirements, the SecretaryGeneral would submit the relevant costs of such
requirements in accordances with rule 153 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly.
With regard to the request contained in paragraph 4,
it is understood that all issues related to the two meetings,
including the dates, venue, format, organization and
scope, are yet to be determined. Accordingly, in the
absence of modalities for the meetings, it is not possible
at the present time to estimate the potential cost
implications of the requirements for the meetings and
documentation. Upon the decisions on the modalities,
format and organization of the meetings, the SecretaryGeneral would submit the relevant costs of such
requirements in accordance with rule 153 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly. Furthermore,
the dates of the meetings will have to be determined in
consultation with the Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management.
Accordingly, the adoption of draft resolution
A/71/L.6 would not give rise to any financial
implications under the programme budget for the
biennium 2016-2017.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria,
Andorra,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Chile, China, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, Georgia, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Hungary, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Maldives, Malta, Mexico,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
16-39494

21/11/2016

A/71/PV.48

Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sudan, Sweden,
Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Central African Republic, Congo,
Indonesia, Syrian Arab Republic

Organization”. May I take it that the Assembly decides
to adopt it?
Draft resolution A/71/L.11 was adopted (resolution
71/14).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Draft
resolution A/71/L.12 is entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Organization for Democracy
and Economic Development”.
I give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.

Germany,

Draft resolution A/71/L.6 was adopted by 84 votes
to none, with 5 abstentions (resolution 71/11).
[Subsequently, the delegations of El Salvador,
France, Germany, India, Italy, Micronesia
(Federated States of ) and Poland informed the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Draft
resolution A/71/L.7 is entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization”. May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to adopt it?
Draft resolution A/71/L.7 was adopted (resolution
71/12).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Draft
resolution A/71/L.9 is entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Central European Initiative”.
I give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management): I should like to announce that
since the submission of the draft resolution, in addition
to those delegations listed in the document, Georgia has
become a sponsor of draft resolution A/71/L.9.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May
I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/71/L.9?
Draft resolution A/71/L.9 was adopted (resolution
71/13).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Draft
resolution A/71/L.11 is entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Shanghai Cooperation

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, in
addition to those delegations listed in the document,
Poland has become a sponsor of draft resolution
A/71/L.12.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May
I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/71/L.12?
Draft resolution A/71/L.12 was adopted (resolution
71/15).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Draft
resolution A/71/L.14 is entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Economic Cooperation
Organization”. May I take it that the Assembly decides
to adopt it?
Draft resolution A/71/L.14 was adopted (resolution
71/16).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Draft
resolution A/71/L.15 is entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Council of Europe”.
I give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, in
addition to those delegations listed in the document,
Armenia and Mexico have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/71/L.15.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May
I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/71/L.15?
Draft resolution A/71/L.15 was adopted (resolution
71/17).

16-3949429/33

A/71/PV.48

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Draft
resolution A/71/L.16/Rev.1 is entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Black Sea Economic
Cooperation Organization”.

21/11/2016

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, in
addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of
draft resolution A/71/L.16/Rev.1: Austria, Hungary,
Montenegro and Spain.

of the resolution. It is anticipated that the request will
constitute an addition to the documentation workload of
the Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management of one document of 8,500 words, to be
issued in all six official languages, which would entail
additional requirements in the amount of $37,600 for
documentation services in 2018. Accordingly, should the
General Assembly adopt draft resolution A/71/L.17, the
additional resources requirement of $37,600 that would
arise for 2018 under section 2, “General Assembly and
Economic and Social Council affairs and conference
management”, will be included in the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2018-2019.

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May
I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/71/L.16/Rev.1?

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May
I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/71/L.17?

Draft resolution A/71/L.16/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 71/18).

Draft resolution A/71/L.17 was adopted (resolution
71/19).

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Draft
resolution A/71/L.17 is entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the International Criminal
Police Organization”.

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Before
giving the floor to speakers in explanation of vote or
position on the resolutions just adopted, I should like to
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.

I give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.

I give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, in
addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of
draft resolution A/71/L.17: Albania, Algeria, Andorra,
Argentina, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, China,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Georgia, Hungary, Israel,
Italy, Jamaica, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Nauru, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Panama, the Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Ukraine and Uruguay.
Also in connection with draft resolution A/71/L.17,
I wish to put on the record the following statement
of financial implications on behalf of the SecretaryGeneral, which is also available on the PaperSmart
portal, in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
In paragraph 5 of draft resolution A/71/L.17, the
General Assembly would request that the SecretaryGeneral submit to the General Assembly, at its
seventy-third session, a report on the implementation
30/33

Mr. Samvelian (Armenia): While my delegation
joined in the consensus on resolution 71/15, we would
like to express our concern about the fact that one
of the resolution’s main sponsors, Azerbaijan, has
regularly misused the Organization for Democracy and
Economic Development in order to present its distorted
interpretation of the process for resolving the conflict
in Nagorno Karabakh. That does not contribute in any
way to the negotiations conducted in the framework
of the agreed format of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe Minsk Group co-chairship,
on the basis of purposes and principles enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations — specifically, the
non-use or threat of use of force, the self-determination
of peoples, and countries’ territorial integrity.
Ms. Aristotelous (Cyprus): Regarding resolution
71/16, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Economic Cooperation Organization”,
my delegation would like to state for the record that
Cyprus dissociates itself from the consensus on the
resolution for the following reasons.
In operative paragraph 2, the resolution takes note
of the Baku Declaration, issued at the twelfth Economic
16-39494

21/11/2016

A/71/PV.48

Cooperation Organization (ECO) summit meeting of its
Heads of State and/or Government, held on 16 October
2012 in Azerbaijan. The Baku Declaration endorsed the
report of the Organization’s Council of Ministers at their
twentieth meeting and instructed the Secretary General
of ECO to ensure that the report was fully implemented.

I now give the floor to those representatives who
wish to speak in exercise of the right of reply. I would
like to remind members that statements in exercise of
the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for the first
intervention and to five minutes for the second, and
should be made by delegations from their seats.

We are informed that the report recommends that
the so-called Turkish Cypriot State be given observer
status in the Economic Cooperation Organization.
The Baku Declaration in effect calls on the Secretary
General of ECO to act contrary to Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions on Cyprus, particularly
Security Council resolutions 541 (1983) and 550 (1984),
which state that the declaration of a purported secession
of part of the Republic of Cyprus is legally invalid
and call for its withdrawal. By those resolutions, the
Security Council condemns all secessionist acts, calling
on all States to respect the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus
and not to recognize any Cypriot State other than the
Republic of Cyprus. The Council also urges States
not to facilitate or assist the secessionist entity in any
way. In that regard, I would also like to recall General
Assembly resolutions 3212 (XXIX) and 37/253, of
1983, which call on all States to respect the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the Republic
of Cyprus.

Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): The irrelevant statements
made by the representative of Armenia with regard
to two of the resolutions just adopted by the General
Assembly are examples of its attempts to create an
erroneous impression of the real situation and deflect
the international community’s attention from the
urgent need to address the chief problems caused by
Armenia’s continued aggression against Azerbaijan.
Armenia’s allegations of so-called Armenophobia are
not worthy of criticism. Suffice it to say that, unlike
Armenia — which has implemented a policy of total
ethnic cleansing of all non-Armenians in both its own
territory and the occupied territories of Azerbaijan,
and has thereby succeeded in creating a uniquely
mono-ethnic culture in them — Azerbaijan has
preserved its ethnic and cultural diversity to this day.

My delegation reiterates those calls made by
the United Nations to the States members of the
Economic Cooperation Organization. We urge them
and the Secretary General of ECO not to act contrary
to United Nations resolutions by implementing
the recommendation to accord observer status to a
secessionist entity. We have decided not to break the
consensus on today’s resolution on cooperation, based
on the good faith and spirit of cooperation displayed
by its sponsors during the informal negotiations on
the text. We hope that same spirit will be displayed
in response to the call we have just made, that
the Economic Cooperation Organization and its
member States will re-evaluate their position on
the issue and, in consideration of their cooperation
with the United Nations, act in compliance with our
Organization’s Charter.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker in explanation of vote or position
after the voting.

The representative of Armenia asserted that his
country was not represented at one of the international
conferences held in Baku and mentioned in resolution
71/17, on cooperation between the United Nations
and the Council of Europe. However, he passed in
silence over the fact that many Armenians, including
Armenian citizens, visited Azerbaijan both before and
after that conference in order to participate in various
international conferences and sports events held there.
If there is anywhere in the world that is insecure for
the citizens of Armenia, it is their own country,
Armenia itself.
The international community has repeatedly
expressed its indignation at the Armenian leadership’s
undisguised promotion of odious notions of racial
superiority and ethnic and religious incompatibility,
and its expressions of hatred towards Azerbaijan and
others of its neighbours, while the relevant United
Nations bodies and other international organizations
have repeatedly expressed their serious concerns about
the spirit of intolerance that prevails in Armenia and the
discriminatory policies and practices it pursues. The
direct involvement of the current political and military
leadership of Armenia, including its incumbent and
former Presidents, in the brutal massacres conducted
during its aggression against Azerbaijan that claimed
the lives of thousands of Azerbaijani civilians, including

16-3949431/33

A/71/PV.48

children, women and the elderly, is well known and
thoroughly documented. Against that background, it
is curious that the representative of Armenia should
criticize and lecture others on notions that are a priori
alien to his country’s policy and practice.
In conclusion, I would like to recall some of the
relevant decisions and documents of international
organizations, including General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions, condemning Armenia’s
use of force against Azerbaijan and calling for an
end to the occupation of Azerbaijani territories. I am
confident that a careful reading of those documents and
decisions would convince the delegation of Armenia
to refrain from wasting time by making irrelevant and
out-of-context statements in the future.
Mr. Samvelian (Armenia): It should be emphasized
that many conflicts, including that in Nagorno Karabakh,
are the result of systematic violations of human rights,
aggravated by precarious situations where the rule of
law is concerned. Countries that violate human rights
systematically and unapologetically tend to be part of
the problem rather than the solution when it comes to
resolving such conflicts. Azerbaijan’s appalling human
rights record and totalitarian tendencies are a case in
point. Obviously, no country, including one that acts
aggressively, will accept that. Such countries would
rather blame their opponents for unleashing military
aggression, and that is the case with Azerbaijan.
Nonetheless, I do not want to engage in lengthy
discussions with Azerbaijan, and our point was made
pretty clearly when we spoke from the rostrum. I
would just like to respond briefly to the mention of
my country’s leadership in Azerbaijan’s statement.
I understand the jealousy of the representative of
Azerbaijan, a country that has been led by a single
family for almost 50 years. Meanwhile, we in Armenia
have a President who is democratically elected for no
more than two terms of office. That should be enough
for Azerbaijan to understand the difference between
the situations in Armenia and Azerbaijan, which should
not even be compared with each other.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I
remind speakers once again to limit their statements to
five minutes.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): The remarks just made by
the representative of Armenia are distorting, as well as
self-contradictory in their substance and unacceptable
in their tone. He goes so far as to lecture other
32/33

21/11/2016

Member States on principles and values that in fact his
Government consistently disregards and opposes.
In reality, the primary objective of the ongoing
peace process aimed at resolving the conflict in and
around the Nagorno Karabakh region of Azerbaijan is
to ensure the unconditional and complete withdrawal
of Armenia’s armed forces from the region and the
other occupied territories of Azerbaijan, along with
the exercise by the forcibly displaced population of
their inalienable right to return to their homes and
properties. Rather than wasting time and misleading
both its own people and the international community,
the Government of Armenia should reconsider its
unconstructive position, which will become more and
more difficult to stick to. The sooner that happens, the
sooner the conflict will be resolved and the countries
and peoples of the region benefit from the prospects of
cooperation and economic development.
Mr. Samvelian (Armenia): I will be brief. In order to
demonstrate its commitment to the peaceful settlement
of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict, Azerbaijan should
as a first step engage immediately and unconditionally
in the implementation of the agreements reached in
Vienna and Saint Petersburg in May and June. A refusal
to implement them will leave it with the burden of full
responsibility for the lack of progress in settling the
Nagorno Karabakh peace process.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
conclude its consideration of sub-items (d), (i), (l), (o),
(u), (v), (w), (x) and (y) of agenda item 126?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Before
concluding the meeting, however, I would like to appeal
to those Member States intending to submit draft
resolutions on the remaining sub-items to do so as soon
as possible.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 126 and its
remaining sub-items.
Programme of work
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish):
Finally, I should like to consult members regarding
an extension of the work of the Second Committee.
Members will recall that at its 2nd plenary meeting,
on 16 September 2016, the General Assembly approved
16-39494

21/11/2016

the recommendation of the General Committee that the
Second Committee complete its work by Wednesday,
23 November. However, I have been informed by the
Chair of the Second Committee that the Committee
requests an extension of its work to Wednesday,
30 November, in view of the fact that such an extension
would facilitate reaching consensus on the pending
resolutions before the Committee.

A/71/PV.48

May I therefore take it that the General Assembly
agrees to extend the work of the Second Committee
until Wednesday, 30 November 2016?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.

16-3949433/33
