S/PV.7865

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7865th meeting

Wednesday, 18 January 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Skoog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Sweden)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Letter dated 27 December 2016 from the Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2016/1113)
Second report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2016/1136).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-01253 (E)
*1701253*

Non-proliferation

S/PV.7865

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Letter dated 27 December 2016 from
the Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015)
(S/2016/1113)
Second report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolution
2231 (2015) (S/2016/1136)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Germany to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
to participate in this meeting: Mr. Jeffrey Feltman,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and
His Excellency Mr. João Vale de Almeida, Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs; His Excellency
Mr. João Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations; and
His Excellency Mr. Sebastiano Cardi, Permanent
Representative of Italy, in his capacity as facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
I now give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: On 16 January, the United Nations
welcomed the first anniversary of implementation day
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA),
which was endorsed by resolution 2231 (2015). One
year on, the Secretary-General is encouraged by the
continued reaffirmation by all JCPOA participants,
including during the meeting of the Joint Commission
in Vienna on 10 January, of their unequivocal
commitment to the full and effective implementation
of the agreement.
The JCPOA — adopted by the E3/EU+3 and
Iran on 14 July 2015 — is a good example of how
2/21

18/01/2017

multilateral diplomacy, political will and perseverance
can resolve the most complex issues. It is imperative
that, as participants, the United Nations and the broader
international community continue to support the full
implementation of that historic multilateral agreement
for its full duration. Its comprehensive and sustained
implementation ensures that Iran’s nuclear programme
will remain exclusively peaceful. It will help realize
the long-awaited aspirations of the Iranian people to
be reconnected to the global economy and bring to a
satisfactory conclusion the consideration of the Iranian
nuclear issue by the Security Council.
Today’s meeting of the Security Council is taking
place against a backdrop of steady implementation,
cooperation and progress. Since Implementation Day, the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has issued
five reports documenting continued implementation
by Iran of its nuclear-related commitments. In her
statement on the first anniversary of implementation
day, the High Representative of the Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Ms. Federica Mogherini,
noted that the lifting of the nuclear-related sanctions,
as promised in the agreement, resulted in “a surge in
bilateral trade and investment in Iran, contributing
to better living standards for the benefit of all”. The
Secretary-General has underscored the importance of
all JCPOA participants accruing equally the full benefits
of the agreement and calls upon all its participants to
continue to work together in good faith and reciprocity.
I am grateful for the opportunity to brief the
Security Council on the second report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) (S/2016/1136). The report was submitted to the
Council on 30 December 2016, pursuant to annex B to
resolution 2231 (2015) and paragraph 7 of the note by
the President of the Council, issued on 16 January 2016
(S/2016/44).
As guided by the Security Council, the report of
the Secretary-General focuses on the implementation
of the provisions contained in annex B to resolution
2231 (2015). It does not cover the implementation of
annex A to the resolution, namely, the implementation
of its nuclear-related commitments by Iran and of the
sanctions-lifting commitments entered into by other
participants, nor does it touch upon issues falling
within the remit of the Joint Commission.
17-01253

18/01/2017

Non-proliferation

S/PV.7865

I now turn to the main findings and recommendations
of the second report of the Secretary-General related to
annex B of resolution 2231 (2015).

information in order to corroborate the information
provided and independently ascertain the origin of
those shipments.

First, the Secretary-General has not received any
report, nor is he aware of any open-source information
regarding the supply, sale or transfer to Iran of nuclearrelated items undertaken contrary to the provisions of
the resolution. Moreover, and also on an encouraging
note, Member States have made greater use of the
procurement-channel process, through which the
transfer of nuclear-related items is approved by the
Council on the basis of recommendation provided by the
Joint Commission. Five nuclear-related proposals have
been submitted since July 2016. Three of those proposals
have been approved; the other two are still under
consideration. Those proposals have been processed
in accordance with the timelines established by
resolution 2231 (2015), with due regard for information
security and confidentiality. The operational linkages
established between the Security Council and the
Procurement Working Group of the Joint Commission
are functioning well. I wish to take this opportunity to
acknowledge the excellent cooperation that we have had
with the European External Action Service, especially
with the Coordinator of the Procurement Working
Group of the Joint Commission.

Still on the subject of arms-related transfers, of
particular concern is the June 2016 televised statement
by the Secretary-General of Hizbullah that Hizbullah
receives its salaries, expenses, weapons and missiles
from Iran. That statement suggests that transfers of
arms from Iran to Hizbullah may have been undertaken
contrary to resolution 2231 (2015). In addition, the
report notes the November 2016 letter by Israel to the
Secretary-General and the Council about the alleged
use of commercial flights by the Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps to transfer arms and related materiel
to Hizbullah (S/2016/987), and the subsequent
response from Iran that such claims were baseless and
unsubstantiated accusations (S/2016/992).

Secondly, the Secretary-General has also not
received any information regarding Iranian ballisticmissile activities or ballistic-missile-related transfers
to Iran undertaken contrary to the relevant provisions
of the resolution.
Thirdly, in terms of the restrictions on armsrelated transfers, the report includes information on
the seizure by the French Navy of an arms shipment
in the Northern Indian Ocean in March 2016. France
concluded that the arms shipment had originated
in Iran and that that transfer had been undertaken
contrary to annex B of the resolution. In addition, the
Secretariat also received information from Australia
and the Combined Maritime Forces about another arms
seizure by the Royal Australian Navy, which took place
off the coast of Oman in February 2016. That shipment
of arms was also assessed by the United States Navy
to have originated in Iran. Both seizures bear strong
similarities with the one reported by the United States
in June 2016 and mentioned in the first report of the
Secretary-General (S/2016/589). The Secretariat is
looking forward to the opportunity to examine the arms
seized in all three instances and to obtain additional

With regard to the case of the Iranian participation
in an arms exhibition held in Baghdad in March 2016,
which was presented in the first report of the SecretaryGeneral on this issue, I am able to inform the Council
today that Iraqi authorities confirmed in October 2016
that all items exhibited have been returned to Iran.
Therefore, no further follow-up will be taken by the
Secretariat in relation to that matter.
Finally, the report draws the attention of Council
members to possible ongoing travel-ban violations by
individuals on the list maintained pursuant to resolution
2231 (2015). The report includes information about two
possible foreign trips by Brigadier General Naqdi and
about numerous possible foreign trips by Major General
Soleimani, which are supported by photographic
evidence released by Iranian and other regional media
outlets. The Secretariat raised those possible violations
with the countries involved. Iraq and Syria did not deny
or confirm that information, but emphasized that no
invitations had been extended nor were visas issued by
their respective authorities to those individuals.
In response to the Secretariat’s request for
clarification with regard to the possible transfer of
arms to Hizbullah, as well as the possible travel-ban
violations, Iran underlined that
“measures undertaken by Iran in combating
terrorism and violent extremism in the region have
been consistent with its national security interests
and international commitments”.

17-012533/21

S/PV.7865

Non-proliferation

Looking forward to the second year of the
implementation of the JCPOA, I would like to reaffirm
once again the particular responsibilities of JCPOA
participants to implement the agreement fully and
effectively. The wider international community also
has an interest in and must contribute to the long-term
implementation of the agreement.
In closing, I would like to acknowledge the
leadership of Ambassador Román Oyarzun Marchesi
of Spain in his role as facilitator for the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) in 2016. I would also like to
congratulate Ambassador Sebastiano Cardi of Italy on
his selection as facilitator for 2017. Ambassador Cardi
and the Security Council can count on the full support
of the United Nations Secretariat in his stewardship of
the resolution endorsing that historic agreement.
The President: I thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Vale de Almeida.
Mr. Vale de Almeida: I am honoured to address
the Council today on behalf of the High Representative
of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, in her capacity as the Coordinator of the Joint
Commission established by the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA), to whom I will refer simply as
the “Coordinator”.
In today’s world, the number of challenges we have
to face prevents us from focusing on the successes we
have achieved. This debate comes just two days after
the first anniversary of the implementation day of the
JCPOA. That agreement was a major achievement. It
was born of the efforts of the E3/EU+3, coordinated
by the European Union (EU) High Representative
and Iran; however, it now belongs to the international
community through its endorsement by the Council
in resolution 2231 (2016). In the past, many predicted
that we would never reach an agreement or that, even
if we did, it would not last for long. Not only did we
reach an agreement, but we are now clearly making
progress in implementing it. Since implementation day,
important steps have been taken by all parties towards
the successful implementation of the deal. In the course
of this year, all JCPOA participants have fulfilled
their commitments. Iran has implemented its nuclear
obligations, and the United Nations, the EU and the
United States have lifted, as agreed, the nuclear-related
economic and financial sanctions.
4/21

18/01/2017

The adherence of Iran to its commitments is being
closely monitored and has been confirmed by four
International Atomic Energy Agency reports up to
now. That is essential in order to deliver on the goal of
a civilian nuclear programme exclusively for peaceful
purposes. The lifting of sanctions has also led to a
surge in trade and investment with Iran. To give just an
example, bilateral trade between the EU and Iran has
risen by a staggering 63 per cent over the first three
quarters of 2016. More efforts are needed to make sure
that those benefits are felt by our populations, but the
trend is clear and progress undeniable.
However, JCPOA implementation is an ongoing
task, and we expect full and effective implementation
by all sides throughout the lifetime of the agreement.
The EU High Representative, as the Coordinator
of the Joint Commission, which is responsible for
overseeing the implementation of the deal, remains
committed to that goal. The EU High Representative,
or her designated representative, has already chaired
six JCPOA Joint Commission meetings, which have
monitored and provided guidance on implementation
issues. At the latest meeting of the JCPOA Joint
Commission on 10 January 2017, all sides reaffirmed
their strong commitment to continued full and
effective implementation of the JCPOA. The rigorous
implementation of commitments by all sides is the
best way to continue to build trust, to strengthen the
JCPOA and to overcome the hurdles that are part of all
comprehensive and far-reaching deals.
I would also like at this point to extend my gratitude
to former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, as well as
to Ambassador Román Oyarzun Marchesi, who served
as the facilitator for the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) in 2016, for the excellent cooperation since
Implementation Day. I would also like to welcome
the new Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, as
well as Ambassador Sebastiano Cardi of Italy, who
will serve as the facilitator for the implementation of
the resolution in 2017. Once again, let me thank our
colleagues in the Security Council Affairs Division for
their unwavering support regarding the establishment
of the procurement channel. I would also like to take
note of the latest report of the Secretary General on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2016/1136).
I will now focus on the work of the Procurement
Working Group. The EU High Representative,
as Coordinator of the Joint Commission and the
Procurement Working Group, is responsible for the
17-01253

18/01/2017

Non-proliferation

smooth operation of that newly established mechanism,
which has been tasked with reviewing proposals by
States seeking to engage in activities with Iran that
involve nuclear and non-nuclear civilian end-uses. On
implementation day, the Joint Commission established
the Procurement Working Group, which is comprised of
representatives of the E3+3 and Iran and is coordinated
by the EU High Representative. The Group has been in
full operation since its establishment. The first proposals
received through the procurement channel have been
reviewed and approved. That is a clear demonstration
that the established procurement mechanism works.
Transparency has been one of our guiding principles
during the negotiations and a cornerstone of the JCPOA.
According to para 6.10 of JCPOA annex IV, the Joint
Commission shall report to the Security Council every
six months on the status of the Procurement Working
Group’s decisions and on any implementation issues.
In that context, on 23 December 2016, the coordinator
of the Procurement Working Group submitted to the
facilitator, on behalf of the Joint Commission, the
Group’s second report to the Security Council on the
work of the Group in support of the implementation
of Security Council resolution 2231 (2015) (see
S/2016/1113). The report seeks to provide the facilitator
and Security Council members with an overview of the
work undertaken by the Procurement Working Group
from 7 July to 22 December 2016.
During the period under review, the participants in
the Procurement Working Group, coordinated by the
High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs
and Security Policy, continued working intensively to
further develop the modalities of its operation. The
participants have held six meetings, and in one of those
meetings the International Atomic Energy Agency
participated as an observer. The Group has made
great efforts to be as transparent as possible without
compromising confidentiality, by reaching out to third
States and promoting a better understanding of its aims,
objectives and review process.
We have taken note of the points raised by thirdparty States during those outreach meetings. In
that respect, during the reporting period, the Joint
Commission updated several documents relating to
the work of the Procurement Working Group. All of
those documents have been published on the Security
Council’s dedicated web page on resolution 2231 (2015).
The Procurement Working Group also responded to an
inquiry put forward by one State through the Security

S/PV.7865

Council. The work we have undertaken so far has
proven that it is possible to reach agreements, even on
the most contentious issues, and to implement them,
provided that there is a will to do so.
Let me conclude by reiterating the European
Union’s resolute willingness to respect the JCPOA and
work for its success throughout its lifetime. We call
on all the other parties to do likewise and to remain
committed to the full implementation of the JCPOA
and of resolution 2231 (2015) in all its dimensions. That
is essential if we wish to continue building trust among
all and shore up multilateral diplomacy.
The President: I now give the floor to Ambassador
Cardi.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): Before I start my statement as
facilitator for the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2231 (2016), let me also say goodbye to
Ambassador Samantha Power. In Italian, when we want
to say goodbye, we say arrivederci, which means, “Until
we see each other again”. I think that wish is shared by
many around this table and at the United Nations.
I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting, as well as Under-Secretary-General
Jeffrey Feltman and Ambassador João Vale de Almeida
for their briefings.
Today I will touch on three aspects of the report
of the facilitator covering the period 16 July 2016
through 15 January 2017. I will touch first on the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA); secondly, on
the monitoring of the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015); and, thirdly, on the developments in the
procurement channel. The full version of the report has
been circulated to the Council members, and will be
issued shortly under the symbol S/2017/49.
First, with regard to the JCPOA, I, like others, find
it fitting to start with the JCPOA, considering that two
days ago was the first anniversary of Implementation
Day. During the reporting period, in line with paragraph
4 of Security Council resolution 2231 (2015), the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Director
General submitted two quarterly reports on verification
and monitoring activities. In both reports, the Agency
affirms that Iran has not pursued construction of the
existing Arak heavy-water research reactor based on
its original design, and that Iran has not conducted any
uranium-enrichment or related research and activities
at the Fordow fuel-enrichment plant. In addition, at

17-012535/21

S/PV.7865

Non-proliferation

the end of the reporting period, the Director General
of the IAEA confirmed that on 15 January the Agency
verified that Iran had removed all excess centrifuges
and infrastructure from the Fordow plant, in line with
its nuclear-related commitments under the JCPOA.
In its quarterly reports, the Agency affirms
that Iran has continued to permit the Agency to use
online enrichment monitors and electronic seals that
communicate the status within the Iranian nuclear
sites to Agency inspectors and facilitate the automatic
collection of measurement recordings by the Agency.
Both reports also affirm Iran’s continued cooperation
with the JCPOA-specified monitoring of uranium ore
concentrate in Iran.
Secondly, with regard to the monitoring of the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), during
the reporting period the facilitator did not receive
information on alleged actions inconsistent with
resolution 2231 (2015). At the same time, the facilitator
took note of the letter from Israel to the President of
the Security Council (S/2016/987) and the letter of the
Islamic Republic of Iran in reply (S/2016/992). As of the
closing date of my report, there has been no formal reply
to the facilitator’s letters of 17 June and 22 July 2016,
which invited the Iranian Government to comment on
two alleged instances of arms transfers referred to in
the first biannual report of the facilitator. Nonetheless,
during the facilitator’s efforts to contact the Iranian
Government so as to seek clarification about those
two cases, the Permanent Mission of Iran rejected the
allegation and reiterated that Iran had never engaged in
the alleged deliveries.
During the reference period, transparency, practical
guidance and outreach remain the priorities, since a
proper understanding of resolution 2231 (2015) by all
is required for its full implementation. The Council
responded to a request for guidance regarding access to
foreign imports by Iranian-flag vessels seeking to load
and unload goods. Moreover, in response to a request
submitted through the facilitator, the Joint Commission
provided guidance on temporary nuclear-related
transfers to Iran.
Thirdly, with regard to developments in the
procurement channel, the Council had received, as of
mid-July 2016, only one proposal, later withdrawn,
to participate in and permit the activities set forth
in paragraph 2 of annex B to resolution 2231 (2015).
During the reporting period, the procurement channel
6/21

18/01/2017

started working more regularly and processed five
proposals that two Member States had submitted to the
Security Council. Three proposals have already been
approved, while the remaining two are currently under
review by the Joint Commission in Vienna. In order
to enhance information exchange between the Joint
Commission and the representatives of the Security
Council dealing with the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015), I will be organizing a meeting with the
Coordinator of the Procurement Working Group here in
New York in the coming weeks, similar to the meeting
held in February of last year to discuss the functioning
of the procurement channel.
Let me conclude, by underlining that, from 18 July
to 20 December 2016, there were more than 72,000
page views of the resolution 2231 (2015) website, a key
channel of information, for a total of more than 140,000
page views since its creation. Those figures show a
marked interest in the implementation of the resolution,
including in the functioning of the procurement
channel, whose activities are likely to increase in the
coming months.
The President: I thank Mr. Cardi for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, from the bottom of my heart for
your comments at the opening of today’s meetings,
which really moved me. When I play them later for my
children, it will move them too.
I
thank
Under-Secretary-General
Feltman,
Ambassador Cardi, Ambassador Vale de Almeida for
their briefings and for all their work on this important
topic. I know that the United States Mission looks
forward to working with Ambassador Cardi in his new
role as the Council’s facilitator for the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015). I agree with the sentiment that
he expressed in Italian in terms of saying “Goodbye,
but we will see you soon”.
This will be my final meeting in the Security
Council, I think, so I would like to start by saying
“thank you”. First, above all, I want to give thanks to
President Obama for giving me this opportunity and I
want to thank my fellow diplomats in the Chamber for
their friendship, their camaraderie and their dedication,
all of which they have shown in spades over the past
three and a half years towards me and towards the
17-01253

18/01/2017

Non-proliferation

subjects that we work on together. Of course, we may
not always agree. Indeed, we have at times disagreed
quite pointedly, but it has been the privilege of my life
to be able to work with each of them.
We have not achieved nearly as much as I would
have liked. The failures of the Council to respond
to the mass atrocities in Syria and South Sudan are
glaring and indeed haunting, but I know from working
with every single individual at this table that we have
achieved much more than we would have had it not
been for their creativity and their individual will to find
a way forward on tough issues.
Diplomacy is about people in two respects. We
diplomats must help people who are suffering the
horrific costs of conflict, but we diplomats are people
and when the Council functions, it is often because
individuals in this Chamber have lobbied their capitals
for a change in instructions or for flexibility in the
cause of peace. While we, who have the privilege of
sitting around this table, may get the attention, we also
know that our work would not be possible without the
people sitting behind us and in the booths above us
and many others in our Governments who never even
get to join us in the Chamber: the teams of diplomats
and foreign service officers at our respective missions,
the officials in our capitals and embassies abroad who
feed into our work, as well as the staff at the United
Nations who make these meetings possible — from the
Security Council Affairs Division to the inexhaustible
interpreters, to the staff from across the United Nations
who brief the Council, write the reports that we
consume and provide information from the field often
at great risk to themselves. I offer a special thanks to
my truly remarkable team at the United States Mission
who works tirelessly to try to make the world better. It
has been an honour to work with all of them.
I am fortunate today to be able to deliver my last set
of remarks on an issue that shows just how much we can
achieve by using the tools in our toolbox at the Security
Council. An issue where the United States, France,
the United Kingdom, Germany, China, Russia and the
European Union were able to all come together — first
to impose powerful sanctions against Iran, including
in 2010 after receiving information that Iran was
building a covert enrichment facility and then to have
the courage and the creativity to negotiate a deal — the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), which
cut off Iran’s pathways to a nuclear weapon and verified

S/PV.7865

Iran’s compliance through the most extensive inspection
regime ever developed for nuclear programme.
I take note, as I depart, that some on the Council
are expressing what seems to be a growing scepticism
about the efficacy of sanctions. It is more than
reasonable to raise questions. Sanctions are not suited
to every crisis. They alone are never a panacea.
They cannot be treated as an end in themselves and
sanctions almost never provide instant gratification
of the kind that the news cycle seems to demand. It
took almost nine years from when the Council first
imposed sanctions on Iran and multiple rounds of new
sanctions after that before the P5+1 and Iran were able
to conclude the JCPOA. However, sanctions were an
absolutely essential tool to bring Iran to the table and
to keep Iran negotiating until we reach the diplomatic
outcome that we sought, one that has significantly
enhanced our collective security. We never would have
reached this goal without uniting to impose sanctions
and without working to ensure that our resolutions were
enforced. This lessons applies not only when dealing
with the threat of nuclear non-proliferation, but also to
other threats to international peace and security, from
genocide to terrorism and violations of other States’
territorial integrity.
But beyond showing how effective sanctions
can be, the JCPOA also shows the life and death
importance of diplomacy — hard-nosed diplomacy.
The United Nations was created as the premier venue
for diplomacy. As Winston Churchill once put it, “To
jaw-jaw is always better than to war-war”. Reaching
this deal — the JCPOA — like so many of the collective
achievements of which we are most proud, including
the global response to the Ebola outbreak, the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change and the Sustainable
Development Goals — required gruelling, at times
exasperating negotiations and countless hours invested
by diplomats, technical experts and even many of us
at this table. There were times in each of these efforts
when we thought we would not be able to reach an
agreement, that the differences were just too great, the
suspicions too deep, when we wanted to give up, walk
away and go home to spend more time with our families
who are far easier to get along with than our foreign
counterparts in negotiations.
But in these and so many other instances we
achieved something together that none of us could have
come close to achieving alone. While, of course, there
are other threats to which we have invested similar

17-012537/21

S/PV.7865

Non-proliferation

time and energy and sweat, but have not been able to
find solutions or consensus — the Syria war and the
quest for Middle East peace being the two most obvious
examples — is there anybody here who would have
rather that we not have tried? Of course, there is not.
I am proud to have served a President who believes in
the power of principled diplomacy, not out of a naïve
belief that we will always succeed, but rather because
of a clear-eyed empirical assessment that our security
often necessitates collective action and that while at
times diplomacy may not be enough, there is never a
time when it is not needed.
It has now been a year and a half since the
JCPOA was concluded and one year since what we
call implementation day, when the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) verified that Iran had
completed the nuclear-related commitments required
for sanctions relief. What we know after all this time is
that the JCPOA is working. All of the deal’s participants
are keeping their commitments. Consider what that
means, what the deal has achieved. Iran’s plutonium
reactor core at Arak is now filled with concrete. The
IAEA has confirmed that Iran has dismantled twothirds of its centrifuges and shipped out 98 per cent of
its enriched uranium. What is left of Iran’s uranium
stockpile is under continuous watch to make sure that
it stays within the limits that the JCPOA put in place.
For our part, the United States has fully implemented
its commitments to lift nuclear-related sanctions as
specified in the JCPOA.
In the Council, the mechanisms that we created
to support the JCPOA are working as intended. When
States want to pursue the nuclear-related activities
permitted under the JCPOA that require the Council’s
approval, the Council is ready to consider their request.
Reporting is also happening with the appropriate
division of labour with the Secretary-General reporting
on the restrictions that apply to Iran under resolution
2231 (2016) while the Joint Commission monitors
implementation of the JCPOA.
However, recognizing this progress on Iran’s
nuclear issues should not distract the Council from
Iran’s other actions that continue to destabilize the
Middle East in ways that affect a lot of issues on
the Council’s agenda. This is after all a regime that
repeatedly threatens Israel and that continues to violate
the human rights of its own people. Under SecretaryGeneral Feltman has informed the Council about
reports of Iranian non-compliance with the remaining
8/21

18/01/2017

arms transfer and travel restrictions in resolution 2231
(2016). These reports include new information about
interdictions of arms exported from Iran, transfers
Hizbullah Secretary-General Hassan Nasrallah has
openly boasted about in his public speeches even
as resolution 2231 (2016) prohibits these shipments.
Israel has also reported to the United Nations that Iran
uses commercial flights to supply arms to Hizbullah.
According to the Secretary-General’s report, Iran
did not even deny these allegations when the United
Nations asked about them.
These arms transfers should be deeply troubling
to each member of the Council in part because Iran is
clearly defying a resolution the Council unanimously
supported. Therefore, even though Iran is living up to
its nuclear commitments, we on the Council need to
come together to push Iran to effectively implement
the binding provisions of resolution 2231 (2016),
especially restrictions that ban Iran’s export of arms
and related material and that ban all Member States
from transferring to Iran advanced weapon systems,
like missiles, tanks and combat aircraft.
That also means every Member State needs to
enforce the travel restrictions that remain in effect
under resolution 2231 (2015). The Secretary-General’s
report (S/2016/1136) notes that both Major General
Qasem Soleimani and Brigadier General Mohammad
Reza Naqdi have travelled to Iraq and Syria, in
defiance of the Council’s decisions. That is and should
be unacceptable to all of us.
As we have said before, the strength of resolution
2231 (2015) comes from the commitment of Member
States to enforcing it, and the United States calls
on them to do so. It is clear that, with the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, the world today is
better off than it was before. Even though there is a
long way to go in countering Iran’s destabilizing
behaviour in the Middle East, any world where Iran is
not pursuing a nuclear weapon is a safer world. Looking
ahead, as this deal is likely to be subjected to even
greater scrutiny than it is at present, it is important for
all of us — here and outside, in all of our nations — to
remember that it is much harder to build up frameworks
and institutions than to tear them down. The progress
we have achieved, so far, depends on maintaining our
collective determination to sustain the JCPOA. So, we,
and each of the JCPOA participants need to stand by
the commitments that we have made and work even
harder to make sure that all States comply with their
17-01253

18/01/2017

Non-proliferation

obligations under resolution 2231 (2015), and we need
to remember that if negotiating an Iran nuclear deal
was possible then we on the Council have it within our
power to act decisively when other crises demand it.
Let me conclude with an idea — fittingly, given the
Swedish presidency, from a renowned Swedish author,
Elin Wägner, who said that values and ideals are like
those old-fashioned bicycle lights. They do not light up
until and unless you start to pedal forward. That can
be said for so much of the work we aspire to do on the
Council, and it is true of all of the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. Unless we pedal, they do
not light up. The principles do not become real for real
people out in the real wold. Problems do not get fixed,
conflicts drag on, crushing poverty persists. Unless
we pedal hard and pedal together, we do not make the
impact that we seek. We do not make the impact that
we, who are sent here by our citizens and people, are
here to make. And we must keep working to make those
principles real, because as I have tried to underscore
so often, the lives of so many people depend on those
principles being turned into practice.
To the girl fleeing armed soldiers in South Sudan,
making protection more than a promise in a mandate,
means the difference between life and death. To the
child in a besieged city in Syria, the prohibition on
the bombing of schools and hospitals may mean the
difference between life and death. To the man or woman
in Uganda or North Korea, the idea that a person should
not be locked up for who you love or what you believe
might mean the difference between a life of freedom
and a life of imprisonment or harassment. So, as I leave,
I urge the Council to keep pedaling and to not give up,
especially when it seems hard. Make sure that those
principles in the United Nations Charter light up. Do
not let them go dark for the people who count on us. I
wish the Council all the best in the months and years
ahead, and I reiterate my thanks for the professionalism
and friendship of its members.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I want to begin
by paying tribute to Ms. Power in her final appearance
in the Security Council. Throughout my time here,
she has been that hard pedaling dynamo that she
just described. She has been a tireless advocate, a
passionate campaigner, a trusted ally and a true friend.
She has shown an unrelenting personal commitment
to tackling the most troubling issues: Syria, Ebola, the
Central African Republic and human rights. And on
all those issues and so many more, she has grounded

S/PV.7865

our diplomacy in humanity, bringing the voices of real
people affected by those conflicts into the Chamber.
Turning to Iran, let me join others in welcoming
the second report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2016/1136).
I thank our briefers for their remarks just now. I would
also like to welcome Mr. Cardi to his new role as
facilitator for resolution 2231 (2015). He takes on the
role at an important time. We have a significant year
ahead of us on the Iran nuclear dossier, but 12 months
on from implementation day, I think it is right to first
look back on how far we have come. We have seen
Iran remove 13,000 centrifuges, as well as associated
infrastructure, and eliminate its stock of 20 per cent
enriched uranium. We have seen the possibility of
Iran acquiring nuclear weapons disappear for over a
decade. We have seen Iran work with us and our E3+3
partners, in the Joint Commission and the working
groups established under the deal, and we are pleased
that the procurement channel, established for the
export of nuclear-related goods and services to Iran
is fully functional. Applications are being approved,
confidentiality is being respected and we hope to
receive applications from many more countries over the
coming year.
And in turn, we have also seen economic prospects
improve in Iran with United Kingdom exports, for
instance, to Iran growing by 42 per cent in just nine
months, last year. We remain committed to ensuring that
trade continues to grow to the tangible economic benefit
of the Iranian people under the joint comprehensive
plan of action (JCPOA). The second phase of sanctions
lifting, which will commence a maximum of eight
years after implementation date, provides a further
incentive for Iran to comply with the deal, but we
remain committed to ensuring that the sanctions that
remain in place, continue to be enforced robustly.
Away from the nuclear file, Iran continues to play a
destabilizing role in the region. That is most clearly seen
in Syria. Iran has failed to uphold its obligations under
international humanitarian law in Syria, for instance,
by failing to allow the delivery of humanitarian aid
into eastern Aleppo, as it was besieged. So we need to
recognize the fundamental tension in Iran’s engagement
with the world. On the one hand, through the Iran deal,
they were part of an indisputable diplomatic success,
one that degraded a significant threat to the region,
and yet on the other, we need only look to the victims
of Aleppo to see how Iran’s engagement in the region

17-012539/21

S/PV.7865

Non-proliferation

remains, so often, misguided. Iran continues to provide
substantial military and financial support to Hizbullah
and the Syrian regime.
As the Secretary-General’s report makes clear,
the leader of Hizbullah stated that Iran supplies all
their weapons and missiles. Senior Iranian individuals
listed under resolution 2231 (2015), continue to flout
the travel ban imposed by the Council, with Major
General Soleimani pictured in Aleppo in September, in
a show of support for the Syrian regime. Those actions
show that Iran chooses to complicate, not extinguish a
conflict that has persisted for far too long, and that is
simply not the way to build our confidence.
Iran must take clear steps to improve its
engagement in the region, this year. We welcome the
latest International Atomic Energy Agency report
(S/2016/983, annex), which confirmed that Iran continue
to comply, broadly, with its nuclear commitments and
we expect Iran to continue to do so, this year. But in
order to benefit fully from the lifting of United Nations,
European Union and United States sanctions, Iran
must build that confidence among the international
community and show that it has changed its disruptive
behaviour in the region.
Therefore, it is vital that Member States continue
to enforce the sanctions regime by acting on and
reporting all suspected violations. We echo the
Secretary-General’s call for all Member States to take
the necessary measures to prevent entry or transit of
Iranians subject to travel bans. We also urge Member
States to consider whether exporting arms to Iran is in
the best interests of the region. In addition, we remain
concerned by Iran’s ballistic missile program, and
we urge all Member States to continue to enforce the
sanctions regime on ballistic missile technology and to
act on and report all suspected violations. As one of the
architects of the JCPOA, the United Kingdom remains
committed to ensuring that the Iran deal is a success.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): On behalf
of France, but also in my personal capacity, let me begin
by paying special tribute to our colleague and friend
Samantha Power for her outstanding work and her
exemplary and tireless commitment to the values of the
United Nations. Ambassador Power is an exceptional
person, and I address to her from the bottom of my
heart my friendship and most cordial personal and
professional wishes for all the best in the next chapter
in her life.
10/21

18/01/2017

I would also like to congratulate our Italian
colleague, Mr. Sebastiano Cardi, for having taken over
from our Spanish colleague the role of facilitator of the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
Almost a year ago, on 16 January 2016, the Council
received assurances from the International Atomic
Energy Agency that Iran had successfully implemented
the preliminary actions related to the nuclear field and
specified in the agreement concluded on 14 July 2015
in Vienna between the E3+3 and Iran, paving the way
for its implementation. The adoption of the Vienna
agreement and its endorsement by the Council, through
resolution 2231 (2015), marked an important step, as
it strictly governed Iran’s nuclear activities over the
life of the agreement, with the ultimate objective of
re-establishing, in the end, confidence in the exclusively
peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear programme. At
that time, we welcomed this important achievement,
with regard both to our sustained efforts aimed at
non-proliferation and, more broadly, for stability in the
region and for international peace and security.
Over the past year, the E3+3 countries have
implemented their commitments in full. A very close
follow-up of the implementation of Iran’s nuclear
commitments has been put in place with a view to
promoting transparency and efficiency. In that context,
France fully supports the rigorous implementation of
all the provisions of the agreement and the monitoring
of the commitments of the parties over the long term.
The International Atomic Energy Agency has a crucial
role and has been diligently pursuing its verification
and monitoring activities of Iran’s implementation of
its nuclear commitments, in accordance with the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA).
I would also like to express our satisfaction
with the recent publication of documents approved
between the E3+3 and Iran in the framework of the
Joint Commission established by the agreement.
It contributes to the proper implementation of the
agreement by increasing transparency towards the
entire international community in the monitoring of
the implementation of the Iranian commitments. It
allows everyone to see the detail and modalities of
verification of Iranian commitments under the Vienna
agreement and to evaluate compliance with them in an
informed manner.
In that context of rigor and transparency, we see that
the benefits of the agreement for Iran are beginning to
17-01253

18/01/2017

Non-proliferation

be felt. On the economic and commercial front, bilateral
trade between France and Iran has increased by 200 per
cent in value since January 2016. Iranian oil exports
are continuously increasing. The French Government,
in conjunction with its partners in the European Union,
has continued its efforts to provide companies with the
necessary information and guidance on the lifting of
sanctions in order to support their return to Iran. We
will continue along that path.
Furthermore, in the nuclear field and within the
framework strictly determined by the agreement and
in accordance with its provisions, our two countries
have initiated discussions on the launching of bilateral
cooperation in the area of security and in certain fields of
magnetic confinement fusion. Finally, several requests
for the transfer of goods whose export is governed by
resolution 2231 (2015) have been submitted through the
procurement channel established by the agreement and
have been approved by the members of the Council.
Nevertheless, the establishment of a climate of lasting
confidence requires full respect for the commitments
made not only under the Vienna agreement but also
under resolution 2231 (2015), which endorsed it.
I would like to express our concern with regard to
the information on Iran’s failure to comply with several
important provisions of resolution 2231 (2015) over
the past six months, which is contained in the full and
factual report (S/2016/1136) that was presented to us.
We remain very concerned about the information that
has been detailed to us today. I am referring, of course,
to the Iranian arms seizures in 2016, mentioned in the
report, by Australia and the Combined Maritime Forces
and by my own country, which constitute violations of
annex B of resolution 2231 (2015). In the same vein, I
am referring in particular to the information available
to us on the arms transfers between Iran and Hizbullah,
which are of great concern to us.

S/PV.7865

remain vigilant about the continuation by Iran of any
such activity, contrary to resolution 2231 (2015), and
the spirit of the Vienna agreement, and contradicting
the objective of consolidating regional stability.
In conclusion, I would like to stress the need to
maintain our collective commitment to ensuring the
long-term implementation of all the provisions of the
Vienna agreement and of resolution 2231 (2015) in the
same spirit of cooperation that favoured the conclusion
of the agreement. The continuation of the diplomatic
success that the conclusion of the Vienna agreement
and the adoption of resolution 2231 (2015) represent
requires strict and transparent compliance in the long
term with all their provisions. France will therefore
remain vigilant and will contribute to the vigilance of
the Security Council throughout the process.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Jeffrey Feltman for presenting the second
report (S/2016/1136) of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). We note the
productive start to the work of the Security Council’s
new facilitator on the implementation of the resolution,
the Permanent Representative of Italy, Mr. Sebastiano
Cardi. We are also grateful to the Permanent
Representative of Spain for the important work that he
undertook previously on this very important resolution.
We highlight once again that the report of the
Secretary-General used less unsubstantiated data and
unverified information from the media that could not
be checked or confirmed than the first report (see
S/2016/589). The new report has become more factbased, impartial and neutral than the first. However, the
text continues to include some elements that can raise
serious questions. There are also repetitions, creating
artificial emphasis.

Furthermore, we are equally concerned about
the information relating to the travel abroad of Major
General Soleimani and Brigadier General Naqdi,
even though they are subject to a travel ban decided
by the Security Council and confirmed by resolution
2231 (2015 ). It is essential for regional stability and
international security that Iran should refrain from any
destabilizing activities.

The main shortcoming of the report is that the
Secretariat ignored Tehran’s wishes to include in it
information on the actual problems related to meeting
sanctions-lifting obligations in the framework of the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). As in
the first report, we note a clear slant towards issues of
implementing annex B aimed at maintaining limits on
the Islamic Republic of Iran. The result is a one-sided
and equivocal report.

Finally, we note the lack of information received
on activities in the field of ballistic missiles designed
to be capable of carrying nuclear weapons. We will

Although the report is submitted pursuant to
resolution 2231 (2015), the references made in it are only
to annex B, which is actually a separate statement of the

17-0125311/21

S/PV.7865

Non-proliferation

5+1 group. Let us not forget that, on 16 January 2016,
the Security Council drew up a special note instructing
the Secretary-General to submit reports. The note refers
to the entire resolution 2231 (2015), and not to separate
parts of it, in particular annex B. We suggest that, if
there are any doubts or questions about the scope, the
structure or individual elements of the report, then the
Secretary-General can, and must, approach the Security
Council for appropriate clarifications.
Furthermore, that procedure has already been used
by the Secretary-General, as reported in the report,
with regard to the issue of the temporary removal of
conventional weapons that are subject to restriction. We
call upon the Secretary-General to monitor the respect
for paragraph 27 of resolution 2231 (2015), which
clearly emphasizes the non-precedent-setting nature of
the provisions of the JCPOA, given that there have been
attempts to use the exclusive agreements in the JCPOA
in other contexts. A number of non-governmental
organizations have been trying to promote ways in which
the JCPOA could be used to enhance the International
Atomic Energy Agency’s (IAEA) safeguards system
and advance nuclear disarmament. Such arbitrary
actions must be monitored.
As before, we continue to call for a change in the
conceptual approach to the preparation of the report,
which presents all information in a negative tone. First
and foremost, the document should help to establish
and enhance conditions that would lead to a successful
and lasting implementation of the JCPOA, which would
be the most important diplomatic achievement.
The Russian Federation is generally satisfied with
the results that have been achieved in the year since the
start of the implementation of the JCPOA. The working
mechanisms of the Joint Commission have started
functioning and have been working satisfactorily. In
our view, the Commission is effectively addressing
emerging issues.
We believe that Iran is fully complying with its
obligations, which is reflected in the report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency. The occasional
technical problems that have emerged are being
addressed effectively, and the most recent clear example
of that is the approval by the Joint Commission of the
decision regarding the clean-up of the production line at
the Isfahan plant and the handling of enriched uranium.
In the long term, the procedure developed will allow
us to address the issue of Tehran’s compliance with
12/21

18/01/2017

the established limit of 300 kilogrammes for stocks of
such material.
We advocate against any attempts to exert pressure
on Tehran in the area of its missile and conventional
weapons programmes. Any threats in that area affecting
the lifting of unilateral sanctions and Iran’s return to
the international economic and financial markets are
unacceptable and counter-productive.
We would like to address an element contained in
the report — the request of the Secretary-General to the
Security Council to clarify the issue of the temporary
transfer of conventional weapons. We are ready to
participate actively in preparing and providing an
adequate reply to the Secretary-General. We believe
that the temporary removal of conventional weapons
does not fall under the scope of annex B.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China would like to thank you, Sir, for convening
today’s meeting. I also thank Under-Secretary-General
Feltman, Ambassador Cardi and Ambassador Vale de
Almeida for their briefings.
The implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) during the first year has
registered good progress overall. At the sixth Joint
Commission meeting of the JCPOA, everyone gave a
positive assessment of the implementation of the Plan
of Action, exchanged views on the lifting of sanctions
and on nuclear issues in an earnest and in-depth manner
and committed to the continuous implementation of
the JCPOA.
China has taken note of the reports submitted
by Secretary-General Guterres (S/2016/1136) and
Ambassador Cardi (see S/2017/49) as the facilitator
for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), and
appreciates the efforts that have gone into the drafting
of those reports. The reports provide an accurate
reflection of the implementation efforts made by the
parties concerned. It is of critical importance to send
a positive signal that all parties are committed to the
implementation of the resolution and the JCPOA. China
has taken note of Iran’s legitimate concerns with regard
to the content of the reports. China appreciates the
efforts by Iran to implement the JCPOA and hopes that
the legitimate concerns of Iran will be duly reflected.
China also acknowledges the recent report (see
S/2016/1113) by the Joint Commission to Security
Council on the work of the Procurement Working Group
17-01253

18/01/2017

Non-proliferation

and will continue to participate actively in the work of
both the Commission and the Working Group. Since the
JCPOA is not being implemented in a vacuum, there
will be difficulties and challenges along the way, and
joint efforts will be required. First, all parties should
reaffirm their political will and eliminate external
interference, so as to be able to stay the course in the
implementation. Secondly, the parties should honour
their commitments, in strict accordance with the
JCPOA, which provides the fundamental guidelines
for action. Thirdly, they should demonstrate goodwill
and properly address technical divergences through
consultations, on an equal footing, in the quest for a
long-term, sustainable solution. Only in so doing can
the implementation of JCPOA be successful and lasting.
China has always advocated for the settlement of
the Iran nuclear issue by political and diplomatic means
and is dedicated to the strengthening of the international
nuclear non-proliferation system and the maintenance
of international and regional peace and stability. As
an active participant, promoter and contributor in the
process to resolve the Iranian nuclear issue, China
supports and safeguards the historic achievement of
the JCPOA, and will continue to work with all parties
to promote the sustained, comprehensive and effective
implementation of the JCPOA.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I join with others in paying
tribute to and thanking Ambassador Samantha Power
for the tireless dedication with which she has tackled
the numerous difficulties that the world faces. It has
indeed been a pleasure working with Ambassador
Power, even if for only six months in my case.
I would like to thank the three briefers for their
detailed reports on this important topic.
Two days ago, we marked the first anniversary of
efforts to commence the implementation of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), and the launch
of meetings on resolution 2231 (2015) at the Security
Council. We are encouraged by the very positive
statements made by JCPOA members over the past few
days and today, reaffirming their strong commitment
to respect and implement the agreement. Japan fully
agrees on the importance of implementing the JCPOA
and resolution 2231 (2015), and will continue to strongly
support both.
One of the most visible examples of the support
we provide to the implementation of the JCPOA is
our cooperation with the International Atomic Energy

S/PV.7865

Agency (IAEA), which verifies and monitors that
Iran’s nuclear programme is being used exclusively for
peaceful purposes. Japan has announced that it will
provide assistance through the IAEA for the purposes
of implementing nuclear safety and safeguards
commitments. The IAEA is playing an invaluable role
in that regard, and we offer our full support.
The international community has wholeheartedly
backed the implementation of the nuclear- and JCPOArelated elements of resolution 2231 (2015). In addition,
the Council is also responsible for closely monitoring
the implementation of the provisions of annex B of
the resolution. Japan commends the efforts of the
Secretariat to provide an objective and comprehensive
report on that area. We are aware of some alleged
cases that may contravene the provisions of annex B,
in particular regarding the arms and travel bans. We
encourage the Secretariat to continue to examine those
cases. The Council should utilize tools such as the
Yemen Sanctions Committee and Somalia Sanctions
Committee to obtain the relevant information. As the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), I am pleased to
cooperate with the facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015), the Secretariat and other bodies.
Possible contraventions of the arms and travel bans
are particularly serious, because they have both direct
and indirect impacts on the regional situation. Japan
believes that one of the most significant by-products of
the JCPOA is its potential to contribute to peace and
security in the Middle East. We believe that Iran can,
and should, play a constructive role in addressing the
difficult situations in Syria and Yemen. The Council
is responsible for closely monitoring the situation and
taking appropriate measures as necessary in order to
prevent actions that could undermine the stability of
the region.
A significant achievement of resolution 2231
(2015) during the past six months was achieving the
full functionality of the procurement channel for
processing nuclear-related proposals. Japan appreciates
the efforts of the facilitator and the Secretariat to make
the mechanism useful and transparent for all Member
States, thereby ensuring the necessary information
security and confidentiality. We will continue to
support work under the resolution 2231 (2015) format
in that regard.

17-0125313/21

S/PV.7865

Non-proliferation

Many of us today have welcomed the steady
implementation of the JCPOA and resolution 2231
(2015), and we hope to see the participation of
the delegation of Iran in future meetings. Japan is
committed to working closely with Council members,
JCPOA members and Iran, both individually and
collectively, so as to enable the most effective possible
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to begin by
adding my sincerest words of thanks and paying tribute
to our colleague Ambassador Samantha Power. I thank
her for the opportunity and privilege to work with
her over the past year. I appreciate that we were able
to work so closely. I thank her for her convictions and
strong stand for justice. That is not to be forgotten. As
in Italian, in Ukrainian we say, “see you soon”. I hope
very much to see her soon again.
I would like to thank all three briefers for providing
factual and substantial reports on the status of the
implementation of both resolution 2231 (2015) and
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), as
well as for giving a detailed presentation on the work
conducted in that area over the past six months.
In that regard, I would like to point out that in
December 2016 Ukraine submitted to the facilitator its
national report on steps undertaken last year to bring
its legal framework into compliance with resolution
2231 (2015). Ukraine joins others in welcoming
implementation day on 16 January 2016, which we
believe marks a new stage in the Iranian nuclear issue
and in the promotion of peace and security in the
region. We highly commend the concerted efforts of the
Secretariat, the European Commission, the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the facilitator’s
team to ensure the full and proper implementation of the
JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015). Those instruments
have provided a platform of convergence for the
common interests of the international community and
have contributed to strengthening the non-proliferation
regime, in general.
As a staunch supporter of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Ukraine
stresses the importance of full and faithful compliance
with that crucial treaty, which aims at striking a
balance between the legitimate right to develop
nuclear energy and the need to stem the proliferation
of nuclear weapons. The JCPOA fully respects such a
balance. We welcome the detailed IAEA reports on the
14/21

18/01/2017

implementation of Iran’s nuclear-related commitments
under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action,
including heavy-water restrictions. We support the
Agency’s role in the verification and monitoring of the
use of nuclear material and technologies exclusively
for peaceful purposes. The provisional application
by Iran of the Additional Protocol Additional to
the Safeguards Agreement between Iran and the
International Atomic Energy Agency and Teheran’s
compliance with the transparency measures set out in
the JCPOA significantly contribute to the sustainable
implementation of the entire agreement.
Over the past six months, we have witnessed the
smooth and effective functioning of the procurement
channel mechanism, with the approval of several
proposals to supply the relevant goods and technologies
to Iran. We welcome that no actions were carried out in
contravention of the ballistic missile-related provisions
of annex B to resolution 2231 (2015) during the
reporting period, as the Secretary-General indicated.
At the same time, we share concerns relating to the
incidents involving the seizure of conventional arms,
allegedly originating in Iran, that were likely bound
for conflict zones. We fully support the intention of
the Secretary-General to continue examining those
cases and obtain additional information. The incidents
of non-compliance with the travel ban stipulated
by resolution 2231 (2015) jeopardize its successful
implementation as well.
Having stressed the imperative of full compliance
with the relevant obligations, Ukraine reiterates the
importance for all parties engaged in the process to
interact constructively to resolve outstanding issues
for the sake of the hard-won non-proliferation deal.
Its proper and diligent implementation represents a
key contribution to regional and global security and
stability. We call on all stake-holders involved to
ensure that the concerns raised in the reports of the
Secretary-General (S/2016/1136) and the facilitator (see
S/2017/49) are not allowed to lead to further disputes;
they should rather be duly considered and resolved
through constructive dialogue.
Proceeding from what I have just stated, and taking
into account the current tense situation in the Middle
East, it is important to further raise public awareness on
the progress achieved since the entry into force of this
historic nuclear agreement. That is even more important
17-01253

18/01/2017

Non-proliferation

at this juncture when we are about to enter a new cycle
of Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conferences.
To conclude, I reiterate the significance of unity in
the Council’s stance when dealing with this sensitive
issue and its determination to ensure the further
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Jeffrey Feltman, Ambassador João
Vale de Almeida and Ambassador Sebastiano Cardi
for their respective briefings on the implementation of
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and
resolution 2231 (2015).
Of course, I endorse everything that you said before
the meeting, Mr. President, with regard to Ambassador
Samantha Power. Whether one loves or hates her, one
will never be misled by her. What you see is what you
get. There is no duplicity in Samantha Power. That is a
great quality that is not abundantly present in the world.
I wish her and her family long life and success.
The Iranian nuclear deal represents, as UnderSecretary-General Feltman said, a significant
achievement of multilateralism and diplomacy in
addressing one of the most pressing peace and security
issues of our time. One year since implementation
day, the Security Council should be encouraged by the
progress made in the implementation of the landmark
JCPOA agreement, which contributes much to the
strengthening of the non-proliferation regime and the
promotion of international peace and security.
In that connection, we take note of the key
findings and recommendation of the Secretary-General
contained in his second biannual report (S/2016/1136)
on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). Most
notably, as others have indicated — and it is worth
repeating — no information has been received during the
past six months with regard to actions inconsistent with
resolution 2231 (2015), in particular as it pertains to the
supply, sale, transfer or export of nuclear-related items,
ballistic missile activity, or ballistic missile-related
transfers, as well as asset-freeze violations. That is
indeed a positive development, clearly indicating
that the implementation of the agreement is firmly
on course.
The Islamic Republic of Iran and the participating
countries deserve to be commended for demonstrating
strong commitment under the JCPOA framework. Of
course, we understand the challenges and difficulties

S/PV.7865

that may be encountered in implementation, and that
is only natural. However, it is absolutely critical that
all participants continue to display the same spirit
of cooperation in order to address this challenge and
preserve the agreement so as to achieve the desired
objectives. Here I would like to echo something that
Ambassador Vale de Almeida said in his briefing:
“The work we have undertaken so far has proven
that it is possible to reach agreements even on the
most contentious issues and to implement them,
provided that there is a will to do so.”
As the Secretary-General’s report indicates, there
are some issues that could lead to ambiguities and
different interpretations of the provisions of resolution
2231 (2015) on the JCPOA. In that regard, explanations
such as that provided by the Joint Commission on the
temporary transfer of nuclear weapons are necessary
in order to clear up misunderstandings and avoid
any possible obstacles to full implementation of
the agreement. The close cooperation and working
relationship between the Joint Commission and the
Security Council with regard to the procurement
channel is important. The continued cooperation of
the International Atomic Energy Agency with the
Islamic Republic of Iran and the JCPOA-participating
States will also continue to be critical to the full
implementation of the nuclear-related commitments
under the JCPOA and to the broader implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015).
Lastly, we are concerned about the information
provided by France about the seizure of arms shipments
that were probably destined for Yemen or Somalia,
as indicated in the Secretary-General’s report. We
therefore hope that the necessary investigation will
be carried out in order to verify the information and
that the Council will be briefed about the outcome in
due course.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Feltman, Mr. Cardi and Mr. Vale de Almeida for
their briefings, and Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi of
Spain for the work he led last year. The information
they have given us shows that the issue has positive
aspects, challenges and also some areas of concern.
Uruguay is firmly committed to non-proliferation
and to strengthening the nuclear disarmament regime.
We do not possess nuclear weapons and we are a
member of the world’s first nuclear-weapon-free zone
under the Treaty of Tlatelolco and its counterpart

17-0125315/21

S/PV.7865

Non-proliferation

organization in Latin America, the Agency for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
and the Caribbean, as well as a party to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. We were
pleased and optimistic about the signing in Vienna in
2015 of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action on the
Iranian nuclear programme.
Exactly one year later, after the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) had verified that Iran had
complied with the initial provisions of the agreement,
during Uruguay’s presidency of the Council, we reached
the starting date for implementation, marking another
important milestone in the process, a key achievement
for non-proliferation and a significant contribution
to international peace, security and stability that
eliminates one of the main sources of tension in the
troubled region of the Middle East.
The steps taken by Iran and the other parties to the
agreement showed that positive results can be achieved
with political will and diplomacy, even in cases where
they seem distant prospects. We appreciate the IAEA’s
confirmation that so far Iran has been fulfilling the
provisions of the agreement. At the same time, we are
concerned about the criticisms in the report regarding
Iran’s possible violation of the provisions of annex B
to resolution 2231 (2015). In that regard, while we are
grateful for Iran’s detailed report on its compliance
with that annex, in the future we would also like to
know the degree of its compliance with other aspects
of the resolution, including annex A. Uruguay urges all
the parties to the agreement to take all the necessary
measures stipulated in resolution 2231 (2015) and to
comply with its provisions in order not to jeopardize
a historic agreement that was the result of more than
two years of intense negotiations. In that regard, we
encourage the parties to act with restraint and caution
and to refrain from taking any action that runs counter
to the agreement. The Security Council, as a guarantor
of international peace and security, should oversee its
full compliance.
(spoke in English)
I would like to express my good wishes to the lady
sitting on my right, whom I will miss. It has been a
pleasure working with Ms. Power — whether we have
been in agreement or disagreement, it has always been
a pleasure and an enriching experience to listen to her
arguments, but mostly to be touched by the fire and
passion that she always puts into her statements. I wish
16/21

18/01/2017

her all the very best. In Spanish we often say adiós, but
we also often say hasta pronto — see you soon.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would like to begin by thanking the
Secretary-General and the Secretariat for preparing
this important report (S/2016/1136) on monitoring
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), on
Iran. I would also like to welcome my friend and
colleague Ambassador Sebastiano Cardi as facilitator
for the resolution’s implementation and to wish him
every success.
Egypt would like to emphasize the importance of
Iran’s continued compliance with its obligations under
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and related Security Council resolutions. The Security
Council and the relevant international organizations
must continue to carry out their responsibilities
regarding verification of Iran’s compliance with
its commitments in the area of nuclear and missile
activities, as well as other activities covered under the
Security Council resolutions, particularly resolution
2231 (2015), on the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.
We would also like to stress how seriously we take
Iran’s suspected continuing illegal arms trafficking in
the Middle East, its role in fuelling some of the conflicts
in the region and its sponsorship of terrorism, all of
them activities that destabilize the region. They are a
violation of United Nations principles, first and foremost
the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs
of States. They also run counter to the neighbourly
relations that we wish all countries in the region would
commit to so that we can achieve the stability we want,
paving the way for constructive dialogue.
In that context, we should once again reiterate
the resolutions of the League of Arab States on Iran’s
conduct in the region, particularly the importance of
reaching a settlement on the three Emirati islands and
addressing Iran’s interference in the internal affairs of
Arab States, as well as its conduct, which has a clearly
sectarian attitude that tends to exacerbate the tension,
division and violence that are already widespread in the
Middle East.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would like
to say at the outset, Mr. President, that my delegation
fully associates itself with the very apt words you
expressed prior to the beginning of this meeting in
paying well-deserved tribute to Ambassador Samantha
Power as she prepares to leave the Chamber and her
17-01253

18/01/2017

Non-proliferation

work as Permanent Representative of the United States.
Ambassador Power has served her country with
dedication and on every occasion found the energy
necessary to advance the Council’s work, including on
issues related to Africa. We wish her good luck.
I should like to thank Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman; Ambassador De
Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations; and Ambassador Sebastiano
Cardi, Permanent Representative of Italy and facilitator
of the implementation of resolution 2231(2015), for
their briefings.
By endorsing the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) in resolution 2231 (2015) on 20 July
2015, the Security Council confirmed the agreement
on the Iranian nuclear issue, which enshrines the
completion of 12 years of diplomatic efforts on the
part of the United States of America, Russia, Germany,
France, the United Kingdom, China,the European
Union and the Islamic Republic of Iran.
The report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2016/1136),
which we are discussing today and which is the second
of its kind established in accordance with the provisions
set out in annex В to that resolution, comprehensively
describes the provisions relating to nuclear issues and
ballistic missiles, travel bans, the freezing of assets
and measures taken to promote the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015).
With regard to nuclear-related provisions, the
report clearly indicates that the Islamic Republic of Iran
continues to fulfil its obligations, as outlined in the last
two quarterly reports published by the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in September and
November on its verification and monitoring activities
in that country, as well as the monitoring of Iran’s
implementation of its nuclear-related commitments
under the JCPOA.
In addition, we welcome the five new nuclear
proposals submitted under the procurement channel,
three of which have already been approved by
the Security Council. This clearly confirms the
effectiveness of the cooperation between our Council
and the Joint Commission set up under the JCPOA.
The interface thus constituted between the members
of the Security Council and the Joint Commission
is functioning well, thereby ensuring visibility,
inclusiveness and transparency. Similarly, no activity or

S/PV.7865

transfer of ballistic missiles by Iran has been reported
in the report, thereby reinforcing compliance with the
provisions of the resolution by that country.
However, mention is made once again of a transfer
of arms from the Islamic Republic of Iran, in violation
of the provisions of annex В to resolution 2231 (2015).
We are awaiting more information from the Secretariat
concerning the origin of these weapons. Moreover, the
Senegalese delegation is concerned about indications
that Iran is supplying weapons to Hizbullah.
With regard to the freezing of assets and travel
bans, we urge the parties to respect these provisions
while the Council continues to work on delisting the
remaining 36 entities and persons.
With regard to the efforts of the Secretariat and
the facilitator in the implementation of resolution
2231, including the practical information provided on
the procurement channel, we can say that they deserve
all our support and cooperation. Indeed, thanks to an
informative website and awareness-raising activities,
Member States have access to the information necessary
to fulfil their obligations properly, in particular the
follow-up of actions deemed not to comply with
resolution 2231 (2015), the procurement channel,
confidentiality, notifications and exemptions, not to
mention issues of transparency and popularization.
I should like to conclude by noting that the
Senegalese delegation is of the opinion that the annual
review of the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015)
is generally positive and encourages the facilitator, all
stakeholders in the JCPOA and the States Members of
the United Nations to persevere in this direction.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I
should like to join our colleagues in paying tribute
to Ambassador Samantha Power for her dedication,
commitment and contribution to peace and security.
We wish her every success in her future endeavours.
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Feltman, European Union observer De Almeida and
Permanent Representative of Italy Sebastiano Cardi for
their briefings.
Our gratitude also goes to the Security Council
secretariat for its support to the Council in implementing
resolution 2231 (2015).
My country has always supported the process
of international negotiations on the Iranian nuclear

17-0125317/21

S/PV.7865

Non-proliferation

programme and made a practical contribution to it.
Two rounds of talks on this matter in Kazakhstan in
2013 contributed to creating an atmosphere of trust
and confidence that facilitated further fruitful rounds
of negotiations between the P5+1 and Iran, and paved
the way for the agreement. As part of the agreement,
in 2015 and 2016 Kazakhstan supplied Iran with
natural uranium on commercial terms in compensation
for the removal of low-enriched uranium from that
country, as specified in the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA). We are ready and willing to
continue our supply, if necessary, in accordance with
the requirements of resolution 2231 (2015) and other
documents related to the Iranian nuclear programme.
For the past thee years, Kazakhstan has
contributed $650,000 to the Nuclear Security Fund
of the International Atomic Energy Agency, some of
which have been allocated to support monitoring and
verification activities in Iran in relation to the Joint
Plan of Action.
As noted in the second report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2016/1136), over the past year there has
been no report of Iranian violations of the provisions
of annex B to resolution 2231 (2015). In this regard, we
commend the strong commitment of Iran to complying
with resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA, which
is very important to the further implementation of
the Agreement.
At the same time, we note that in the past reporting
period only five additional nuclear-related proposals
have been submitted through the procurement channel,
three of which were approved by the Security Council.
These statistics, in our view, suggest the need to
maintain ongoing transparency, with practical guidance
and outreach as a priority. That is important in view of
the need for a proper understanding and implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015).
Implementing the JCPOA has had a significant
impact on normalizing the situation in the region as
a whole. The JCPOA will have a positive effect on
the revitalization of economic activity in the region.
In that context, the expansion of economic relations
between Iran and regional countries, including the
Central Asian States, will promote business activity
and economic development in the region. As evidence
of this, I would cite the mutual visits of the heads of
Kazakhstan and Iran in the past year. In April 2016,
President of Kazakhstan Nazarbayev paid a visit to
18/21

18/01/2017

Tehran, which resulted in 51 commercial agreements
and contracts worth more than $1 billion. In December
2016, Iranian President Rouhani made a return visit to
Astana, during which further agreements were reached
to strengthen mutually beneficial trade, economic and
investment cooperation. Kazakhstan, as a land-locked
country, gained the opportunity to enter the world
markets and export its products with the launch of
the Kazakhstan-Turkmenistan-Iran railway. Thus, the
JCPOA has brought positive changes and, consequently,
the revival of economic relations among the countries
of the region.
In conclusion, I wish to underline that Kazakhstan
will continue to support and to implement strictly
resolution 2231 (2015), and express the readiness of my
Government to cooperate with Iran in the framework of
implementing the JCPOA.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia): At the outset, I wish to join my colleagues in
wishing Ms. Samantha Power and her family happiness,
peace and love.
(spoke in Spanish)
Allow me to express the gratitude of my delegation
for the report presented by Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, the
statement made by the Head of the Delegation of the
European Union, Mr. João Vale de Almeida, as well as
for the report presented by the Permanent Representative
of Italy, Mr. Sebastiano Cardi, as facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) — which was negotiated by Germany, China,
the United States of America, the Russian Federation,
France, the United Kingdom, the High Representative
of the European Union and the Islamic Republic of
Iran — was adopted on 14 July 2015. On 20 July, the
Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 2231
(2015), in which it endorsed the JCPOA. The Security
Council affirmed that the implementation of the Plan
of Action would contribute to building trust in the
exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear programme
and highlighted the fact that the Plan promotes and
facilitates the normal development of cooperation and
economic and trade contacts with the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
That moment in recent history represented a
qualitative step forward when compared to other
conflicts facing humankind. As such, it was doubtlessly
17-01253

18/01/2017

Non-proliferation

a victory for multilateralism over unilateralism. It
was a victory for the respect of the equality of all
United Nations Member States over interventionism.
It was a victory for negotiation over compulsion. It
was a victory of diplomacy against the use of force,
and a clear illustration that diplomacy cannot and
should not be entrenched in fixed positions. Instead,
diplomacy should help us to build bridges, encourage
rapprochement and identify mutual interests that allow
us to resolve our disputes peacefully.
As has been expressed here today, it was not only
the fact that we reached this agreement that fills us
with a deep sense of satisfaction and hope, but the
implementation of the agreement as well. Iran — and
we should all recognize this — has met its obligations.
In addition, the United Nations, the European Union
and the United States have lifted sanctions related to
the matter.
The International Atomic Energy Agency has
asked the Security Council to undertake the necessary
verification and monitoring of Iran’s fulfilment of its
obligations in the nuclear sphere with regard to the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) (see S/2016/589). Allow me
to point out that I do this not only in my capacity as
Permanent Representative of Bolivia, but also as a
member of the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States, a nuclear-weapon-free zone. We hope
to soon see the day when the Middle East in its entirety
will also be a zone declared free of nuclear weapons.
And we have not given up on the dream that our entire
planet will one day be free of these weapons, which
represent a serious threat, not only to international
peace and security, but also to the very survival of our
species and Mother Earth.
The report presented today pursuant to the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) shows
progress in the review of each case, and encourages us
to ensure that each review is independent, impartial,
comprehensive and conclusive, based on reliable
information, and its results duly verified. We are of
the view that when additional information is required,
the Secretariat should use all the necessary sources of
information so that it can include in its report those cases
that have been brought to its attention. We highlight
that the aforesaid is aimed only at contributing to the
continuity of the work undertaken by the SecretaryGeneral with regard to the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015).

S/PV.7865

In conclusion, we believe it vital that the next report
to be submitted to this body deal with the provisions of
annexes A and B of resolution 2231 (2015).
Mr. Cardi (Italy) (spoke in French): I shall speak
in my national capacity.
Since its conclusion, Italy has considered the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) to be proof
of how diplomacy can effectively lead to a solution
to issues related to nuclear non-proliferation. In
particular, the JCPOA has been set up with a robust
and comprehensive structure, supported by a solid
verification mechanism, which is crucial to upholding
mutual trust and the credibility of the Plan. For that
reason, Italy will continue to strongly support the
International Atomic Energy Agency in its verification
and monitoring duties. In that respect, Italy commends
the Agency for the work it has done to date and the
productive dialogue it has held with all stakeholders.
Italy also commends the High Representative of the
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Federica
Mogherini, for her leadership as Coordinator of the
Joint Commission established by the JCPOA.
Two days after the first anniversary of
implementation day, it is clear that the mechanism
effectively contributes to global security. The
implementation of the JCPOA and of resolution 2231
(2015) has advanced very significantly thus far. We
trust that all the parties will continue to respect their
commitments and the spirit of the agreement in good
faith. Only good faith implementation of the JCPOA
and of resolution 2231 (2015) will contribute to regional
and international peace and security.
We encourage all stakeholders to continue to
promptly resolve any potential issues through dialogue,
using all the relevant mechanisms set up by the JCPOA.
Of course, the Security Council has a key role in this
process, and Italy will do its part to facilitate the smooth
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), taking the
excellent work done by my predecessor, Ambassador
Román Oyarzun Marchesi, as an example.
In conclusion, we believe that in coming years the
international community should continue to ensure that
the JCPOA yields benefits for all and that it maintains its
central role in the global effort against the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Sweden.

17-0125319/21

S/PV.7865

Non-proliferation

Sweden warmly welcomed the agreement on the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) in July
2015. It is a victory for diplomacy and a prime example
of peaceful dispute resolution and conflict prevention.
Its successful implementation benefits both stability in
the region and international peace and security. We call
on all parties to fully honour their commitments and
to build on the momentum provided by the agreement.
Sweden welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2016/1136), which finds that implementation,
overall, is on track. We commend the Government of
the Islamic Republic of Iran for its compliance with its
nuclear-related obligations, as evidenced by the reports
of the International Atomic Energy Agency. The fact
that there has been no information indicating activities
in contravention of restrictions regarding ballistic
missile activity and related technology is welcome. It is
also promising that the procurement channel process is
working, in line with the agreement.
Despite the generally positive picture regarding
implementation, a number of areas for concern remain,
however.
First, we are concerned about reports of arms
transfers, alleged to have originated in Iran, having
taken place. All supply, sale or transfer of arms or
related materials from Iran must be authorized on a
case-by-case basis by the Security Council.
Secondly, there have been reported contraventions
of the travel ban. Only the Security Council can
determine when such travel is justified, and all
countries must meet their obligations to prevent entry
and transit through their territories of individuals on
the list maintained pursuant to resolution 2231 (2015).
Sweden calls on the Government of Iran to
formally respond to the reports of activities undertaken
contrary to the provisions of annex B to the resolution
identified in the Secretary-General’s report. We stress
the importance of the Secretary-General receiving all
the necessary information, including the opportunity
to examine specific seizures of arms suspected to
have originated in Iran. A close dialogue between
Iran and the Secretary-General and between Iran
and the facilitator is instrumental in that regard. A
crucial confidence-building measure would be early
ratification by Iran of the Additional Protocol.
The historic agreement is one of the major
diplomatic achievements of the past decade. Successful
20/21

18/01/2017

implementation requires the long-term commitment of
all parties, based on mutual trust and respect. I hope we
can all work towards that end.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Braun (Germany): Germany would like to
thank today’s briefers and the Secretary-General for his
second report on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) (S/2016/1136), introduced by Under-SecretaryGeneral Feltman at this meeting. Let me briefly make
three points.
First, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA), endorsed by resolution 2231 (2015), is an
outstanding success of diplomacy in an extremely
volatile region. It is a thoughtful agreement building on
and strengthening the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. One year into the implementation
of the JCPOA, there is no doubt that the deal is working.
All participants have been keeping their commitments.
That contributes to security and stability in the region.
All participants to the agreement will now need to
adhere to the JCPOA for its full duration in order to
ensure its continued success.
Secondly, the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) has to date verified in four
reports that Iran is abiding by its nuclear-related
commitment — and I stress nuclear-related. Going
ahead, verification and monitoring by the IAEA will
remain essential to re-establishing trust and confidence
and to reassuring the world that Iran’s nuclear
programme serves exclusively peaceful purposes. The
easing of sanctions has brought considerable economic
progress to Iran over the past 12 months. Just two
indicators are the fact that gross domestic product has
grown by 4.5 per cent and the conclusion of substantial
business contracts, among them by Boeing and Airbus.
That is a powerful and encouraging signal.
We are confident that the people of Iran are
now beginning to reap the benefit of Iran’s return to
international trade and growth. At the same time, we
all know that economic consolidation and growth take
time. The full and comprehensive implementation of
the JCPOA provides the basis for that to happen. It is a
precondition for confidence to also grow in the business
community. Germany remains committed to the goal
17-01253

18/01/2017

Non-proliferation

of re-establishing full economic ties with Iran to the
benefit of all parties concerned.
Thirdly, Germany welcomes the fact that the
procurement channel has become fully operational. We
thank Spain for its important role in that regard. We
look forward to continuing the excellent cooperation
with the Security Council via the new facilitator, Italy.
The Vienna agreement and resolution 2231 (2015)
are a victory for the principles of the United Nations.
The JCPOA negotiations show the power of persistent
multilateral diplomacy to address major international

S/PV.7865

challenges. Germany is proud to be a party to the
JCPOA and remains firmly committed to its continued
and full implementation.
With your permission, Mr. President, I would also
like to take this opportunity to wish our colleague,
Ambassador Samantha Power, also on behalf of the
non-members of the Security Council, godspeed in
her future endeavours, and good luck to all of us in
the future without her at this table. Samantha will
be missed.
The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.

17-0125321/21
