A /70/PV.69

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

69

th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 8 December 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Denmark)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Abdrakhmanov
(Kazakhstan), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 79 (continued)
Oceans and the law of the sea
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/70/74 and
A/70/74/Add.1)
Report on the work of the Ad Hoc Working
Group of the Whole on the Regular Process
for Global Reporting and Assessment of the
State of the Marine Environment, including
Socioeconomic Aspects (A/70/418)
Report on the work of the United Nations Openended Informal Consultative Process (A/70/78)
Letter from the Co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc
Working Group of the Whole to the President
of the General Assembly (A/70/112)
Draft resolution (A/70/L.22)
(b) Sustainable fisheries, including through the
1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating
to the Conservation and Management of
Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory
Fish Stocks, and related instruments
Draft resolution (A/70/L.19)

15-41197 (E)

Mr. Shapoval (Ukraine): Ukraine fully aligns
itself with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union (see A/70/PV.68) and would like to
make a statement in its national capacity.
We would like to express our gratitude to the
Secretariat and to the Division for Ocean Affairs and
the Law of the Sea for the work done during the year,
including the preparation of the annual report on oceans
and the law of the sea (A/70/74). Our appreciation also
goes to Ambassador Eden Charles and Ms. Alice Revell
for their excellent stewardship of the consultations on
draft resolutions A/70/L.22 and A70/L.19.
Ukraine is strongly committed to the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) as
a framework convention that represents the constitution
of the oceans, reflects customary international law and
establishes the overarching legal framework within
which all activities in the oceans and seas should be
managed. It is our firm belief that that the goal of
universal participation in the Convention will soon be
met.
The UNCLOS legal order currently faces just
such a challenge from the wrongful international acts
of the Russian Federation in Ukraine and its maritime
areas. Our delegation recalls that Russia, beginning in
February 2014, carried out an armed aggression against
our country, in violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, and engineered a referendum on secession,
in breach of the fundamental rules and principles of
international law, including the principles of respect for
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the State.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1541197*

A/70/PV.69

In that regard, Ukraine would like to recall that
resolution 68/262, entitled “Territorial integrity of
Ukraine”, reconfirms the sovereignty of Ukraine
over Crimea and calls upon all States, international
organizations and specialized agencies not to recognize
any alteration of the status of the Autonomous Republic
of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol on the basis of the
so-called referendum, and to refrain from any action
or dealing that might be interpreted as recognizing any
such altered status.
Thus, Russia’s attempt to assume Ukraine’s
legitimate responsibility for international shipping
matters — including those regarding the safety of
navigation, the protection of marine environment from
ship pollution, search and rescue, ship registration, and
the certification of crew members of seagoing vessels
in the maritime areas adjacent to Crimea and the city
of Sevastopol — is a wrongful act at the international
level, for which the Russian Federation bears
international responsibility. The Russian Federation’s
unlawful unilateral amendments of navigational charts,
published in the notices to mariners by the Department
of Navigation and Oceanography of the Ministry of
Defence of the Russian Federation, constitutes unlawful
usurpation of navigational and hydrographic support of
navigation.
It should also be emphasized that the Russian
Federation continues to violate the sovereign rights of
Ukraine in other areas of the international law of the
sea. In particular, the Russian Federation has violated
Ukraine’s sovereign rights to natural resources by
illegal exercising regulatory jurisdiction and by seizing
and illegally using Ukrainian gas and oil fields located
in the Black Sea, which are part of the continental
shelf and exclusive economic zone of Ukraine. Those
and other flagrant breaches of UNCLOS have serious
repercussions for the rights and obligations of Ukraine
and other parties to the Convention.
I wish to recall the decision of the Government of
Ukraine to close down, beginning in June last year,
all seaports in the territory of Crimea, namely, those
of Kerch, Sevastopol, Feodosia, Yalta and Yevpatoria.
All States members of the International Maritime
Organization (IMO) were duly notified of that decision
through the IMO secretariat. Moreover, the Ukrainian
side has raised that issue at various IMO meetings,
including the ninety-fourth and ninety-fifth sessions
of the IMO Maritime Safety Committee, in November
2014 and June 2015, as well as at the 25th Meeting

2/20

08/12/2015

of States Parties to UNCLOS in June 2015. Ukraine
expects the competent authorities of all Member States
to ensure the compliance of ship owners, operators and
ship masters with international law and the decision of
Ukraine to close the ports in Crimea and Sevastopol.
Notwithstanding the Ukrainian side’s decision
to close its seaports and to limit navigation within its
jurisdiction, commercial vessels and warships flying
the flag of the Russian Federation systematically
enter the closed Ukrainian seaports and navigate
without authorization in Ukraine’s internal waters and
territorial sea, namely, the Black Sea and the Sea of
Azov. By November 2015, more than 200 different
vessels and non-commercial ships flying the Russian
flag had illegally entered closed ports in the Crimea
peninsula. At the same time, Ukraine has not received
any response from the Russian Federation to Ukraine’s
numerous notes verbales on that particular issue. The
Russian Federation’s systematic violation of restrictions
lawfully imposed by Ukraine in its seaports, internal
waters and territorial sea constitute a violation of
Ukraine’s sovereignty and a breach of the Convention.
Encouraged by the international community’s
success in countering maritime piracy, Ukraine wishes
to underscore that no sustainable results are possible
until we deal with the root causes of piracy and the
perpetrators of acts of piracy, as well as their organizers
and facilitators on land, are brought to justice. We
express our growing concern over the high number
of accidents of piracy and armed robbery at sea in the
Gulf of Guinea, in particular violence against innocent
crew members. Ukraine also fully supports the IMO
recommendations to Governments for preventing and
suppressing piracy and armed robbery against ships,
additionally revised by the Maritime Safety Committee
and distributed in IMO circular letter No. 1333. Ukraine
urges coastal States, flag States and industry to do
everything possible to ensure the safety and security
of maritime shipping, especially in high-risk regions.
As one of the major origin States for seafarers,
Ukraine stands ready to further cooperate with the States
Members of the United Nations , IMO, the International
Labour Organization and other actors with a view to
enhancing measures aimed at protecting the welfare
of seafarers who fall victim to pirates, including their
post-incident treatment and reintegration into society.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): Viet Nam joins other
States in welcoming the remarkable achievements in

15-41197

08/12/2015

marine and sea management and uses within the legal
framework of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).
We would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (A/70/74), which emphasizes
the role of ocean activities in achieving sustainable
development, as well as the importance of the effective
implementation of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea. We also would like to express our
appreciation for the enormous efforts and work of the
subsidiary organs of the General Assembly in recent
years. We appreciate the outcome document of the Ad
Hoc Open-ended Informal Working Group to study
issues relating to the conservation and sustainable use
of marine biological diversity beyond areas of national
jurisdiction (see A/69/780), which reaffirms the
commitment of States to developing an international,
legally binding instrument under UNCLOS. Vietnam
also welcomes the successful activities of the organs
established by the Convention, including the success
of the twenty-first session of the International Seabed
Authority, the collaborative efforts of the Commission
on the Limits of the Continental Shelf to consider the
submissions made by States parties, and the various
activities of the International Tribunal on the Law of
the Sea this year.
Viet Nam joins other States in underscoring the
vital role of oceans as well as the impact of human
activities on our oceans. In that regard, we would like to
recall the importance of UNCLOS — the constitution
of the oceans — in promoting the peaceful, equitable,
sustainable and efficient use of oceans and governing
activities in the oceans and seas with the aim of
achieving common peace and prosperity for humankind.
We are pleased to see that, more than 30 years after the
Convention’s adoption and more than 20 years since its
entry into force, UNCLOS has become one of the most
widely recognized international multilateral treaties.
As a State party to the Convention and a coastal State
in the East Sea or South China Sea, Viet Nam has always
adhered to the provisions of the Convention, respected
the legal rights of other nations and participated in
activities under the framework of the Convention. We
have established sea zones under its jurisdiction and in
accordance with its provisions, as well as a regime for
maritime management, exploration and exploitation, in
order to advance the country’s economic development
and ensure national food security.

A/70/PV.69

We deeply understand the importance of
maintaining peace and stability in the region and of
the sustainable development of the ocean economy. All
countries should respect and fulfil their obligations and
conduct activities to ensure the sustainable development
of the oceans in accordance with international law.
In that vein, we support the General Assembly’s new
focus on sustainable development and the conservation
of marine diversity and safe maritime navigation. At
the regional level, Viet Nam welcomes the efforts of all
nations in maintaining peace, security and cooperation
for development in the South China Sea and in ensuring
the effective implementation of the Declaration on the
Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea. Viet Nam
urges all parties concerned to redouble their efforts to
advance the consultative process on the code of conduct
to its next phase.
However, there is still a gap between political
commitment and practical actions, which causes
tension and complicates the situation in our region.
Viet Nam calls on all concerned parties to abide by
their commitments, respect and comply with the rules
of international law, and refrain from any activities
that would change the status quo, militarize the South
China Sea or complicate or escalate disputes, thereby
affecting peace and stability in the region.
The seas and oceans are an invaluable gift of
nature. Let us join hands in preserving marine life
and the environment so that the sea and ocean remain
forever the cradle for the development of humankind.
Mr. AlMowaizri (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I thank Mr. Mogens Lykketoft for presiding over
this session of the General Assembly and the SecretaryGeneral for the report he has submitted to the General
Assembly (A/70/74), pursuant to the resolutions on
oceans and the law of the sea.
Kuwait has considered the report on oceans and
the law of the sea, which reiterates that sustainable
development is based on the Earth’s natural resources,
including the oceans and seas. That issue is addressed
by the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(resolution 70/1), in particular Goal 14, which advocates
the protection of oceans and seas to achieve sustainable
development.
International navigation and shipping make up
a large part of international trade, despite the acts of
pirates and terrorists who target vessels and other marine
activity, posing a significant threat to international

15-411973/20

A/70/PV.69

shipping and the lives of all who work in that field. The
State of Kuwait therefore condemns all acts of piracy
and terrorism on the seas and oceans and welcomes the
efforts of the International Maritime Organization and
the International Labour Organization to combat such
activities and to address such crimes.
This year marks the thirtieth anniversary of the
United Nations Convention of the Law of the Sea,
to which we acceded in 1986. We attach particular
importance to that instrument. We have also ratified
all the documents related to its implementation. In
addition, we have acceded to the Convention on the
International Regulations for Preventing Collisions
at Sea and to other measures on the protection of the
sea. In that regard, the State of Kuwait welcomes the
fact that a number of other States have also acceded to
that Convention, as well as to others as observers. We
would therefore encourage other States to accede to the
Convention so that we can resolve the problems that it
addresses.
We would also like to see greater respect for
international law in this area. Based on that conviction,
Kuwait makes every effort to respect resolution Security
Council 2246 (2015), which was adopted on 10 November
within the framework of the Chapter VII Charter of the
United Nations. The resolution encourages all States
to criminalize acts of piracy within their national
legislation with a view to preventing them, in line with
international law and international human rights law.
To conclude, the State of Kuwait invites all Member
States to cooperate and pool their efforts to make good
use of the resources of the sea through technology and
in respect for all legal provisions and international
conventions so as to maintain international peace and
security.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Our delegation attaches great importance to
the General Assembly’s discussion of issues concerning
the law of the sea and sustainable fishing. We thank
the Secretary-General for his substantive reports on
maritime issues. We also thank the coordinators of the
informal consultations on draft resolutions A/70/L.19
and A/70/L.22, under consideration today, as well as
the Director and staff of the Division for Ocean Affairs
and the Law of the Sea, who have made a professional
contribution to the work on the draft resolutions.
We recognize the importance of maintaining and
making sustainable use of the resources of the world’s

4/20

08/12/2015

seas. We have consistently advocated for strengthening
the scientific foundation for the development of policies
on maritime activities. In that connection, we welcome
the outcome of the first global assessment of the state of
the marine environment (see A/70/418), which has been
completed this year. We thank the Group of Experts
of the Regular Process for Global Reporting and
Assessment of the State of the Marine Environment,
including Socioeconomic Aspects, for its extensive
work.
We welcome the discussions that took place at
the 16th meeting of the United Nations Open-ended
Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law
of the Sea. That forum remains a useful platform for
reviewing a broad spectrum of maritime issues. We
believe that it should continue to be held regularly.
We have closely followed the discussions within the
United Nations of issues related to the conservation and
sustainable use of marine biological diversity of areas
beyond national jurisdiction. We intend to participate
constructively in the work of the preparatory committee
set up under resolution 69/292.
Nevertheless, we will not be able to support
initiatives that could lead to an unjustified limitation
of maritime activities in the absence of corresponding
reliable scientific and international legal bases. We
believe that the process launched under resolution
69/292 should not damage the current system of regional
fisheries management organizations or existing
international treaties, first and foremost the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and the 1995
Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation
and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly
Migratory Fish Stocks, and related instruments. The
Russian delegation intends to play an active role
in the 2016 Review Conference for that important
Agreement. We are in favour of enhancing measures to
combat illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing. We
encourage States to participate in establishing new and
improving the effectiveness of existing regional fishing
organizations.
We note the work of the bodies set up in accordance
with the 1982 Convention. Next year will mark the
twentieth anniversary of the International Tribunal
for the Law of the Sea, which has reviewed dozens of
cases in those years. The Commission on the Limits of
the Continental Shelf is also working actively, which

15-41197

08/12/2015

has led to a significant increase in the workload for
those involved. We believe that its members should be
provided with suitable service conditions, including
faster resolution of matters related to their medical
insurance when they are working in New York. As
active members of the Committee, we intend to continue
to participate in the work of the Working Group on the
Conditions of Service in order to identify effective
measures that will allow us over time to optimize its
activities.
In conclusion, I would like to express regret at the
latest attempt by the delegation of Ukraine to make
use of the General Assembly to make unfounded
allegations concerning Russia. The status of Crimea,
like other maritime areas, was defined as a peninsula in
a statement issued a number of years ago. This question
has nothing to do with the agenda item we are discussing
today, but since the subject has been raised, I would
like to assure the Assembly that the Russian authorities
are duly fulfilling their obligations under international
maritime law in the areas under Russian jurisdiction.
That fully applies to the waters off the coast of Crimea.
Mr. Li Yongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The ocean is the cradle of human civilization, the
common home of humankind and a valuable space
for sustainable development. Promoting sustainable
maritime development represents the shared aspiration
of peoples throughout the world and corresponds with
the proposals put forward by the Chinese Government
towards a harmonious world and harmonious oceans
and seas.
The Chinese delegation is very pleased to see that
the conservation and sustainable use of oceans and seas
have been incorporated as a significant component
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(resolution 70/1). To achieve that goal, countries need
to develop political will and embrace the idea of a
community of common destiny in addressing ocean
affairs so as to jointly respond to challenges and
expand pragmatic cooperation with a view to achieving
common development.
Over the past year, we have witnessed achievements,
challenges and progress in the field of oceans and the
law of the sea. China has actively participated in the
consultations on the texts of draft resolutions A/70/L.22,
on oceans and the law of the sea, and A/70/L.19, on
sustainable fisheries. I thank Ambassador Eden Charles
of Trinidad and Tobago and Ms. Alice Revell of New

A/70/PV.69

Zealand for their contributions as facilitators of the
consultations. I also wish to recognize the work done by
the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea
of the Office of Legal Affairs. I take this opportunity
to share China’s position and ideas on relevant aspects
concerning oceans and the law of the sea.
First, the Chinese delegation commends the
International Seabed Authority (ISA) on its
achievements over the past year. In July, the ISA
considered and approved procedures and criteria
for extending contracts for exploration and decided
to make the acceleration of the formulation of draft
regulations for exploitation a priority for the Legal and
Technical Commission. It also decided to launch the
periodic review of the international regime governing
the seabed. Such work is of great significance to the
improvement of the international seabed regime.
The Chinese Government attaches great importance
to and has been positively involved in international
seabed affairs. We will diligently fulfil our relevant
obligations to ensure the comprehensive and faithful
implementation of the signed contracts for exploration
in the area. As a developing country, China pays
great attention to the effective and comprehensive
participation of developing countries in international
seabed affairs and has provided assistance to the best
of its ability. This year, China has once again donated
$20,000 to the ISA Voluntary Trust Fund to finance the
participation of members from developing countries in
meetings of the Legal and Technical Commission and
the Finance Committee of the Authority.
Secondly, the Chinese delegation has taken
note of the increasingly important role played by the
International Tribunal on the Law of the Sea in such
areas as the peaceful settlement of maritime disputes
and the maintenance of international maritime order.
China appreciates the Tribunal’s contribution to the
promotion of capacity-building of developing countries
and training their personnel in the law of the sea.
In April, an order was rendered with respect to a
request for an advisory opinion by the full Tribunal in
case no. 21, which gave rise to some concerns on our
part. Many countries, including China, believe that
the Tribunal lacks the legal basis for exercising such
advisory jurisdiction. China hopes that in future the
Tribunal will give full consideration to the concerns of
all sides and exercise caution in addressing advisory
jurisdiction.

15-411975/20

A/70/PV.69

08/12/2015

Thirdly, the Chinese Government highly
appreciates the hard work of the Commission on
the Limits of the Continental Shelf and its positive
contribution to a balanced handling of the legitimate
rights and interests of coastal States and the overall
interests of the international community. We support
the Commission in continuing to fulfil its mandate
strictly in accordance with the Convention and its
own rules of procedure, particularly the rule that the
Commission shall not consider a submission in cases
where a land or maritime dispute exists between the
countries concerned.

settle disputes peacefully, refrain from acting ultra vires
in interpreting and applying rules of international law,
or even disregard objectivity and justice and use the rule
of law as a pretext for violating the rights and interests
of other countries. The formulation, interpretation and
application of international law should serve to promote
peace, development and cooperation. With regard
to the abuse of international law by one country that
unilaterally initiates or forces a so-called arbitration,
the other country surely has the legitimate right not to
accept and not to participate. Such arbitration therefore
cannot and will not have any effect.

China has taken note of the increasingly heavy
workload of the Commission and supports the ongoing
efforts to improve its working conditions and to address
the issue of providing medical insurance to its members.
In the past, China has made multiple donations to the
Volunteer Trust Fund for the Commission in order to
help members from developing countries to attend the
Commission’s meetings. This year, we donated another
$20,000 to the Voluntary Fund.

China has always promoted international cooperation
characterized by mutual trust, mutual benefit and
collaboration on an equal footing. We look forward
to further strengthening cooperation with other
countries in exploring together ways to address various
challenges in the area of the oceans and seas and jointly
build a harmonious world with harmonious oceans and
seas that enjoys lasting peace and common prosperity.

Fourthly, the international community attaches
great importance to the preservation and sustainable
use of marine biodiversity in areas beyond national
jurisdiction. In accordance with resolution 69/292, the
preparatory committee for negotiating an international
agreement on marine biodiversity in areas beyond
national jurisdiction will hold its first meeting in March
2016 to launch the relevant negotiation process. China
believes that formulating an international agreement
on marine biodiversity in areas beyond national
jurisdiction is currently the most important legislative
process in the field of the law of the sea. The relevant
negotiations shall proceed in an orderly and progressive
manner. The need for all countries, particularly the
developing countries, to enjoy fair use of marine
biological resources should be fully accommodated,
and existing legal regimes and frameworks should not
be jeopardized. The Chinese delegation is ready to take
an active part in the work of the preparatory committee
and the negotiating process that follows.
The sustainable development of the oceans and seas
cannot be achieved without a just international maritime
order. All countries should comply with international
law in exercising their rights, fulfil their obligations in
good faith and ensure the equal and uniform application
of international law. All countries and international
judicial organs should respect the legitimate right of
countries to independently choose their own ways to

6/20

The Acting President: In accordance with
resolution 51/6, of 24 October 1996, I now call on
the Secretary-General of the International Seabed
Authority.
Mr. Odunton (International Seabed Authority):
This being the first time that the International Seabed
Authority is addressing the General Assembly at
its seventieth session, I would like to convey to the
President our warmest congratulations on his election
to the presidency and assure him of the Authority’s
trust and support.
I wish to refer to the two draft resolutions before
the General Assembly and convey my appreciation
to speakers today for their words of support for the
importance of the work of the International Seabed
Authority. I also wish to express my thanks and
gratitude for the very detailed report of the SecretaryGeneral (A/70/74), which this year once again provides
comprehensive background information for our review.
I am also grateful to the dedicated Director and staff of
the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea
for its excellent cooperation with the secretariat of the
Authority throughout the course of the year.
As comprehensively reflected in the draft
resolution contained in document A/70/L.22, this year
marked a critical point in the evolution of the Authority
on a number of matters. To name a few, these matters
included the decision of the Council on substantive

15-41197

08/12/2015

actions to be undertaken and a time frame of 12 to
18 months to complete the regulations for exploitation
of polymetallic nodules in the Area, the decision on
procedures and criteria for the extension of contracts
for exploration for polymetallic nodules in the Area,
the unprecedented decision to undertake a review of the
way in which the legal regime for the Area has operated
in accordance with article 154 of the Convention,
the number of contracts signed by the Authority
and identification of resources to facilitate their
administration, and the increase in capacity-building
opportunities provided and funded by contractors, as
well as the continuing efforts at capacity-building made
possible by the Authority’s Endowment Fund.
The Authority has been entrusted with the
implementation of the common heritage of mankind
that applies to mineral resources beyond the limits of
national jurisdiction. The legal regime for the common
heritage of mankind represents a major innovation
not only in the law of the sea but also in international
law in general. The regime breathes life into a
revolutionary vision of the sustainable development
of mineral resources in the international seabed Area
and the sharing of benefits and responsibilities for all
States, including the landlocked and geographically
disadvantaged States.
In paragraph 54 of the draft resolution, the Assembly
notes that 27 plans of work for exploration for the three
mineral resources presently identified by the Authority
have been approved by the Council of the Authority.
This represents a remarkable increase in number and
demonstrates the trust placed by contractors and their
sponsoring States in the administration of the common
heritage of mankind by the Authority.
This year, the Authority signed five new contracts,
bringing the total number of contracts for exploration
to 23. Two of the new contracts were for exploration
for polymetallic nodules with Marawa Research and
Exploration Ltd. on 19 January and with Ocean Mineral
Singapore Pte Ltd., on 22 January; one contract was for
exploration for polymetallic sulphides with the Federal
Institute for Geosciences and Natural Resources of
Germany on 6 May, and the last two contracts were for
exploration for cobalt-rich ferromanganese crusts with
the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment
of the Russian Federation on 10 March and with
Companhia de Pesquisa de Recursos Minerais of Brazil
on 9 November. At the present time, therefore, 14 of the
contracts are for exploration for polymetallic nodules,

A/70/PV.69

five are for exploration for polymetallic sulphides and
four are for exploration for cobalt-rich ferromanganese
crusts. It is anticipated that the remaining approved
plans of work will be converted into contracts and signed
prior to the twenty-second session of the Authority in
July 2016. On behalf of the Authority, I wish to express
my thanks and appreciation to these entities and their
sponsoring States whose actions indicate their strong
commitment to the concept of the common heritage
of mankind and their confidence in the work of the
Authority and who have thus entered into a long-lasting
cooperative relationship with the Authority.
While new contracts have entered into force this
year, six of the first contracts signed by the Authority
in 2001, for exploration for polymetallic nodules in the
Area, will expire in 2016. As a result, it was a matter
of urgency for the Authority to adopt procedures and
criteria for the extension of contracts in the absence
of any applications for contracts for exploitation. The
Legal and Technical Commission, which was asked to
undertake this task, was able to recommend a set of
procedures and criteria to the Council, which adopted
them in July. The procedures and criteria for the
extensions recognized the efforts of contractors over
the past 15 years and will ensure that the Commission
is provided with all the information and data it needs to
make appropriate recommendations on the requests for
extensions. I would like to express my appreciation for
the speed with which the Council was able to proceed
and adopt procedures and criteria by consensus.
As of today, five requests for extensions of
contracts for exploration for polymetallic nodules
have been submitted to the Authority. They are
from Yuzhmorgeologiya, sponsored by the Russian
Federation; the Interoceanmetal Joint Organization,
sponsored by Bulgaria, Cuba, the Czech Republic,
Poland, the Russian Federation and Slovakia; the
Government of the Republic of Korea; the China
Ocean Mineral Resources Research and Development
Association, sponsored by China; and the Deep Ocean
Resources Development Company Limited, sponsored
by Japan. Consideration of those requests will be placed
on the agenda of the Legal and Technical Commission
for its next meeting, due to commence on 22 February
2016.
The draft resolution before the Assembly today
recognizes the Authority’s ongoing work on the
exploitation code for polymetallic nodules as a priority
and in accordance with the list of priority deliverables

15-411977/20

A/70/PV.69

endorsed by the Council of the Authority in July. The
secretariat will give this major issue all the support
needed, including for external experts, to enable
the Commission and the Council to perform their
responsibilities next year.
Paragraph 53 of the draft resolution reiterates the
importance of the pioneering and ongoing efforts of
the Authority to develop a standardized taxonomy and
nomenclature for the fauna associated with polymetallic
nodules, pursuant to the responsibilities entrusted to
the Authority in relation to the protection of the marine
environment and marine scientific research in the Area.
In that regard, I am pleased to note the holding of a
third workshop dealing with the standardization of the
taxonomy of meiofauna associated with polymetallic
nodules, to be convened next week in Ghent, Belgium,
and which I am grateful to the University of Ghent
for hosting. Representatives of all contractors for
polymetallic nodules, as well as expert taxonomists,
will participate. The outcomes will be placed on
the agenda of the Legal and Technical Commission
next year to ensure that the recommendations for
the guidance of contractors are complete with
regard to the fauna — megafauna, macrofauna and
meiofauna — associated with polymetallic nodules,
and that the standardization keeps abreast of the latest
scientific methods. After review by the Commission,
it is expected that the standardized taxonomy will be
made available to all contractors and marine research
institutions on the Authority’s web page.
Equally important are the recommendations
issued by the Commission in July providing reporting
standards for exploration results and resource
classification. This mineral resource classification
framework is particularly necessary in the light of the
increasing commercial interest in the Area’s resources
and in the assessment of contractors’ activities. At the
workshop convened for the purpose in 2014, the experts
indicated that resources identified in exploration areas
could be classified in a number of ways, including
“speculative”, “inferred”, “measured” and “reserves”
of the metals that they contain. The classifications
describe, among other things, the extent to which
resources have been sampled, the distances between
sample stations, the availability of technology for
mining them and markets for the metals of commercial
interest. Of the various classes, reserves are the ones
of most interest to investors and bankers. While it was
recognized that contractors had achieved a lot in their

8/20

08/12/2015

efforts to identify reserves of copper, nickel and cobalt
in their exploration areas, it was also recognized that
no contractor had yet undertaken a pilot mining test to
prove that nodules could be brought up to the ocean
surface in quantities that could support a viable mining
project.
The recommendations issued by the Legal and
Technical Commission include factors that must be
taken into account, the data and information required
and the need for pilot mining tests to ground truth
models that have been developed to ascertain the
potential profitability of a deep seabed polymetallic
nodule project. The last time any such tests were
conducted was in 1978. Since then, a number of the
associated technologies, such as flexible risers, have
been radically improved. Another component of the
mining system that would have to be tested is the
collector device in situ. At current costs, it would
appear that very few contractors wish to undertake
that test individually. I believe that such tests could
be facilitated by collaboration among contractors to
test their collector devices and conduct pilot mining
tests and environmental impact assessments. Such an
approach would reduce the costs and risks for each
contractor and facilitate the conversion of polymetallic
nodule resources from inferred resources to reserves
of the metals, which is a prerequisite for proceeding
to exploitation. The Authority will take the necessary
steps to support such collaboration.
Paragraphs 58 and 60 of the draft resolution
emphasize the importance of the role entrusted to the
Authority by articles 143 and 145 of the Convention
and refer to the need for environmental management
plans for regions and areas where there are currently
exploration contracts. In that regard, Member States
have shown a clear commitment to building on the
Authority’s ongoing work in connection with the
implementation of the environmental management
plan for the Clarion-Clipperton Zone, which will be
reviewed next year. In that regard, I am pleased to
inform the Assembly that discussions are already
under way on convening a workshop to review the
implementation of the environmental management
plan for the Clarion-Clipperton Zone, as well as on
lessons learned that could be applied to a plan for the
Mid-Atlantic Ridge and other geographic areas, taking
into account data availability and standardization and
in cooperation with other sponsoring Governments and
organizations.

15-41197

08/12/2015

At the Authority’s twentieth session, its Assembly
adopted a budget of $15,743,143 for the Authority’s
operations for the financial period 2015-2016. During
that session, the Council also adopted a decision that
an overhead charge should be paid by contractors
to enable the Authority to administer and supervise
their contracts, in the amount of $47,000 per annum
for each contractor. Support was voiced for the idea
of establishing an International Seabed Authority
Museum. I was requested to prepare a report for the
Council’s consideration outlining the objectives of
establishing such a museum and how to achieve them.
Echoing paragraph 61 of the draft resolution, I wish
to convey the Authority’s appreciation to those who
have made contributions to the Authority’s endowment
fund and voluntary trust fund. The endowment fund
promotes and encourages collaborative marine scientific
research in the international seabed Area for the benefit
of humankind through two main activities — first,
by supporting the participation of qualified scientists
and technical personnel from developing countries in
marine scientific research programmes and activities,
and secondly, by providing those scientists with
opportunities for participating in relevant initiatives.
As of 1 December, a total of 76 scientists and
Government officials from 40 countries have obtained
financial support from the ISA Endowment Fund. The
recipients were from Argentina, Bangladesh, Bolivia,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Chile, China, Colombia,
the Cook Islands, Costa Rica, Egypt, Fiji, Greece,
Guyana, India, Indonesia, Jamaica, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Micronesia, Namibia, Nigeria, Palau, Papua New
Guinea, Peru, the Philippines, the Russian Federation,
Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Suriname,
Thailand, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia and
Viet Nam. The Voluntary Trust Fund is designed to
help developing States that are members of the Legal
and Technical Commission and the Finance Committee
to participate in their meetings.
The draft resolution before the Assembly attaches
great importance to capacity-building. In that regard,
I would like to note the approximately 90 training
opportunities that should arise as a result of contracts
for exploration that have been issued since 2011. That
number could reach 130 as a result of the remaining
contracts for exploration to be concluded next year. It
does not include the training opportunities that would
arise from the extension of contracts for exploration

A/70/PV.69

in 2016 and 2017. I take this opportunity to call on
Member States to assist the Authority in disseminating
information on available training opportunities, so that
no training opportunity is lost and capacity-building
needs are matched with the opportunities.
As recognized in paragraph 69 of the draft
resolution, the Authority has demonstrated the
importance it attaches to raising awareness of its work
by organizing sensitization seminars. I would like to
express my gratitude and thanks to the Governments of
South Africa and Chile for hosting the tenth and eleventh
seminars this year. It is expected that a sensitization
seminar will be convened in Accra in 2016.
In conclusion, I wish to emphasize that the
Authority is getting closer and closer to realizing the
unique regime of the common heritage of mankind. At
this critical juncture, it is essential that all members
of the Authority attend meetings and contribute to that
realization, which concerns future generations as well
as current ones. The Authority’s legacy will depend
on the contributions of all its members. At its next
session, it will elect half of the members of its Council
for the period 2017 to 2020; a Secretary-General; and
members of the Legal and Technical Commission and
the Finance Committee. It will also adopt a budget for
the period 2017-2018. I therefore encourage the widest
possible participation by all members at the Authority’s
twenty-second session, to be held in July 2016.
I wish everyone here a merry Christmas and a
happy new year.
The Acting President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 51/204, of 17 December 1996, I
now call on Mr. Vladimir Golitsyn, President of the
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea.
Mr. Golitsyn (International Tribunal for the Law
of the Sea): On behalf of the International Tribunal for
the Law of the Sea, I would like to say what an honour
it is to address the General Assembly this year, which
marks the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations,
and to speak on the agenda item 79, “Oceans and the law
of the sea”. I will first make some remarks concerning
the organization of the Tribunal, and then will turn to a
consideration of the contribution the Tribunal makes to
the peaceful settlement of disputes relating to the law of
the sea, focusing on its most recent decisions.
With regard to organizational matters, I would like
to inform the Assembly that on 18 May Judge Vicente

15-411979/20

A/70/PV.69

Marotta Rangel from Brazil resigned as a member of
the Tribunal, creating a vacancy on the Tribunal’s bench
for the remainder of his nine-year term, which ends on
30 September 2017. On 1 October, the Registrar of the
Tribunal circulated a note verbale announcing that the
election to fill the vacancy for the remainder of the
term would be held on 15 January 2016. The documents
concerning the election have been circulated to States
parties as documents of the meetings of States parties
to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS), to which I will refer from now on as the
Convention.
The Tribunal’s judicial activity continued to
increase in 2015. On 2 April, the Tribunal delivered
its first advisory opinion on a case concerning illegal,
unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing. In addition,
on 25 April the Special Chamber of the Tribunal formed
to deal with the dispute concerning delimitation of the
maritime boundary between Ghana and Côte d’Ivoire
in the Atlantic Ocean adopted an order prescribing
provisional measures. Finally, on 24 August, the
Tribunal issued an order prescribing provisional
measures regarding the dispute between Italy and India
concerning the Enrica Lexie incident. Through its
decisions, the Tribunal made further contributions to
the peaceful settlement of disputes and the development
of the law of the sea. I will now speak briefly about
each of the cases.
As indicated in my statement to the Assembly
last year (see A/69/PV.67), the Subregional Fisheries
Commission (SFRC), a regional fisheries organization
composed of seven West African States — Cabo Verde,
the Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Mauritania,
Senegal and Sierra Leone — submitted a request for
an advisory opinion to the Tribunal in March 2013. The
request posed four questions to the Tribunal concerning
IUU fishing, to which the Tribunal provided answers in
its advisory opinion of 2 April.
The first question asked the Tribunal to determine
the obligations of the flag State in cases where illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing activities are
conducted within the exclusive economic zones of
third-party States. The Tribunal first clarified the
scope of application of the question by stating that
it related to the obligations of flag States that are
not members of the SRFC where vessels flying their
flag are engaged in IUU fishing within the exclusive
economic zones of SRFC member States. The Tribunal
underlined that under the Convention, responsibility for

10/20

08/12/2015

the conservation and management of living resources
in an exclusive economic zone rests with the coastal
State concerned, which therefore has the primary
responsibility for taking the necessary measures to
prevent, deter and eliminate IUU fishing. The Tribunal
emphasized, however, that this responsibility of the
coastal State does not release other States from their
obligations in that regard.
The Tribunal then turned its attention to the issue
of flag State responsibility for IUU fishing, noting that
this matter is not directly addressed in the Convention.
The Tribunal therefore proceeded to examine the
relevant provisions of the Convention dealing with flag
State obligations in the context of the conservation and
management of living resources. It found that flag States
have a specific duty to take the necessary measures to
ensure that their nationals and vessels flying their flag
are not engaged in IUU fishing activities. It further
explained that, pursuant to paragraph 3 of article 58 and
paragraph 4 of article 62 of the Convention, the flag State
has the responsibility to ensure compliance by vessels
flying its flag with the laws and regulations concerning
conservation and management measures adopted by the
coastal State. In order to meet that responsibility, the
flag State must take the necessary measures, including
those of enforcement, as well as effectively exercise its
jurisdiction and control in administrative, technical and
social matters over ships flying its flag, in accordance
with paragraph 1 of article 94 of the Convention. The
Tribunal emphasized that the obligation of a flag State
to ensure that vessels flying its flag are not involved in
IUU fishing is an obligation of conduct, which is a due
diligence obligation, not an obligation of result.
The second question before the Tribunal concerned
the liability of the flag State for IUU fishing activities
conducted by vessels flying its flag. To respond to
that question, the Tribunal found guidance in the
draft articles of the International Law Commission on
responsibility of States for internationally wrongful
acts, observing that articles 1 and 2 and paragraph 1
of 31 consisted of the rules of general international law
relevant to the second question.
Capitalizing on the approach taken by the Seabed
Disputes Chamber in its first advisory opinion, the
Tribunal concluded that the liability of the flag State
does not arise from a failure of vessels flying its flag
to comply with the laws and regulations of the SRFC
States members concerning IUU fishing activities in
their exclusive economic zones, as the violation of such

15-41197

08/12/2015

laws and regulations by vessels is not per se attributable
to the flag State. At the same time, the Tribunal clarified
that the liability of the flag State arises from its failure
to comply with its due diligence obligations concerning
IUU fishing activities conducted by vessels flying its
flag in the exclusive economic zones of the SRFC States
members. The Tribunal underlined that the flag State is
not liable if it has taken all necessary and appropriate
measures to meet its due diligence obligations.
In the third question, the Tribunal was requested to
assess whether, in the case of a fishing licence issued
to a vessel within the framework of an international
agreement with an international agency, the
international agency or flag State would be liable for
the violation of the fisheries legislation of the coastal
State by the vessel in question. The Tribunal observed
that the question involved the issue of liability of
international organizations and that the organizations
concerned were those to which their member States had
transferred competence in matters concerning fisheries.
In the case before it, the organization in question was
the European Union.
The Tribunal stated that in cases where such an
organization concludes a fisheries access agreement
with an SRFC State member that provides for access
by vessels flying the flag of a member State of that
organization to fish in the exclusive economic zone
of the SRFC State member, the obligations of the
flag State become the obligations of the international
organization. Therefore, the organization is required to
ensure that vessels flying the flag of a member State
comply with the fisheries laws and regulations of the
SRFC State member and do not conduct IUU fishing
activities within the exclusive economic zone of that
State. According to the Tribunal, only the international
organization, and not its member States, may be
held liable for breach of its obligations. Therefore, if
the international organization does not meet its due
diligence obligations, the SRFC State member may
hold the organization liable for the violation.
In response to the fourth question related to the
rights and obligations of the coastal State in ensuring
the sustainable management of shared stocks and
stocks of common interest, the Tribunal enumerated
a number of obligations borne by SRFC member
States, in particular: the obligation to cooperate
with the competent international organizations to
ensure, through proper conservation and management
measures, that the maintenance of the shared stocks

A/70/PV.69

in the exclusive economic zone is not endangered by
overexploitation; the obligation to seek to agree upon
the measures necessary to coordinate and ensure the
conservation and development of such stocks and in
relation to tuna species; and, finally, the obligation to
cooperate directly or through the SRFC with a view to
ensuring conservation and promoting the objective of
optimum utilization of such species in their exclusive
economic zones. I wish to point out that while it is true
that the advisory opinion was limited to the exclusive
economic zone of the SRFC member States, it may also
be of value to those seeking legal guidance in pursuing
their efforts to deter IUU fishing.
Other examples of important pronouncements
made by the Tribunal can be found in two recent
cases on requests for the prescription of provisional
measures. I will first address the request for the
prescription of provisional measures filed by Côte
d’Ivoire on 27 February, regarding Dispute Concerning
Delimitation of the Maritime Boundary between Ghana
and Côte d’Ivoire in the Atlantic Ocean (Ghana/Côte
d’Ivoire). That case is pending before a Special Chamber
of the Tribunal. In that regard, allow me to recall that,
further to consultations which I held in December 2014
with representatives of Ghana and Côte d’Ivoire, the
parties concluded a special agreement to submit their
dispute to a special chamber constituted pursuant to
paragraph 2 of article 15 of the Statute of the Tribunal.
Following my consultations with the parties, the
Tribunal, by an order of 12 January, formed the Special
Chamber, which is made up of five judges, including
two judges ad hoc — one chosen by Ghana and one
by Côte d’Ivoire. In its request, Côte d’Ivoire asked the
Special Chamber to prescribe provisional measures
requiring Ghana to, inter alia, take all steps to suspend
all ongoing oil exploration and exploitation operations
in the disputed area. Ghana requested the Special
Chamber to deny all of Côte d’Ivoire’s requests for
provisional measures. The Special Chamber delivered
its order on 25 April. In its order, the Special Chamber
observed that it may not prescribe provisional measures
unless it finds that there is a real and imminent risk that
irreparable prejudice may be caused to the rights of the
parties in dispute.
Concerning the rights that Côte d’Ivoire claimed on
the merits and sought to protect, the Special Chamber
stated that before prescribing provisional measures,
it need only to satisfy itself that those rights are at
least plausible, and concluded that Côte d’Ivoire had

15-4119711/20

A/70/PV.69

presented enough material to show that those rights in
the disputed area were plausible. The Special Chamber
therefore found that the exploration and exploitation
activities planned by Ghana may cause irreparable
prejudice to the sovereign and exclusive rights invoked
by Côte d’Ivoire in the continental shelf and superjacent
waters of the disputed area before a decision on the
merits is given by the Special Chamber, and that the
risk of such prejudice is imminent.
The Special Chamber found that the suspension
of ongoing activities conducted by Ghana in respect
of which drilling had already taken place would entail
the risk of considerable financial loss to Ghana and its
concessionaires and could also pose a serious danger
to the marine environment. The Special Chamber
therefore considered that an order suspending all
exploration or exploitation activities conducted by
or on behalf of Ghana in the disputed area, including
activities in respect of which drilling had already taken
place, would cause prejudice to the rights claimed by
Ghana and create an undue burden on it and that such an
order could also cause harm to the marine environment.
In order to preserve the rights of Côte d’Ivoire, the
Special Chamber decided to order Ghana to take all
necessary steps to ensure that no new drilling, either by
Ghana or under its control, took place in the disputed
area. The Special Chamber also requested each party
to submit a report and information on compliance with
the provisional measures prescribed, which each party
did on 25 May.
A further request for the prescription of provisional
measures was submitted on 21 July by Italy with regard
to its dispute with India in the case concerning The
“Enrica Lexie” Incident (Italy v. India), Provisional
Measures. Before then, on 26 June, Italy had instituted
arbitral proceedings against India under annex VII
of the Convention in respect of this dispute. The
provisional measures request was therefore made under
paragraph 5 of article 290 of the Convention, pending
the constitution of the arbiter tribunal.
According to Italy, the dispute concerned an incident
that occurred on 15 February 2012, at approximately
20.5 nautical miles off the coast of India, involving the
MV Enrica Lexie, an oil tanker flying the Italian flag.
In India’s subsequent exercise of jurisdiction over the
incident and over two Italian marines from the Italian
Navy who were on official duty aboard the Enrica
Lexie at the time of the incident, India maintained that

12/20

08/12/2015

the incident arose from the killing of two innocent
Indian fishermen aboard an Indian fishing vessel, the
Saint Antony, which on 15 February 2012 was engaged
in fishing at a distance of about 20.5 nautical miles
from the Indian coast. India further maintained that it
envisages exercising jurisdiction over the marines.
Italy requested the Tribunal to prescribe the
following provisional measures. India shall refrain
from taking or enforcing any judicial or administrative
measures against Sergeant Latorre and Sergeant Girone
in connection with the Enrica Lexie incident and from
exercising any other form of jurisdiction over the
Enrica Lexie incident. And India shall take all measures
necessary to ensure that restrictions on the liberty,
security and movement of the marines be immediately
lifted so as to enable Sergeant Girone to travel to and
remain in Italy and Sergeant Latorre to remain in Italy
throughout the duration of the proceedings before the
annex VII tribunal. India requested the Tribunal to
reject the submissions made by the Republic of Italy in
its request for the prescription of provisional measures
and to refuse prescription of any provisional measures
in the present case.
The Tribunal delivered its order on 25 August. In
the order, the Tribunal found that a dispute appeared to
exist between the parties concerning the interpretation
or application of the Convention and that the annex VII
arbitral tribunal would prima facie have jurisdiction
over the dispute. The Tribunal pointed out that, in
provisional measures proceedings, it is not called upon
to settle the claims of the parties in respect of the rights
and obligations in dispute and to establish definitively
the existence of the rights that they each seek to protect.
It noted that it needs only to satisfy itself that those
rights are at least plausible. In this respect, the Tribunal
found that, in the case before it, both parties had
sufficiently demonstrated that the rights they sought
to protect regarding the Enrica Lexie incident were
plausible.
The Tribunal observed that, under paragraph 1 of
article 290, it may prescribe any provisional measures
that it considers appropriate in the circumstances to
preserve the respective rights of the parties, which
implies that there is a real and imminent risk that
irreparable prejudice could be caused to the rights of
the parties to the dispute, pending such a time when the
annex VII arbitral tribunal is in a position to modify,
revoke or affirm the provisional measures. With regard
to the case before it, the Tribunal considered that, in

15-41197

08/12/2015

the circumstances, continuation of court proceedings
or initiation of new ones by either party would
prejudice rights of the other party. It concluded that this
consideration requires action on the part of the Tribunal
to ensure that the respective rights of the parties are
duly preserved.
The Tribunal therefore prescribed as a provisional
measure that Italy and India should both suspend all
court proceedings and refrain from initiating new ones
that might aggravate or extend the dispute submitted
to the annex VII arbitral tribunal or might jeopardize
or prejudice the carrying out of any decision that the
arbitral tribunal may render. Pursuant to the order of
the Tribunal, India and Italy each submitted a report, on
18 and 23 September, respectively, on compliance with
the provisional measures prescribed.
This brief overview of the Tribunal’s recent
judicial work shows that States increasingly bring cases
concerning their disputes to the Tribunal. The Tribunal’s
jurisprudence clearly demonstrates its potential, and
the Tribunal is committed to further facilitating access
to its procedures.
I am pleased to inform the Assembly that, in line
with this commitment, a joint declaration was signed
on 31 August between the Tribunal and the Ministry of
Law of the Republic of Singapore. In the declaration,
both sides agree that if the Chamber or the Tribunal
finds it desirable in a case before it to sit or exercise its
functions in Singapore, the Government of Singapore
will provide appropriate facilities. I wish to reiterate
my gratitude to the Singaporean Government for its
willingness to assist the Tribunal in this respect.
As the Assembly knows, the Tribunal is active in
disseminating knowledge about the mechanisms for
dispute settlement established by the Convention and
the procedures applicable to cases before the Tribunal.
It does so by, among other activities, organizing
regional workshops in different parts of the world
and conducting capacity-building programmes at
its premises in Hamburg. The most recent regional
workshop, the eleventh so far, was held on 27 and
28 August in Bali, Indonesia. It was organized with
the assistance of the Korea Maritime Institute and in
cooperation with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Indonesia. I wish to express my sincere
gratitude to both the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
Indonesia and the Korea Maritime Institute for their
generosity and excellent cooperation. Representatives of

A/70/PV.69

14 States from the region attended the workshop, which
was preceded by a seminar on maritime delimitation
and fisheries cooperation.
Through its internship programme, the Tribunal
provides training opportunities to young Government
officials and university students. Since the
establishment of the programme in 1997, 310 interns
from 94 countries have profited from this opportunity.
Scholarships to support interns from developing
countries are paid from a trust fund set up by the
Tribunal that has received grants from several donors,
including the Korea Maritime Institute, to which I wish
to convey my gratitude once again.
Finally, the Nippon programme is a capacitybuilding and training programme on dispute
settlement, designed to provide Government officials
and researchers with advanced legal training in
international dispute settlement in law of the sea
matters. The programme was established in 2007 and
has been running since then with the ongoing support
of the Nippon Foundation of Japan. I wish to take this
opportunity to express my gratitude to the Nippon
Foundation for its generosity.
Before concluding my remarks, I wish to highlight
that the coming year, 2016, marks the twentieth
anniversary of the Tribunal, which, as members
know, was officially inaugurated on 18 October 1996.
We plan to commemorate the anniversary with a
number of events. The main event of the year will be
a commemorative ceremony to be held in Hamburg on
5 October 2016. It will be followed on 6 and 7 October
by a symposium on UNCLOS and the Tribunal’s
contribution to international dispute settlement. In
addition, a side event will be held during the Meeting
of States Parties in June 2016. These events will be an
occasion to review the development of the work of the
Tribunal since its early days and will also set the scene
for the Tribunal’s way into the future. A more detailed
programme of the anniversary celebrations is currently
being prepared. Invitations will of course be addressed
to all States parties to the Convention.
I am grateful for the opportunity to address the
General Assembly and for its interest in the Tribunal’s
work. I also wish to seize this occasion to express my
gratitude to the Director of the Division for Ocean
Affairs and the Law of the Sea and her staff for their
continued and excellent cooperation and assistance.

15-4119713/20

A/70/PV.69

The Acting President: In relation to draft
resolution A/70/L.22, I should like to inform members
that the Assembly will be in the position to take action
on the draft resolution after the Fifth Committee has
considered its programme budgetary implications.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/70/L.19, entitled “Sustainable fisheries,
including through the 1995 Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December
1982 relating to the Conservation and Management
of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks, and related instruments”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed
in the draft document, the following countries have
become sponsors of A/70/L.19: Australia, Costa Rica,
Denmark, Greece, Indonesia, Italy, Jamaica, Maldives,
the Philippines, Portugal and the United States of
America.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/70/L.19?
Draft resolution A/70/L.19 was adopted (resolution
70/75).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to delegations that wish to explain their position on
the resolution just adopted, may I remind Assembly
members that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Fernandez Valoni (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): We wish to speak in explanation of position
on resolution 70/75, on sustainable fisheries.
Argentina joined the consensus on the resolution.
However, we wish to inform the Assembly once again
that none of the recommendations in the resolution
can be interpreted to mean that the provisions of the
Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation
and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly

14/20

08/12/2015

Migratory Fish Stocks, and related instruments, which
was adopted in New York in 1995, can be considered
mandatory for States that have not clearly expressed
their consent or commitment to the Agreement.
The resolution that we have just adopted contains
paragraphs concerning the implementation of the
recommendations of the Review Conference on
the Agreement. Argentina reiterates that those
recommendations must be considered not as
enforceable, but merely as recommendations to those
States that are not parties to the Agreement. Moreover,
that is particularly important for those States, such as
Argentina, that have disassociated themselves from the
recommendations. Therefore, as in previous sessions,
Argentina disassociates itself from the consensus of
the Assembly with respect to the paragraphs of the
resolution that refer to the recommendations of the
Review Conference on the 1995 Agreement.
In addition, Argentina notes that current
international law does not authorize regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements, or their
member States, to take any measure with respect to
vessels whose flag State is not a member of such an
organization or arrangement, or that have not explicitly
consented to the application of such measures to vessels
flying their flags. Nothing in the General Assembly’s
resolutions, including that which we have just adopted,
can be interpreted as contrary to that conclusion.
Moreover, I recall once again that in the
implementation of conservation measures, the conduct
of scientific research or the undertaking of any other
activity recommended in the resolutions of the General
Assembly, in particular resolution 61/105 and related
instruments, the legal framework provided by the
international law of the sea in force — as reflected
in the Convention, including in article 77 and Part
XIII — must be strictly respected. The implementation
of the resolutions cannot therefore be used as a pretext
or justification for ignoring or violating the rights
established in the Convention, and nothing in resolution
61/105 or in other resolutions of the General Assembly
prejudices the sovereign rights of coastal States over
their continental shelf or the exercise of the jurisdiction
of coastal States with respect to their continental shelf
under international law. Paragraph 164 of the resolution
we have just adopted contains a pertinent reminder
of that concept, which has already been reflected in
resolution 64/72 and subsequent resolutions. In the same
vein, and as at previous sessions, paragraph 165 notes

15-41197

08/12/2015

the adoption by coastal States of conservation measures
regarding their continental shelf to address the impacts
of bottom fishing on vulnerable marine ecosystems, as
well as their efforts to ensure compliance with those
measures.
Finally, I should like to alert the Assembly once
again that the growing differences of opinion regarding
the content of the resolution on sustainable fisheries
seriously jeopardize the likelihood of such texts being
adopted by consensus at future sessions.
Mr. Medina Mejías (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of my
delegation, I take this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General of the International Seabed
Authority and the President of the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea for participating in this
meeting. We extend our gratitude to the representative
of New Zealand, Ms. Alice Revell, for facilitating the
negotiations on resolution 70/75, entitled “Sustainable
fisheries, including through the 1995 Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December
1982 relating to the Conservation and Management
of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks, and related instruments”, to which I refer in this
explanation of position.
Venezuela underscores its commitment to sustainable
fisheries by implementing the Code of Conduct for
Responsible Fisheries of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and chapter 17 of
Agenda 21, adopted at the United Nations Conference
on Environment and Development in 1992. Venezuela
is also party to various international instruments for
the conservation and management of fisheries.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has consistently
expressed its position in various international forums
that the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea (UNCLOS) should not be considered as the sole
legal framework governing activities on the oceans
and seas, given the existence of other international
instruments on that topic which, together with UNCLOS,
constitute the body of laws known as the law of the
sea. In that regard, it has been Venezuela’s consistent
and long-standing position to object to the possibility
of the Convention being invoked under conventional
or customary law. The Venezuelan delegation has also
pointed out many times that UNCLOS does not have
universal participation; to date, it has 162 States parties,

A/70/PV.69

unlike many other multilateral instruments such as the
Convention on Biological Diversity, which currently
has 193 States parties.
The Venezuelan law on fisheries prohibits bottom
fishing and establishes a sanctions regime for cases of
non-compliance with conservation and management
measures, which also include the control of vessels that
fly the national flag and engage in fishing activities.
We also have a system of inspection and monitoring
of operations on the high seas through which relevant
information is transmitted to the fisheries management
entity. This gives us the exact geographic location
where the fishing is taking place which helps in turn to
ensure compliance with the norms established by law.
It is also important to highlight that Venezuela makes
contributions in its national capacity to the drafting of
a legally binding instrument on port State measures
to prevent, deter and eliminate illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing. These contributions were made
in the technical consultations that were held in the
framework of the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations.
Finally, in the interests of consensus, our delegation
joined in adopting resolution 70/75. Nevertheless,
Venezuela expresses explicit reservations with regard
to the content of the resolution because it is not a party
to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea or the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation of
the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to
the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish
Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks. As such, the
norms of international instruments under customary
international law are not applicable, except where the
Republic has explicitly recognized or will explicitly
recognize them by incorporating them into its national
legislation.
Mr. Erciyes (Turkey): With regard to resolution
70/75, on sustainable fisheries, I would like to state
that Turkey is fully committed to the conservation,
management and sustainable use of marine living
resources and attaches great importance to regional
cooperation to that end. Accordingly, Turkey supported
the resolution. However, Turkey dissociates itself from
references made in the resolution to international
instruments to which it is not a party. Those references
should not therefore be interpreted as a change in
Turkey’s legal position with regard to those instruments.

15-4119715/20

A/70/PV.69

Mr. Morales López (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation would like to make a statement following
the adoption by consensus of resolution 70/75, on
sustainable fisheries and pertaining to the 1995
Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation
and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly
Migratory Fish Stocks and related instruments.
We acknowledge the valuable contribution made by
the sustainable fisheries resolution. Nevertheless, the
resolution is formulated on the basis of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982,
to which Colombia is not a party. Therefore, and as we
have expressed on repeated occasions, the Republic
of Colombia states that the present resolution and
Colombia’s participation in the process of its adoption
cannot be considered or interpreted in any way that
binds us under any provisions of the Convention.
The constructive spirit that prevails in our country
with regard to sustainable fisheries is based on the fact
that we believe that all States Members of the United
Nations have a role to play in a sustainable future
for our world. My country has a new institutional
framework with regard to marine and coastal matters
and a new comprehensive vision in which the seas, their
coasts and resources will play a fundamental role in the
new direction of the country towards building not only
a sustainable country but also sustainable fisheries at
the global level, in compliance with our international
commitments in the environmental field.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position.
Several representatives have asked to speak in
exercise of the right of reply. May I remind members
that statements in the exercise of the right of reply are
limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and to
five minutes for the second intervention and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Yparraguirre (Philippines): The Philippines
would like to exercise its right of reply to the statement
made earlier by the representative of China.
To quote our Secretary of the Department of Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Albert del Rosario, in his concluding
remarks on 30 November 2015 before the Permanent
Court of Arbitration in The Hague in the last round of
oral hearings of our arbitration case,

16/20

08/12/2015

“the 29 October Award on Jurisdiction [and
Admissibility] ... is a compelling rebuke to those
who doubt that international justice does exist and
will prevail”.
The Arbitral Tribunal decided in its Award of
29 October that it has jurisdiction to hear the case and
that China would be legally bound to comply with
its decision. The Tribunal has again given China the
opportunity to comment in writing until 1 January 2016
on anything said during the recent hearing on the merits
or submitted in writing subsequently by the Philippines.
The Tribunal also found that the Philippines’ act of
initiating the arbitration did not constitute an abuse
of process, contrary to the statement made earlier by
China.
The core issue in maritime disputes in the South
China Sea is China’s claim of indisputable sovereignty
over 90 per cent of the South China Sea as enclosed
by its so-called nine-dash line, which has no basis
in international law, and claims sovereignty over the
exclusive economic zones (EEZ) of neighbouring
coastal States, such as the Philippines. The world cannot
allow a country, no matter how powerful, to claim an
entire sea as its own, nor should it allow coercion to
be an acceptable dispute-settlement mechanism. Under
the current circumstances, the Philippines is not able
to exercise its rights to fish in its traditional fishing
grounds and exploit the natural resources in its EEZ.
The Philippines has become unable to enforce its laws
within its EEZ, which is its right under the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS),
the world’s constitution for oceans and the seas.
This dispute is not a bilateral dispute, however.
Aside from the Philippines and China, it involves three
or four other parties. But even if it were granted, for
the sake of argument, that the dispute was limited
to only the Philippines and China, before initiating
arbitration under article 7 of UNCLOS, the Philippines
has bilaterally engaged with China in over 50 instances
over the past two decades, even before China seized
Subi Reef in 1988 and Mischief Reef in 1995 from the
Philippines.
Negotiations presupposed the willingness of the
parties to compromise. Regrettably, this failed to
produce mutually satisfactory results since China’s
starting point has always been that it has indisputable
sovereignty over almost all of the South China Sea
through its so-called nine-dash line. This is an

15-41197

08/12/2015

excessive and expansive claim, which does not have
legitimacy under international law and has rendered
negotiations impossible. That is the crux of this longstanding problem.
The Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in
the South China Sea of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) is not a bar to the arbitration
proceedings, as was ruled by the Arbitral Tribunal in
its award of 29 October. In paragraph 335 of the award,
the Tribunal added that, in any event, the ASEAN
Declaration on the Conduct of Parties itself,
“along with discussions on the creation of a further
Code of Conduct, represents an exchange of views
on the means of settling the Parties’ dispute”,
thereby thus satisfying the obligation of having an
exchange of views under articles 281 and 283 of
UNCLOS.
With respect to the latest developments in ASEAN,
in the Chairman’s statement of 21 November 2015,
following the twenty-seventh ASEAN summit in Kuala
Lumpur and the ASEAN-China summit, the ASEAN
leaders expressed concern on the militarization taking
place in the South China Sea and urged all parties
to ensure the maintenance of peace, security and
stability. They urged the exercise of self-restraint,
avoidance of actions that would escalate tension and
the non-recourse to the threat or use of force. The
ASEAN leaders underscored their commitment to the
ASEAN Declaration on the Conduct of Parties and
the expeditious establishment of an effective code of
conduct. Finally, they emphasized the importance for
the States concerned of resolving their differences
and disputes through peaceful means in accordance
with international law, including the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea.
In conclusion, to reiterate, the Arbitral Tribunal
constituted under annex VII to UNCLOS, pursuant to
a request by the Philippines found, in its 29 October
Award, that it has jurisdiction to hear the Philippines’
case. Last 30 November, the Tribunal concluded its
hearings on the merits phase. The parties have until
9 December to review and submit corrections to the
transcripts of the hearings, which will subsequently
be published on the website of the Permanent Court of
Arbitration. In line with the Tribunal’s duty to assure
each party a full opportunity to be heard and to present
its case, the Tribunal has given China until 1 January
2016 the opportunity to comment in writing on anything

A/70/PV.69

said during the hearing or subsequently submitted in
writing by the Philippines. We invite China to avail
itself of its opportunity.
In his concluding remarks before the Permanent
Court of Arbitration at The Hague, which I mentioned
previously, Secretary for Foreign Affairs Albert del
Rosario said that the Philippines is confident that the
Tribunal
“will interpret and apply the law in a way that
produces a truly just solution. That is the best
way — indeed the only way — to craft a legal
solution that truly promotes peace, security and
good-neighbourliness in the South China Sea”.
Mr. Li Yongsheng (China): We regret that the
Philippines is insisting on abusing this United Nations
forum to advance its so-called arbitration on the
South China Sea, which it unilaterally initiated. The
Philippines’ unilateral initiation and obstinate pushing
forward of the South China Sea arbitration by abusing
the compulsory procedures for dispute settlement under
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS) is a political provocation under the cloak
of law. In essence, it is not an effort to settle disputes
but an attempt to negate China’s territorial sovereignty,
maritime rights and interests in the South China Sea.
In the position paper of the Government of the
People’s Republic of China on the matter of jurisdiction
in the South China Sea arbitration initiated by the
Republic of the Philippines, which was released by the
Chinese Ministry for Foreign Affairs on 7 December
2014, upon authorization, the Chinese Government
pointed out that the Arbitral Tribunal has manifestly
no jurisdiction over the arbitration initiated by the
Philippines and elaborated on the legal grounds for
China’s non-acceptance of and non-participation in the
arbitration. This position is clear and explicit and will
not change.
As a sovereign State and a State party to UNCLOS,
China is entitled to choose the means and procedures
of dispute settlement of its own will. All along, China
has been committed to resolving disputes with the
Philippines over territorial and maritime jurisdiction
through negotiations and consultations. Since the 1990s,
China and the Philippines have repeatedly reaffirmed
in bilateral documents that they shall resolve relevant
disputes through negotiations and consultations. The
Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South
China Sea explicitly states that the sovereign States

15-4119717/20

A/70/PV.69

directly concerned undertake to resolve their territorial
and jurisdictional disputes by peaceful means through
friendly consultations and negotiations. All these
documents demonstrate that China and the Philippines
chose a long time ago to settle their disputes in the South
China Sea through negotiations and consultations.
The breach of this agreement by the Philippines
damages the basis of mutual trust between States. It
disregards the essence of this arbitration case, namely,
territorial sovereignty, maritime delimitation and related
matters. It maliciously evades China’s declaration on
optional exceptions made in 2006 under article 298 of
UNCLOS and negates the agreement between China
and the Philippines on resolving relevant disputes
through negotiations and consultations. The Philippines
has abused relevant procedures and obstinately forged
ahead with the arbitration and as a result has seriously
violated the legitimate rights that China enjoys as a
State party to UNCLOS, completely deviated from the
purposes and objectives of UNCLOS and eroded the
integrity and authority of the Convention. As a State
party to UNCLOS, China firmly opposes the acts of
abusing compulsory procedures for dispute settlement
under UNCLOS and calls upon all parties concerned to
work together to safeguard the integrity and authority
of the Convention.
The arbitration unilaterally initiated is not about
the interpretation and application of UNCLOS. In fact,
the Philippines itself also treats this dispute as one of
sovereignty over territory deep in its heart. For example,
the day after the initiation of the arbitral proceedings,
a document of the Philippines Department of Foreign
Affairs entitled “Q & A on the UNCLOS Arbitral
Proceedings against China to Achieve a Peaceful and
Durable Solution to the Dispute in the West Philippine
Sea”, dated 23 January 2013, described the purpose
of the case as “to protect our national territory and
maritime domain” or “to defend the Philippine territory
and maritime domain”. It also stated that
“[a]t this stage, the legal track presents the most
durable option to defend the national interest and
territory on the basis of international law”.
The Philippines Senate subsequently passed a
resolution supporting the arbitration stating that “the
Philippines is left with no other option than to protect
the Philippines’ territorial integrity and sovereign
rights”. The Philippine Under-Secretary of Foreign
Affairs stated that “the areas under dispute are legally

18/20

08/12/2015

the territory of the Philippines as guaranteed by
international law”. All these references to territory or
territorial integrity testify to the territorial essence of
the claims presented by the Philippines in its notification
of dispute to the Arbitral Tribunal convened under
UNCLOS, which clearly has no jurisdiction over the
matter.
Ms. Yparraguirre (Philippines): With regard
to the United Nations forum, it may be said that the
General Assembly may discuss any question or matter
within the scope of the Charter of the United Nations,
including the peaceful settlement of disputes. What is
more, world leaders from our region and beyond have
expressed serious concern over the developments in
the South China Sea in various forums, including the
United Nations.
I would like to reiterate that the Arbitral Tribunal
decided in its award of 29 October that it has jurisdiction
to hear the case and that China would be legally bound
to comply with its decision. Moreover, the Tribunal
also found that the Philippines’ act of initiating the
arbitration process did not constitute an abuse of
process, contrary to the statement made earlier by the
representative of China. The Tribunal also found that
the 2002 China-Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South
China Sea, and other international agreements such as
the Convention on Biological Diversity, do not, under
articles 281 or 282 of the Convention, preclude recourse
to compulsory dispute-settlement procedures available
under section 2 of Part XV of the Convention.
In this dispute, China has always invoked historic
rights in the same breath as international law. Its
nine-dash line claim is supposed to be anchored in
historic rights. However, there is nothing historic or
right about China’s nine-dash line claim. In paragraph
160 of its award on 29 October, the Arbitral Tribunal
states that China has not clarified the nature or scope of
its claimed historic rights nor its own understanding of
the meaning of its own nine-dash line set out on the map
accompanying its notes verbales of 7 May 2009; nor
has China expressed a view on the status of particular
maritime features in the South China Sea.
There is no overlapping territorial sea between the
Philippines and China. There is also no overlapping
exclusive economic zone (EEZ) between the Philippines
and China. The arbitration case is not about territorial
jurisdiction or maritime boundaries delimitation but

15-41197

08/12/2015

a maritime dispute involving the interpretation or
application of UNCLOS, namely, whether the waters
enclosed by China’s nine-dash line claim over the South
China Sea can encroach on the 200-nautical-mile EEZ
of the Philippines. That is the fundamental issue.
Arbitration is an open, friendly, durable and rulesbased dispute-settlement mechanism. We believe
that it will serve to clarify maritime entitlements of
all littoral States in the South China Sea, paving the
way for a resolution to the dispute, in accordance with
international law, particularly UNCLOS. We remain
open to China’s constructive participation in the
arbitration process.
Mr. Li Yongsheng (China): There is still no
delimitation between China and the Philippines over the
maritime area, so I seriously challenge the conclusion
that the representative of the Philippines has drawn just
now that there is no overlapping maritime area between
the two countries.
The Arbitral Tribunal has no jurisdiction under
paragraph 1 of article 288 of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), as the
dispute is not one concerning the interpretation or
application of the Convention. More specifically, the
Tribunal does not have jurisdiction ratione temporis
over the dispute, which had arisen before the entry into
force of UNCLOS with respect to China in 1996. The
Tribunal does not have jurisdiction over this dispute
because its resolution would constitute a decision on
the sovereignty over many islands or insular features or
would necessarily involve the concurrent consideration
of unsettled disputes concerning sovereignty or other
rights over these islands or insular features.
The Tribunal has no jurisdiction over certain claims
relating to the sovereignty over or definition of status of

A/70/PV.69

certain submerged features or whether they are subject
to appropriation because they either do not constitute
disputes concerning the interpretation or application
of UNCLOS or are consequential upon the resolution
of a land-territory issue over which the Tribunal has
no jurisdiction. The Tribunal has no jurisdiction over
certain claims relating to the definition of the status of
certain rocks because these claims relate to sovereignty
over this insular-land territory and they either do not
constitute disputes concerning the interpretation or
application of UNCLOS or are consequential upon
the resolution of a sovereignty issue over which the
Tribunal has no jurisdiction.
To the extent that the Philippines’ understanding
is meaningful with regard to the interpretation of the
scope of paragraph 1 of article 288, to which it became
subject when the Philippines ratified UNCLOS in
1984, it reinforces the position that disputes relating to
sovereignty over continental or insular-land territory are
outside the jurisdiction of a Section 2 Court or Tribunal.
In addition, I would repeat that, under paragraph 1 (a)
of article 298, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction over
this case because the disputes or claims presented by
the Philippines have been excluded by China’s 2006
declaration or by the Philippines’ understanding.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 79?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 79 and of agenda item 79 as a whole.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

15-4119719/20
