S/2019/430

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 May 2019
Original: English

The situation in Central Africa and the activities of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to the statement of the President of the
Security Council dated 10 August 2018 (S/PRST/2018/17), in which the Council
requested the Secretary-General to keep it informed about the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA). It provides an assessment of
the major political and security developments and trends in Central Africa since the
report of the Secretary-General dated 29 November 2018 (S/2018/1065) and covers
the period from 30 November 2018 to 15 May 2019. The report also provides an
update on the situation in the Lake Chad basin region, pursuant to Council resolution
2349 (2017).

II. Major developments in the Central Africa subregion
A.

Political, peace and security developments and trends
2.
The political situation in Central Africa remained volatile and highly charged
by recent electoral processes and security and human rights challenges.
3.
In N’Djamena, on 24 March, the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community (CEMAC) held the fourteenth ordinary session of it s Conference of
Heads of State, at which it adopted a common policy on emigration, immigration and
border security, aimed at accelerating the creation of a visa-free zone. CEMAC
leaders further expressed their solidarity with the President of Gabon, Ali Bo ngo
Ondimba, following his recent convalescence and commended the President of the
Central African Republic, Faustin-Archange Touadéra, for the signature of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic.
The President of Cameroon, Paul Biya, took over the chairmanship of CEMAC for a
two-year period.
4.
On 13 April, the Conference of Heads of State and Government of the
Community of Sahelo-Saharan States decided to temporarily relocate its headquarters
from Tripoli to N’Djamena.

19-08210 (E)

300519

*1908210*

S/2019/430

Political development and trends
5.
In Angola, the President, João Lourenço, ramped up the fight against corruption
as part of his Government’s commitment to political and macroeconomic reforms.
The Government mounted campaigns aimed at combating illegal immigration and
illegal mining, which resulted in mass expulsions of foreign nationals. As
preparations advanced for the holding of local elections in 2020, underpinning a
broader decentralization process, Angola took steps to broaden democr atic space and
enhance dialogue with civil society.
6.
The political and civic space in Burundi continued to be tense, with reports of
persistent harassment of opposition parties. In January, the Government suspended
30 international non-governmental organizations after they failed to comply with a
recent law strengthening financial controls and requiring the enforcement of ethnic
quotas. In December 2018, the Prosecutor General issued an arrest warrant against
the former President, Pierre Buyoya, and 16 other officials on conspiracy charges
related to the 1993 assassination of the former President, Melchior Ndadaye. On
17 April, the National Assembly passed the new Electoral Code that will guide the
2020 general elections, in line with the May 2018 Constitution.
7.
On 1 February, the former President of the United Republic of Tanzania,
Benjamin Mkapa, in his capacity as facilitator, at that time, of the East African
Community-led inter-Burundi dialogue, submitted a report to the Heads of State of
the Community at their twentieth ordinary summit. He also proposed a political road
map for the 2020 elections. The President of Burundi, Pierre Nkurunziza , rejected
both the report and concerns regarding the political situation. The Community has yet
to decide on next steps regarding the inter-Burundi dialogue.
8.
In Cameroon, President Biya appointed a new Government on 4 January, which
included 11 women. More than half of the country’s 60 ministers were replaced. As
legislative and municipal elections remained postponed by presidential decree,
supporters of the main opposition parties called for a revision of the electoral law.
Meanwhile, on 5 April, Parliament enacted a law on decentralization to determine the
number of regional councillors. On 26 January, protests erupted in major cities
throughout the country, eliciting a violent response by internal security forces and
triggering mass arrests. Those arrested included several Members of Parliament from
the Social Democratic Front and the leader of the Cameroon Renaissance Movement,
Maurice Kamto, together with 200 of Mr. Kamto’s supporters, who are currently
standing trial before a military tribunal on charges that include rebellion, insurrection
and public disturbance. Some of those charges carried the death penalty. In an interview
broadcast on 19 March, the spokesperson for President Biya announced that the
President would reject dialogue with Mr. Kamto, who had requested a face -to-face
discussion.
9.
The security situation in the North-West and South-West Regions of Cameroon
remained of serious concern, with a new wave of kid nappings and killings in early
2019. On 24 January, the leader of the separatist group, Southern Cameroons Defence
Forces, was reportedly killed by the national armed forces. In February, nearly 70
people were killed during a separatist-imposed 10-day lockdown to disrupt National
Youth Day activities in the two regions. On 11 February, an arson attack on the Kumba
District Hospital in the South-West Region resulted in at least four patients killed and
several others injured. On 19 March, the former Secretar y of State in charge of
secondary education was kidnapped from his residence in Bamenda by suspected
secessionist fighters. On 20 March, 16 students were abducted from the University of
Buea by unidentified gunmen. The Government accused the secessionists of the
abductions. The authorities announced their intention to carry out investigations into
alleged human rights violations by security forces in the affected regions, but no
outcome was made public.
2/16

19-08210

S/2019/430

10. While no concrete progress was made towards a dialogue process, in November
2018, the Government of Cameroon established the National Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration Committee, under the leadership of the Prime
Minister, and tasked it with organizing, supervising and managing the disarmamen t,
demobilization and reintegration of former fighters from Boko Haram and armed
groups in the North-West and South-West Regions. The Government requested the
Committee to work closely with international partners, especially the United Nations.
The latter remained engaged and continued to advocate paying urgent attention to the
situation of women and children formerly associated with combatants. From 14 to
17 April, the Liberian peace activist and Nobel Peace Prize laureate, Leymah
Gbowee, led a mission of the African Women Leaders Network, with the support of
the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women, the
African Union, UNOCA and the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), to Cameroon, seeking to reinforce the role of women in efforts to reduce
violence and promote peace. The Prime Minister expressed his firm commitment to
supporting the work of women’s associations active in peacebuilding and social
cohesion.
11. In the Central African Republic, considerable efforts were undertaken to
revitalize the peace process under the auspices of the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation. From 8 to 11 January, the Commissioner for Peace and Security of
the African Union and the Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations of the
United Nations visited Bangui, accompanied by a ministerial delegation from the
region. Following the visit, talks between the Government and 14 armed groups
commenced in Khartoum on 24 January and culminated in the signing of the Politica l
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, in Bangui,
on 6 February. Several neighbouring countries expressed their readiness to
re-establish bilateral joint commissions with the Central African Republic that would
facilitate discussions on border management and common security challenges.
12. In Chad, progress was made towards the holding of legislative elections, which
had been postponed several times since 2015. On 4 April, the members of the
Independent National Electoral Commission were sworn in before the Supreme Court.
Opposition segments had raised concerns in relation to the individuals representing
the opposition in the electoral body. A call by parts of the opposition to suspend their
participation in the national framework for political dialogue was short-lived.
Members of the presidential majority and opposition continued to come together in
equal numbers under the framework, which continued to constitute the main platform
for resolving contentious issues related to electoral preparations. Questions
surrounding the electoral calendar, the budget and financing were yet to be clarified.
13. The security situation in some parts of Chad remained precarious, owing to
armed group activity in the northern province of Tibesti and to Boko Haram terrorist
activities in the areas around Lake Chad. In early February, the Government requested
military support from France to halt the advance from southern Libya of some 250
fighters associated with the rebel coalition, Union des forces de la résistance. The
military operation was deemed a success. On 3 March, the Government closed the
country’s border with Libya. On 26 March, it announced the establishment of an
interdisciplinary security force in Tibesti, tasked with securing the b order and
intercepting armed criminal groups. Meanwhile, cycles of intercommunal tension
between pastoralists and farmers continued in several parts of Chad.
14. While armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo continued to
represent a challenge to broader regional stability, the country’s presidential, national
and provincial legislative elections of 30 December took place in a relatively calm
atmosphere and resulted in its first peaceful transfer of power. On 10 January, the
Independent National Electoral Commission announced the provisional results of the
19-08210

3/16

S/2019/430

presidential election and declared the opposition candidate, Félix Tshisekedi , the
winner. A legal challenge presented by the runner-up, Martin Fayulu, was rejected by
the Constitutional Court and, on 24 January, Mr. Tshisekedi was sworn in as President.
In the legislative elections, the Front commun pour le Congo coalition won the
absolute majority. The proportion of women in the National Assembly remained
roughly equal to the 2011 results; on 24 April, however, Jeannine Mabunda Lioko
was elected as the first woman President of the National Assembly.
15. In Equatorial Guinea, opposition parties continued to face obstacles to
participation in political dialogue. On 26 February, several members o f opposition
parties were arrested and briefly detained by the Government. On 22 March, the trial
began for 150 individuals accused of instigating a failed coup d ’état in December
2017. On 11 April, the leader of the Convergencia para la Democracia Social
(Convergence for Social Democracy) opposition party, Andrés Esono Ondo, was
arrested in Chad on suspicion of attempting to buy arms from the Chadian opposition
to carry out a coup in Equatorial Guinea. He was released from prison with no charges
on 24 April and returned to Malabo of his own volition.
16. In Gabon, a new National Assembly and new municipal councils were set up,
following parliamentary and municipal elections in October and November 2018. On
7 January, several insurgents from within the Republican Guard took over the national
radio station in Libreville and sought to overthrow the Government. The mutineers
were quickly overpowered, and several were killed by internal security forces.
17. Headed by the Prime Minister, Julien Nkoghé Békalé, the new Government was
established on 12 January, and then lightly reshuffled on 30 January. On 25 February,
President Bongo Ondimba returned to Libreville from his convalescence abroad to
convene the first meeting of the Council of Ministers since the establ ishment of the
new Government. In March, some opposition parties and civil society called upon the
Constitutional Court to declare a vacancy of power on the basis of what they
perceived as the President’s poor health. On 23 March, following further treatme nt
abroad, the President returned to Libreville and held another meeting of the Council
of Ministers on 29 March.
18. On 6 March, in the Congo, a Brazzaville court sentenced the opposition leader
and 2016 presidential candidate, André Okombi Salissa, to 20 years in prison, on
charges of illegal possession of weapons and attempting to undermine State security.
The country continued to make progress towards the implementation of the ceasefire
agreement of 23 December 2017 with former rebels in the Pool Region, although the
related disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme still needed to be
fully implemented.
19. Following legislative, local and regional elections in October 2018, the
Government of Sao Tome and Principe was formed by a diverse coalition with a
one-seat majority in Parliament, ushering in a tense post-electoral period. On
29 November, the President, Evaristo Carvalho, appointed Jorge Lopes Bom Jesus as
Prime Minister, to lead the new Government, which consists of 12 ministers and
2 secretaries of State, including 3 women. On 28 December, the new National
Assembly reversed several of the decisions of its predecessor by reappointing four
judges of the Supreme Court of Justice who had been obliged to retire and by revoking
the mandate of the five judges of the Constitutional Court.
Security developments and trends
Boko Haram/Lake Chad basin
20. Attacks on civilian and military targets continued in the Far North Region of
Cameroon and in the Lac province of Chad. Between 1 December 2018 and 30 April
4/16

19-08210

S/2019/430

2019, there were, reportedly, 83 Boko Haram-related security incidents in Cameroon,
leading to 83 civilian fatalities, and 24 incidents in Chad, leading to 33 civilian
fatalities. On 18 February, Chadian security forces arrested five suspected Boko
Haram members in N’Djamena. On 22 March, Boko Haram elements launched a
large-scale attack on Chadian forces deployed in Dangdala, Chad, that left 23 soldiers
dead and 4 wounded. Following the attack, the President, Idriss Déby Itno, replaced
the Chief of Staff of the Chadian armed forces. On 6 April, four Cameroonian soldiers
were killed during an attack in Sagmé, Cameroon. On 14 April, another large attack
killed 7 Chadian soldiers in Bouhama, Chad, and wounded 15 others. The Chadian
army reported that 63 Boko Haram terrorists were killed during that attack. On
17 April, 2 Chadian soldiers were reportedly killed and another 12 injured in a Boko
Haram attack in Magorone, Nigeria, during which 53 Boko Haram elements were
reportedly also killed. On 18 April, Boko Haram elements attacked and burned the
village of Tchakamari, in the Far North Region of Cameroon, killing 11 civilians,
including children and older persons.
Lord’s Resistance Army
21. The Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) continued to loot and kidnap civilians,
including for forced labour. The non-governmental organization (NGO) Invisible
Children reported a surge in abductions in Haut-Uélé and Bas-Uélé provinces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo during the first quarter of 2019. During the same
period, the United Nations Joint Human Rights Office documented 62 human rights
abuses committed by LRA combatants in the above-mentioned provinces. Incidents
involved the ambushing of civilians, looting of food and non-food items and brief
kidnappings of civilians to transport the looted items. Clashes with LRA elements led
to the killing of two soldiers of the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo on 8 and 22 February.
22. In the Central African Republic, unconfirmed reports indicated that LRA
elements attacked civilians four times in the diamond -mining region east of Bria and
reportedly fired upon armed group elements of the Front populaire pour la renaissance
de la Centrafrique. Five LRA defectors were repatriated to Uganda with the support
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the
Central African Republic (MINUSCA). LRA elements crossed the porous border
between the Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
multiple times to prey upon civilians for survival. Reports of civilians abducted by
LRA could not be confirmed by MINUSCA during the reporting period, owing to the
inaccessibility of the border area.
Maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea
23. In its report on piracy and armed robbery against ships issued on 16 January
2019, the International Maritime Bureau noted that reports of attacks in the Gulf of
Guinea had more than doubled in 2018. During the reporting period, 15 attacks were
recorded in the ECCAS zone of the Gulf of Guinea, 7 of which occurred off the coast
of the Congo. On 2 January, 18 hostages were released off the Bakassi peninsula in
Cameroon. On 22 February, three Chinese fishing vessels were attacked, result ing in
eight people being taken hostage. At the time of writing, they remained in captivity.
On 8 May, the authorities of Equatorial Guinea and Spain reported a joint naval
operation in which 20 crew members on a Maltese-flagged merchant vessel were
rescued from an assault by pirates in the Gulf of Guinea on 5 May, following which
10 pirates were reportedly arrested.

19-08210

5/16

S/2019/430

Poaching and illicit trafficking in wildlife and natural resources
24. On 25 January, the high-level segment of the International Conference of
Ministers of Defence, Security and Protected Areas on the fight against poaching and
other cross-border criminal activities met in N’Djamena, under the joint auspices of
the Congo Basin Forest Partnership and the Commission for the Forests of Central
Africa. Conference attendees adopted a declaration acknowledging that climate
change was among the drivers of change in transhumance dynamics, which had the
potential to jeopardize prospects for development, peace and security.
25. In February and March, the Government of Gabon intercepted 353 containers of
kevazingo wood, subject to a ban since 2018, which were sold for illegal export. On
14 March, 2 tons of pangolin scales and 200 elephant tusks were seized in Douala ,
Cameroon, and 4 traffickers were arrested. At the time of writing, the traffickers
remained in custody.
Effects of climate change, ecological changes and natural disasters on the
stability of Central Africa
26. According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , temperatures in
parts of Central Africa have been rising 1.5 times faster than the global average.
Owing to changing rainfall patterns, the subregion was experiencing more intense and
frequent droughts and floods, which undermined food production, livelih oods and
stability and elevated the risks of humanitarian crises, natural disasters and violence
related to transhumance. In parts of Chad and Cameroon bordering Lake Chad,
protracted conflict, combined with increased variability in rainfall and temperatur e,
continued to result in high levels of hunger and malnutrition, subjecting millions to
extreme hardship.
27. Urban settlements in the region were at risk owing to more frequent extreme
climate events such as flooding and cyclones, combined with populati on growth and
poor infrastructure. Bangui, Kinshasa and Mbuji-Mayi, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, were listed as three of the most at-risk cities in the 2018 Climate Change
Vulnerability Index.

B.

Humanitarian developments
28. In Burundi, some 1.8 million people were affected by the humanitarian crisis
and economic downturn. Humanitarian partners are targeting the 710,000 most
vulnerable with required humanitarian assistance in 2019. Figures provided by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees showed that there were
351,975 Burundian refugees covered by the Burundi regional refugee response plan
in the immediate subregion and beyond. Between 1 January and 31 March, 5,278
Burundian refugees were provided with assistance to return to Burundi from the
United Republic of Tanzania, while an additional 2,082 left Burundi as refugees. As
at 31 March, some 125,000 Burundians remained internally displaced.
29. In Cameroon, humanitarian needs increased sharply in the first quarter of 2 019.
Some 4.3 million people will require humanitarian assistance in 2019, an increase of
30 per cent compared with 2018. In addition to the impact of the Lake Chad basin
crisis on the Far North Region, more than 1.3 million people are in need of urgent
humanitarian assistance in the North-West and South-West Regions, owing to the
ongoing violence there. More than 530,000 people were internally displaced in those
two regions, as well as in the Littoral and West Regions, by the end of April 2019,
and another 35,858 had sought asylum in Nigeria. School closures, multiple
abductions of students and teachers, movement restrictions and incidents of sexual

6/16

19-08210

S/2019/430

and gender-based violence contributed to a climate of fear and intimidation,
negatively affected local economies and access to basic social services and
significantly increased protection risks. In addition, Cameroon had 263,000 internally
displaced persons in the Far North Region and hosted 278,884 refugees from the
Central African Republic in the East Region.
30. Protracted armed conflict and insecurity in the Central African Republic left
over 63 per cent of the population, or 2.9 million people, in need of humanitarian
assistance. More than 656,000 people remained internally displaced, and 592,000 had
sought refuge in neighbouring countries.
31. In Chad, close to 4.3 million people needed humanitarian support, of whom
2.2 million required nutrition support, a 29 per cent increase since 2018. Of the
country’s 23 provinces, 16 were declared to be in a nutrition emergency. Chad was
also affected by high levels of forced displacement, with large refugee caseloads from
Sudan (338,799) and the Central African Republic (103,837).
32. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 12.8 million people were in urgent
need of humanitarian assistance. Humanitarian workers and the Ministry of Health
battled to contain the ongoing Ebola outbreak in North Kivu and Ituri. As at 13 May,
there had been more than 1,705 confirmed and probable cases of Ebola, and 1,122
deaths. Distrust among parts of the population and cases of community resistance to
the response resulted in 19 documented attacks on health facilities, as well as hostility
against response staff. More than 112,000 people had been vaccinated as at 13 May.
Boko Haram/Lake Chad basin
33. A surge in armed attacks accelerated population displacement throughout the
Lake Chad basin region in recent months. Tens of thousands of civilians fled the
attacks, bringing the total number of Nigerian refugees as at 30 April to 15,45 6 in the
Lac province of Chad and 102,327 in the Far North Region of Cameroon. In February,
30,000 Nigerian refugees returned to Nigeria in what was considered to be an induced
return. As at 31 March, there were 183,472 internally displaced persons and ret urnees
in the Lac province of Chad and 253,813 internally displaced persons in the Far North
Region of Cameroon. By the end of April, some 2.8 million people were displaced
across the Lake Chad basin, the highest level to date.

C.

Human rights trends
34. On 23 January, the National Assembly of Angola adopted its first penal code
since independence and removed the provision prohibiting same -sex conduct. In
February, the National Security Council approved the extension of its Operation
Transparency, which targeted citizens and foreign nationals associated with illegal
mining. Since September 2018, the Government’s anti-corruption measures have
resulted in more than 400,000 foreign citizens leaving the country to go to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Unofficial sources reported that, in January and
February, some 70 members of the Movimento Independentista de Cabinda (Cabinda
Independence Movement) were arrested, of which 60 were later released.
35. Recorded allegations of human rights violations in Burundi included killings,
forced disappearances, ill-treatment, arbitrary arrests and detentions and restrictions
on the freedoms of association, expression and movement. Most of the victims of
human rights violations were members of opposition political parties or coalitions,
those perceived as opponents to the Government and human rights activists. The
police, the national intelligence services and the Imbonerakure militia were accused
of being the main perpetrators. The ongoing political impasse, along with the
Government’s decision to suspend cooperation with the Office of the United Nations

19-08210

7/16

S/2019/430

High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in Burundi in October 2016, the
subsequent closure of the Office in February 2019 and restrictions on the activities of
some international NGOs, had a negative impact on the situation of human rights in
the country.
36. Intensified fighting in the North-West and South-West Regions of Cameroon
between government forces and separatists impeded the free movement of civilians,
with violence and destruction of property attributed to both government forces and
armed groups. There were also regular reports of human rights violations committed
by government security forces and armed separatist groups. The International Crisis
Group estimated that at least 1,850 people, including civilians, separatist fighters and
government forces, had been killed since September 2017. In the Far North Region,
Boko Haram continued to deliberately target public places such as markets, mosques
and main commercial areas, with attacks often perpetrated by girls and women
co-opted by the terrorist group.
37. The charges against the opposition leader, Maurice Kamto, and his supporters
in Cameroon were pending with military courts after the High Court of Mfoundi in
Yaoundé denied their plea for habeas corpus. The trial of separatist leaders extradited
from Nigeria and detained since January 2018 was due to resume before the military
tribunal on 8 April; the accused, however, failed to appear in court. The defence
insisted that the case could not continue at the military tribunal while an appeal
against its verdict on its competence over the defendants was still pending at the
Appeals Court.
38. In the Central African Republic, violence by armed groups persisted throughout
the country as part of their attempts to gain territorial control; meanwhile, national
defence and security forces were absent in large parts of the country. Civilians
continued to be targeted and killed, sometimes along ethnic and religious lines, by
different ex-Séléka splinter groups and anti-balaka elements.
39. In Chad, commissioners for the national human rights commission were yet to
be selected. OHCHR strengthened its advocacy with the Government to accelerate
the appointment process. According to local NGOs and the judicial authorities, four
cases of human rights violations affecting 14 victims (12 women and 2 men) were
reported during the period. According to the same sources, those c ases included
deaths following sequestration and torture, as well as ill-treatment, arbitrary detention
and physical violence, and involved elements of the security services. Access to social
media remained suspended for over one year.
40. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the volatile security situation in parts
of the country was conducive to an environment of violence and human rights
violations, in particular sexual violence. Between the beginning of the electoral
campaign on 22 November and the inauguration of President Tshisekedi on
24 January, the United Nations Joint Human Rights Office documented 304 human
rights violations related to the electoral process, including 21 fatalities due to the
disproportionate use of force. In addition, 203 peo ple were injured, and 656 others
detained, by State agents across the country. In his inaugural speech, President
Tshisekedi cited human rights as a priority and later announced that all political
prisoners would be rapidly released.
41. In Equatorial Guinea, the opposition political party, Convergencia para la
Democracia Social, was outlawed on 26 February.
42. In Gabon, trials began for some of the political dissidents imprisoned following
the 2016 presidential election. Deteriorating prison conditions, overcrowding and
increasing lengths of pretrial detention remained serious concerns. Despite an appeal
launched by the National Union of Magistrates of Gabon on 7 March, the Government
8/16

19-08210

S/2019/430

did not provide any information on the deaths of two insurgent soldier s in connection
with the events of 7 January (see para. 16 above).
43. On 8 March in the Congo, the third criminal court of the High Court of
Brazzaville charged 6 police officers with manslaughter and non-assistance to persons
in danger in the case of the 13 youths found dead inside the Chacona police station in
Brazzaville in July 2018. The court was declared incompetent on the issue of civil
interests, depriving victims’ families of the right to compensation.

D.

Socioeconomic trends
44. The overall economic and financial situation in Central Africa remained fragile
and challenging. Fiscal consolidation and restrictive monetary policies within
CEMAC, combined with rising oil prices, led to improved economic performance in
2018. While real growth in gross domestic product (GDP) in the CEMAC zone was
estimated to have reached 2.7 per cent in 2018, up from 0.9 per cent in 2017, CEMAC
countries continued to contend with insufficient reserves, low economic activity and
a lack of social protection for the most vulnerable groups. A gradual decline in oil
production was projected over the medium term. As oil prices continued to rise, GDP
growth was projected to further increase in 2019; economic diversification, however,
remained largely unachieved.
45. In Gabon, heavy constraints on the budget led to unpopular measures adopted
by the Government, such as a reduction in the public sector payroll and attempts to
eliminate subsidies to high school and university students, triggering a wave of social
protests. In Chad, social tensions eased slightly in early 2019, following a partial
reversal of pay cuts for civil servants and a restoration of soldiers ’ salaries. In the
Congo, the socioeconomic situation remained of significant concern, and the
Government and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) continued discussions over
a support package. In Equatorial Guinea, IMF was reengaging with the Government
on access to the Fund’s Extended Credit Facility.

III. Activities of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa
A.

Good offices, preventive diplomacy and mediation
Cameroon
46. My Special Representative for Central Africa pursued efforts to promote a
peaceful resolution of the crisis in the North-West and South-West Regions through
political dialogue. From 19 to 22 January, he travelled to Yaoundé to meet with
national authorities, including the new Prime Minister and the Director of the Civil
Cabinet of the Presidency. He reaffirmed the commitment of the United Nations to
supporting national efforts to preserve the country’s stability and discussed with
authorities the process for requesting eligibility to receive, under the Peacebuilding
Fund, additional resources crucial for accelerating decentralization, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, the promotion of bilingualism and elections. In a
letter dated 12 February, the Prime Minister informed my Special Representative that
President Biya supported the country’s request for eligibility to receive support from
the Peacebuilding Fund. Subsequently, the Prime Minister established an
interministerial committee to coordinate closely with the United Nations country team
in preparing the necessary documentation. The United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights visited Yaoundé from 1 to 4 May and called for the Government to

19-08210

9/16

S/2019/430

allow OHCHR to conduct a human rights assessment mission. The High
Commissioner and President Biya both expressed their willingness for further
cooperation aimed at improving the protection of and respect for human r ights in the
country.
Central African Republic
47. On 24 and 25 January, my Special Representative for Central Africa participated
in the opening of direct dialogue between the Government of the Central African
Republic and armed groups in Khartoum. He continued to advocate constructive and
coordinated regional engagement in the implementation of the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. From 2 to 5 April, my
Special Representative undertook a joint mission to Bangui with the SecretaryGeneral of ECCAS to show unified support for the Agreement. In a joint
communiqué, they emphasized the central role of countries in the region in the
implementation of the Agreement and invited Governments to use the framework o f
the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa to accelerate the re-establishment of bilateral joint commissions between the
Central African Republic and neighbouring States.
Chad
48. From 11 to 13 March, my Special Representative for Central Africa visited
N’Djamena and met with members of the ruling majority and the opposition to discuss
the preparations for the legislative elections to be held later in 2019. He urged all
stakeholders to arrive at a consensus on the composition of the Independent National
Electoral Commission and to continue to engage through the national framework for
political dialogue. My Special Representative further discussed modalities to
operationalize the Electoral Commission. He returned to N’Djamena on 5 April to
pursue those discussions.
Equatorial Guinea
49. From 5 to 10 May, UNOCA conducted a human rights assessment mission to
Malabo to identify, together with the United Nations country team, areas of support
required to strengthen the Government’s efforts in the field of human rights.
Gabon
50. Since the legislative and local elections held in October 2018, and in particular
after President Bongo Ondimba took ill at the end of October, my Special
Representative for Central Africa met regularly with leaders of the main national
institutions and key stakeholders to promote respect for the Constitution, the rule of
law and stability. Those leaders included the Prime Minister, the President of the
Constitutional Court, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Cooperation, the
Francophonie, Regional Integration and Gabonese Living Abroad and the Minister of
State for Justice and Human Rights, as well as opposition leaders and civil society
representatives.
51. From 25 February to 1 March, UNOCA held a training workshop for 37 senior
Gabonese police officers, including 11 women. Issues discussed included the
application of human rights standards and gender perspectives , and readiness to
deploy in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
52. In March, UNOCA and the United Nations Development Programme held
consultations with representatives of the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights, the
National Human Rights Commission, civil society, women’s groups and the European
Union. The consultations informed the development of a project to strengthen
10/16

19-08210

S/2019/430

national capacity for the promotion and protection of human rights and sustaining
peace. On 15 March, the Minister of State for Justice and Human Rights endorsed the
proposal and designated a national focal point to coordinate further with United
Nations system entities and other stakeholders.
Congo
53. My Special Representative for Central Africa visited Brazzaville from 13 to
16 February. He noted the improving situation in the Pool Region and encouraged the
Government to disburse, without delay, its share of the funding received for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, in order to encourage donors to fulfil
their pledges. He encouraged opposition leaders to join the Conseil national du
dialogue (National Dialogue Council) as the only legal framework for dialogue. He
also encouraged the presidential majority to provide more political space for the
opposition.
Sao Tome and Principe
54. From 28 to 31 January, my Special Representative for Central Africa visited Sao
Tome and Principe to offer support to the new Government. He held meetings with
the President, the Prime Minister, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Cooperation and
Communities, the President of the National Assembly, the President of the Electoral
Commission, the President of the Constitutional Court, leaders of the ruling majority
and opposition parties, representatives of civil society and heads of residen t United
Nations agencies. Immediately following the visit, I received a letter from the Prime
Minister, formally requesting the support of the United Nations in strengthening
social cohesion, political dialogue and legal reforms, including the reform of t he
electoral system. A technical assessment mission visited the country from 6 to
8 March to assess options for the provision of possible support. The findings of the
mission highlighted the need for a more constructive dialogue process between the
ruling majority and the opposition. My Special Representative returned to Sao Tome
and Principe on 12 and 13 April and held meetings with senior officials on the margins
of the annual meeting of the heads of United Nations presences in Central Africa (see
para. 70 below).

B.

Support for United Nations, regional and subregional initiatives on
peace and security
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in
Central Africa
55. In its capacity as secretariat of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, UNOCA organized the forty seventh meeting of the Committee in N’Djamena, from 3 to 7 December. In its final
communiqué, the Committee highlighted the growing threats of mercenary activities
and the growing number of conflicts related to pastoralism and transhumance in the
subregion, among other issues.
56. From 24 to 29 March, members of the Bureau of the Committee (Angola, Chad,
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Equatorial Guinea), accompanie d by
representatives of Cameroon and the Central African Republic and an international
expert on pastoralism and transhumance-related issues, conducted a field mission to
Dungu, Democratic Republic of the Congo. The mission examined the peace and
security angle of pastoralism and transhumance in the area. The mission is expected
to report on its findings at the forty-eighth meeting of the Committee, to be held in
Kinshasa from 27 to 31 May.

19-08210

11/16

S/2019/430

Collaboration with regional, subregional and intergovernmental organizations
57. On 11 and 12 March, in Addis Ababa, UNOCA participated in the twelfth
consultative meeting of the United Nations, the African Union, the regional economic
communities and the regional mechanisms on the topic of the prevention,
management and resolution of conflicts. Among other issues, participants discussed
regional dynamics in Central Africa, enhanced collaboration between regional,
subregional and intergovernmental organizations and mediation processes in Africa.
58. UNOCA supported the participation of representatives of civil society
organizations from Cameroon, Chad and Gabon, as well as a representative of the
ECCAS secretariat, at the sixty-third session of the Commission on the Status of
Women, held in New York from 11 to 22 March.
59. From 25 to 29 March, UNOCA participated in a workshop organized by ECCAS
in Douala, Cameroon, with the support of the Government of Cameroon, the African
Union and the European Union. The aim of the workshop was to strengthen the
capacity of civil society organizations in conflict prevention, resolution and
transformation in Central Africa. The participants, including more than 50 civil
society representatives, agreed to set up a regional early warning coordinating
mechanism, modelled on the West Africa Network for Peacebuilding. Participants
also agreed on a workplan, with several recommendations to be examined at the
ECCAS ministerial meeting to be held later in 2019.
60. On 17 and 18 April, UNOCA and the ECCAS secretariat held a joint retreat, at
which they reviewed modalities for cooperation and adopted a joint action plan for
2019, placing a priority on conflict prevention, security cooperation, capacity building and monitoring and evaluation.
Boko Haram
61. From 11 to 23 February, UNOCA and the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel (UNOWAS) undertook a joint working-level technical assessment
mission to Chad and Cameroon to review support for the Lake Chad Basin
Commission in the fight against Boko Haram. A similar joint working-level mission
to Niger was conducted from 11 to 17 March. The teams met with representatives of
a broad range of national and local authorities in communities affected by Boko
Haram, as well as with representatives of the Lake Chad Basin Commission, the
Multinational Joint Task Force, national security and defence services, civil society,
humanitarian agencies and international partners. The mission focused on assessing
national and regional capacities to address security threats, impacts on the
humanitarian and human rights situation and the need for more sustainable modalities
to better channel United Nations and international support to Member States and
subregional mechanisms.
62. The above-mentioned technical assessment missions prepared the ground for
joint high-level visits by my Special Representatives for Central Africa and for West
Africa and the Sahel, to Chad, from 14 to 16 March, to Cameroon, from 25 to
27 April, and to Niger, from 28 to 30 April. They were joined in Chad by the
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and in
all three countries by the European Union Special Representative for the Sahel. The
delegation met with national and regional interlocutors in the capital s and visited
affected local communities around Lake Chad, where they spoke to local and
traditional authorities and returnees. The visits raised awareness of the vulnerability
of civilians living in Boko Haram-affected areas and highlighted the importance of
enhanced development and education efforts, including through increased State
presence.

12/16

19-08210

S/2019/430

Regional strategy and plan of action on counter-terrorism and the
non-proliferation of small arms and light weapons in Central Africa
63. On 7 December, on the margins of the ministerial meeting of the United Nations
Standing Advisory on Security Questions in Central Africa, the United Nations
Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa and UNOCA signed a
memorandum of understanding with the ECCAS Secretariat to jointly support the
implementation of the Central African Convention for the Control of Small Arms and
Light Weapons, their Ammunitions and Components that can be used for their
manufacture, repair or assembly, known as the Kinshasa Convention. Th e
memorandum entailed a joint project to build national capacity to implement the
Kinshasa Convention in Central Africa, in line with the African Union 2063 Agenda.
In that regard, a regional technical and legal capacity-building workshop was held in
Yaoundé from 24 to 26 April.
Coordination of the implementation of the United Nations regional strategy to
address the threat and impact of the Lord’s Resistance Army
64. On the margins of the consultative meeting on the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts (see para. 57 above), UNOCA held working-level discussions
with the African Union Commission on possible joint activities. Such activities
included joint assessment missions to the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and South Sudan to explore modalities of putting in place
ECCAS-led alternative security arrangements to the African Union-led Regional
Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord ’s Resistance Army, within the
framework of the African Standby Force, in line with the recommendations of the
795th meeting of the African Union Peace and Security Council, held on
20 September 2018.
Transhumance and farmer-herder conflicts
65. From 9 to 11 April, a UNOCA-ECCAS workshop on regional pastoralism and
transhumance took place in N’Djamena, bringing together ECCAS member States
and some 70 experts. Workshop participants identified key pillars and principles for
maximizing the socioeconomic benefits of pastoralism, while reducing risks of
insecurity and instability for peaceful transhumance.
Link between illicit trafficking in wildlife and natural resources and financing
of armed groups in the subregion
66. Reports received by UNOCA, including from recent LRA defectors, alluded to
financing through specific proxies and the exchange of natural and wildlife resources
for weapons and ammunition in the Kafia Kingi enclave where Joseph Kony was
believed to have been living for several years. The same sources reported that LRA
had derived resources from gold and diamond mining sites in Haute -Kotto and
Mbomou prefectures of the Central African Republic, as well as from elephant
poaching in Garamba National Park in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

C.

Enhancing United Nations coherence and coordination in
the subregion
67. On 17 and 18 January, my Special Representative for Central Africa met in
Addis Ababa with the Chairperson, the Commissioner for Peace and Security and the
Commissioner for Political Affairs of the African Union Commission, within the
context of the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security. They explored options for joint initiatives in the

19-08210

13/16

S/2019/430

areas of peace and security and conflict prevention in Central Africa. He also met
with my Special Representative to the African Union to discuss strengthening
cooperation and coherence of the United Nations in the region.
68. On 18 February, my Special Representative participated in the political
coordination meeting between my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region and
senior United Nations officials in the region, including the members of the
Management Board of the Great Lakes Regional Strategic Framework. On
19 February, he participated in the United Nations-European Union coordination
meeting on the Great Lakes region and briefed attendees on the situation in Central
Africa. The meeting was hosted by my Special Envoy.
69. On 21 March, UNOCA and UNOWAS held a working-level exchange on
support for the Lake Chad Basin Commission in the context of the fight against Boko
Haram; maritime security; interregional cooperation; and joint support for the
regional economic communities.
70. On 12 and 13 April, in Sao Tome and Principe, UNOCA convened the seventh
annual meeting of special representatives and envoys of the Secretary-General,
regional directors of United Nations entities and United Nations resident coordinators
in Central Africa. Under the theme “Advancing the Sustainable Development Goals
to promote peacebuilding”, the meeting served as a platform for sharing analyses of
the subregion and enhancing coordination around multidimensional peace and
security challenges. A representative of the Civil Societ y Platform for Peacebuilding
and Statebuilding briefed participants on efforts to support Central African countries
by holding inclusive and participatory voluntary national reviews on Sustainable
Development Goal 16. The meeting resulted in a set of recommendations for common
actions and priorities for United Nations system entities in Central Africa, to be
reviewed in April 2020.

IV. Observations and recommendations
71. Inclusive, genuine and credible electoral processes remain a key factor for
stability in Central Africa. While a number of important transitions took place in
2018, several others remain on the horizon. Some countries continue to manage
fragile post-electoral situations that will require concerted and inclusive political
dialogue. While elections can provide an important framework for consolidating
stability in the subregion, the dividends are hindered by abundant security,
development and economic governance challenges, as well as insufficient
institutional capacity.
72. An increasingly dominant feature highlighted in the present report is the
prevalence of human rights issues at the heart of national politics. In several countries,
questions of justice related to elections became central political questions. In others,
citizens asserted themselves more actively for freedom of expression and the
enjoyment of democratic economic, social and cultural rights. I appeal to all actors to
uphold and promote international human rights standards in their efforts to find
lasting solutions to conflicts through peaceful and inclusive political dialogue.
73. The signing of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic reaffirms, now more than ever, the importance of
constructive and coordinated regional and international engagement to bring an end
to the conflict. I commend countries in the region for their readiness to cooperate in
the Central African Republic under the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation
in order to deliver on the Agreement, and I stress that their role must continue
throughout its implementation. It is crucial that the countries of the subregion be

14/16

19-08210

S/2019/430

considered part of the solution, that they remain constructively engaged in the
implementation phase of the Political Agreement and that they do so in a coordinated
manner. In that regard, I welcome the meeting of the Central African Republic Cameroon joint commission in Bangui on 6 and 7 May and strongly urge the
re-establishment of the other bilateral joint commissions between the Centra l African
Republic and its neighbours, which could also serve as a tool to support the
implementation of the Agreement.
74. I am deeply troubled by the deteriorating security situation in the North -West
and South-West Regions of Cameroon. There has been no major progress made
towards a peaceful resolution of the crisis through dialogue, and the humanitarian
consequences are increasingly high. I am also concerned by the alarming human
rights situation in the two regions and note that violence and abuses appe ar to be
perpetrated by both government forces and armed groups. I call upon all stakeholders
to show restraint, renounce violence and work with the national authorities through
adequate dialogue mechanisms. It is likewise critical that women be fully enga ged at
all levels and, in that regard, I commend Ms. Gbowee and the African Women Leaders
Network for their efforts to further engage Cameroonian women in peacebuilding.
I call upon regional partners to work closely with my Special Representative to
support national dialogue efforts. There has been a recent increase in international
offers of support for the Cameroonian authorities in addressing the situation in the
North-West and South-West Regions. Those offers were expressed through several
high-level visits to Yaoundé. I urge the national authorities to avail themselves of all
means of support needed to enter into genuine and inclusive political dialogue,
including to address the situation in the North-West and South-West Regions and to
ensure that unimpeded access is granted to humanitarian and human rights
organizations.
75. I note that the evolving security situation in Chad risks further reducing the
focus on development, which is essential for sustainable peace. I urge that inclusive
dialogue be initiated with local communities to help to address the volatile situation
in Tibesti province. I also urge the Government to work towards the opening of
political space, notably with respect to freedoms of expression, association and
assembly, in order to defuse tensions and facilitate conditions more conducive to
peaceful, inclusive and credible elections. I welcome the Government ’s approach to
inclusive dialogue with the political opposition and look forward to further progress
in that regard within the national framework for political dialogue. I call on partners
to invest more generously towards sustainable peace and development in Chad.
76. Over the past several months, Gabon has shown resilience, in particular during
the prolonged absence of President Bongo Ondimba. Nevertheless, the economic
context remains difficult despite some efforts on the part of the Government to
consolidate public finances, which must be undertaken in consultation with
socioeconomic actors to maintain the stability of the country. My Special
Representative will continue to work with political stakeholders to consolidate good
governance and impress upon their adherence to upholding respect for the
Constitution and the rule of law.
77. I welcome progress made towards the implementation of the ceasefire
agreement in the Congo and encourage the Government to ensure that any future arms
and ammunition recovered are handled in compliance with international small arms
control standards and relevant regional instruments, namely the Kinsha sa Convention
and the Nairobi Protocol. The Government and international partners should disburse
their pledges to enable the launch of the national disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme. The success of the peace process in the Pool Regio n and
sustained broader stability in the Congo will be contingent on a credible and inclusive
political process and more inclusive governance at the national level. The protection
19-08210

15/16

S/2019/430

and promotion of human rights must be at the centre of peacebuilding efforts .
I strongly encourage the opposition leaders to join the Conseil national du dialogue
and engage in a national dialogue process without delay. The United Nations stands
ready to assist the Government in that regard.
78. I welcome the further consolidation of the democratic process in Sao Tome and
Principe and call on the ruling majority and the opposition to engage in a constructive
dialogue process. The United Nations stands ready to provide its support in that
regard.
79. I commend Member States for showing greater willingness to cooperate on
efforts to regulate transhumance at the subregional level, namely through the
development of a regulatory framework on pastoralism under ECCAS. I commend
the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa for addressing the issue, and I invite Governments and local communities to
continue to work together to address common challenges relating to transhumance.
UNOCA will continue to lend its full support to ECCAS and its member States, in
close cooperation with the broader United Nations system.
80. Armed group activity continues to be a significant factor in regional instability.
Illegal armed groups in the Cameroon, the Central African Republic and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have a severe impact on peace and stability in the
subregion. I remain concerned by ongoing violence against civilians perpetrated by
LRA. I support the decision of the African Union Peace and Security Council to
maintain the Regional Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord ’s
Resistance Army, pending the development of a strategy to progressively phase out
the Initiative, without leaving any security vacuum that LRA could use to renew and
intensify its destabilization activities in the affected areas. I am concerned about the
long-term effects of poaching and illicit trafficking in wildlife and natural resources,
which are unambiguously linked with the prolongation and exacerbation of the
conflict.
81. The intensity of the violence committed by Boko Haram in the countries of the
Lake Chad basin region remains intolerable. I would urge Member States not to lose
focus on the hard-earned gains made through our collective action and through the
African Union and Lake Chad Basin Commission regional strategy for the
stabilization, recovery and resilience of the areas of the Lake Chad basin affected by
Boko Haram activities, as well as the support pledged by international donors. The
United Nations, including through my Special Representatives for Central Africa and
West Africa and the Sahel, will continue to support Member States in that regard.
I also call for continued support for the Multinational Joint Task Force.
82. I would like to express my appreciation to the Governments of the subregion,
the African Union, ECCAS, CEMAC, the Lake Chad Basin Commission, th e Gulf of
Guinea Commission and other regional and subregional institutions for their
continued collaboration with UNOCA. I would also like to express my appreciation
to the Multinational Joint Task Force and troop-contributing countries for their
dedication and commitment to the service of peace and stability. I am grateful to the
Government and people of Gabon for their generous hospitality and support to
UNOCA. I would like to thank the various entities of the United Nations system
working in Central Africa, including the heads of United Nations peace operations,
regional offices, country teams and other entities, for their support to and cooperation
with UNOCA.
83. Finally, I would like to thank my Special Representative, François Louncény
Fall, and the staff of UNOCA for their continuing support for regional efforts to
advance the cause of peace and security in Central Africa.

16/16

19-08210
