S/PV.8762

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8762nd meeting

Tuesday, 29 September 2020, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abarry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Niger)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Sautter
Mr. Djani
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. King
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Allen
Mr. Hunter
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-25115 (E)
*2025115*

S/PV.8762

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

democratic institutions are critical to uniting Gaza and
the West Bank under a single national authority and
vital to upholding the prospect of a negotiated twoState solution.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, to
participate in this meeting.
Mr. Mladenov is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Jerusalem.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: On behalf of the Secretary-General,
I will devote this briefing to presenting his fifteenth
report on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016),
covering the period from 5 June to 20 September of
this year.
Before presenting the report, I would like to note
the recent agreements between Israel, the United Arab
Emirates and Bahrain. The Secretary-General welcomes
those agreements, which suspended Israeli annexation
plans over parts of the occupied West Bank. The
Secretary-General hopes that such developments will
encourage Palestinian and Israeli leaders to re-engage
in meaningful negotiations towards a two-State solution
and create opportunities for regional cooperation. He
reiterates that only a two-State solution that realizes
the legitimate national aspirations of Palestinians and
Israelis can lead to sustainable peace between the two
peoples and contribute to broader peace in the region.
I am similarly encouraged by the call to restore
hope in the peace process and resume negotiations on
the basis of international law and agreed parameters, as
made by the Foreign Ministers of Jordan, Egypt, France
and Germany in Amman.
The recent moves towards strengthening
Palestinian unity, as demonstrated by the outcome
of the Fatah-Hamas meetings calling for the longawaited national presidential and legislative elections,
are also encouraging. Elections and legitimate
2/20

29/09/2020

However, I am concerned by the rising coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) infection rates in the occupied
Palestinian territory and Israel. The Office of the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
is working with the relevant stakeholders to address
the needs in Gaza and the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem. I welcome the initial response from the
donor community to the United Nations COVID-19
efforts, and I urge increased support, particularly as the
health emergency is rapidly becoming a socioeconomic
crisis. All efforts must be mobilized in order to respond
to the pandemic, particularly in Gaza.
Turning to the report, from the outset let me state
that developments during the reporting period cannot be
divorced from the broader context — Israel’s continued
military occupation of the Palestinian territory; the
illegal settlement activity and demolitions; the situation
in Gaza, with more than a decade of control by Hamas
over the Gaza Strip and ensuing rocket fire, militant
activity and Israeli closures; unilateral actions that
undermine peace efforts; severe challenges to the
viability of the Palestinian Authority; and the persistent
risk of military escalation. The global pandemic
has further increased the needs and vulnerabilities
of Palestinians.
Those factors collectively erode the prospects for
achieving a viable two-State solution, in line with
United Nations resolutions, international law and
previous agreements.
Resolution 2334 (2016), in paragraph 2, calls
on Israel to “immediately and completely cease all
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem” and to “fully respect
all of its legal obligations in this regard”. No steps were
taken to that effect during the reporting period.
During this and the previous reporting period, there
were no settlement housing plans advanced, approved
or tendered in Area C. On 21 June, however, the
Jerusalem District Planning Committee advanced plans
for a building with 72 housing units in the occupied
East Jerusalem neighbourhood of Beit Hanina.
On 9 June, the High Court of Justice struck down a
2017 law enabling the wide-scale expropriation of private
20-25115

29/09/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8762

Palestinian land and the retroactive regularization,
under Israeli law, of thousands of housing units in
settlements and unauthorized outposts. The Court ruled
that the law was unconstitutional owing to its violation
of the rights of Palestinians to property and equality as
a protected population in the occupied West Bank.

Gaza, 22 were intercepted by the Iron Dome system and
19 landed in Israel. At least eight Israeli civilians, two
of them children, were injured and at least two houses
were damaged, while over 400 balloons carrying
incendiary devices were launched into Israel, causing
hundreds of fires in the vicinity of Gaza.

On 27 August, the High Court of Justice also
ordered the evacuation of approximately 40 structures
in the illegal settlement outpost of Mitzpe Kramim,
illegal also under Israeli law, and the relocation of
its residents. Meanwhile, two new outposts were
established in Um Zaituna, between the occupied West
Bank settlements of Ma’on and Carmel, and on Mount
Eival, north of Nablus.

Israeli security forces launched over 160 missiles
and tank shells against Hamas positions in Gaza. Ten
Palestinian civilians, including four children and a
pregnant woman, were injured, and at least two houses
were damaged. Following one strike, an unexploded
Israeli missile was found in a United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) school in the Al-Shati refugee camp.

On several occasions during the reporting period,
Israeli authorities removed or destroyed structures
in illegal outposts, in some cases leading to violent
clashes with the Israeli security forces and settlers.
As highlighted in a statement by the Humanitarian
Coordinator for the occupied Palestinian territory on
10 September, demolitions and seizures of Palestinianowned structures by Israeli authorities continued across
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, reaching the
highest demolition rate in the past four years.
Citing the absence of Israeli-issued building
permits, which remain almost impossible for
Palestinians to obtain, 250 structures were seized
or demolished, resulting in the displacement of 360
Palestinians, including 179 children and 87 women.
Of the structures demolished, 181 were in Area C and
69 in East Jerusalem. In 32 cases, Palestinians were
forced to demolish their own homes so as not to incur
the heavy Israeli demolition fees. Health and water
facilities, as well as agricultural structures, were also
demolished, affecting the services and livelihoods of
up to 2,000 Palestinians.
Resolution 2334 (2016), in paragraph 6, calls for
“immediate steps to prevent all acts of violence against
civilians, including acts of terror, as well as all acts of
provocation and destruction”. Unfortunately, violence
continues almost on a daily basis.
In August, Palestinian militants resumed launching
incendiary balloons from Gaza towards Israel,
sometimes escalating to rockets and mortars. Israel
retaliated by striking targets in Gaza and temporarily
tightening the closures, until a temporary de-escalation
was achieved at the end of the month. Overall, 63
rockets and mortars were fired towards Israel from

Meanwhile in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, during the reporting period, four
Palestinians, including one child, were killed by the
Israeli security forces and 40 people injured by live
ammunition. One Israeli was killed and 37 were injured
by Palestinians, including three children, in stabbings,
clashes, rocket attacks, and other incidents.
On 23 June, a 27-year-old Palestinian man was shot
and killed by Israeli security forces while reportedly
carrying out a ramming attack at a checkpoint near
Jerusalem in which one soldier was injured.
On 9 July, Israeli security forces shot and killed a
34-year-old Palestinian man and wounded a 17-year-old
in the West Bank village of Kifl Haris.
Later in July, several Palestinian workers were
severely beaten and robbed of their possessions near
Mitar Terminal, south of Hebron. The Israeli Justice
Ministry subsequently submitted indictments against
five border police officers.
In early August, a 23-year-old Palestinian woman
was killed by live fire in her home in Jenin during
an Israeli security forces operation and the ensuing
clash with residents. There are contradictory claims
over responsibility for the shooting, and a Palestinian
prosecutor is investigating the incident.
On 17 August, a Palestinian man, who was
attempting to carry out a stabbing attack against an
Israeli border police officer, was shot and killed in the
Old City of Jerusalem.
On the same day, Israeli security forces shot and
injured a 60-year-old Palestinian man with hearing and

20-251153/20

S/PV.8762

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

speech impairments at the Qalandiya checkpoint when
he did not respond to their calls to halt.
Later in August, a 16-year-old Palestinian died, and
two others were injured, after being shot in a village
west of Ramallah. The Israeli security forces stated that
the three were preparing to throw Molotov cocktails
and set alight tires to attack passing vehicles.
On 26 August, a Palestinian man from Nablus
stabbed and killed an Israeli man in Petach Tikva. The
perpetrator was later arrested.
On 2 September, an Israeli police officer and a
soldier were injured in an alleged ramming attack
south of Nablus. The Palestinian driver was shot
and apprehended.
Settler-related violence in the occupied West Bank
continued during the reporting period. The Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs reported 73
attacks against Palestinians by Israeli settlers, with 30
injuries resulting from those incidents. Approximately
100 attacks resulting in some 20 injuries and damage
to property by Palestinians against settlers and other
Israeli civilians were also reported.
On 14 September, an Israeli court sentenced the
convicted the killer of a Palestinian family in a 2015
gruesome arson attack in Duma village to three life
sentences for murder and 20 years for attempted murder,
as well ordering compensation to the family.
Resolution 2334 (2016) calls for the parties to refrain
from acts of provocation, incitement or inflammatory
rhetoric. During the reporting period, one senior
Fatah official said that anyone who cooperates with
Israel “should be shot”, and in its weekly guidance for
Friday sermons, the Palestinian Authority Ministry
of Religious Affairs used anti-Semitic language in
messaging on the recent normalization agreements
that “there is nothing that harms Palestine and its holy
sites more than making an alliance with the Jews,
being connected to them, and relying on them.” Some
Israeli officials also made provocative and concerning
statements in support of the annexation of parts of
the occupied West Bank and rejected the prospect of
Palestinian statehood.
One Israeli member of the Knesset and former
Minister incited to violence, deprecating a video
showing restraint by soldiers of the Israel Defense
Forces (IDF) in the face of a 15-year-old Palestinian
child throwing stones at them. Referring to the
4/20

29/09/2020

manslaughter conviction of a member of the IDF after
fatally having shot a Palestinian assailant in Hebron,
he said: “I would prefer 1,000 videos of Elor Azaria
instead of an embarrassing and dangerous one like
this one.”
Resolution 2334 (2016) reiterated calls by the
Middle East Quartet for affirmative steps to be
taken immediately to reverse negative trends on the
ground that are imperilling the two-State solution. On
3 September, for the first time in nearly a decade, the
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) Executive
Committee held its first meeting together with the
heads of all Palestinian factions. Speakers focused on
the need to restore unity and reform the PLO. President
Abbas reiterated his known position that he is ready to
launch negotiations with Israel under United Nations
or international auspices, while also calling for popular
resistance to confront the annexation threat.
Following an escalation in violence between Hamas
and Israel, Qatar mediated a de-escalation arrangement
announced on 31 August and provided significant
assistance to Gaza, including to support COVID-19
response and to vulnerable families. As a result, Israel
allowed the delivery of fuel, reinstated the fishing zone
and reopened the Kerem Shalom crossing for goods,
and Hamas agreed to halt to incendiary balloons and
other attacks.
The COVID-19 pandemic and the suspension
of coordination between the Palestinian Authority
(PA) and Israel in response to the plans to annex
parts of the occupied West Bank have contributed to
worsening the already dire humanitarian, economic
and political situation in Gaza and impacted the health
and socioeconomic situation in the West Bank. The
PA’s decision to stop accepting the clearance revenues
that Israel collects on its behalf has exacerbated an
already concerning fiscal crisis, with an 80 per cent
reduction in Palestinian revenues, which has impacted
salaries and service provision. It is unclear whether the
Government will have sufficient resources to make any
future salary payments or carry out its functions in the
coming months.
In Gaza, COVID-19-related restrictions halted the
crossing of workers and traders into Israel and prevented
revenue transfers to Gaza’s exporters. The absence
of coordination also delayed critical infrastructure
projects, exacerbating the high unemployment rate in
the Strip, which is nearly 50 per cent.
20-25115

29/09/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In response, the United Nations has engaged
with all sides to ensure the unimpeded provision of
humanitarian assistance. Agreements were reached
with the PA to enable the coordination of humanitarian
deliveries under United Nations auspices and with Israel
to streamline its administrative procedures. In early
September, the Palestinian Authority also re-engaged
in its support to donor-funded projects in Gaza. Still,
the lack of coordination has significantly compounded
the challenge of confronting the rapid increase in the
number of COVID-19 cases throughout the occupied
Palestinian territory. During the reporting period, three
patients, including two children, who needed urgent
medical treatment outside Gaza died because of related
delays. On 6 September, however, the United Nations
brokered arrangements to enable patient transfers from
Gaza with the support of the World Health Organization.
Meanwhile, the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) faces a $200 million financial shortfall
in its 2020 core programme budget and is seeking an
additional $31 million to cover its 2020 emergency
appeal for critical humanitarian needs in Gaza.
UNRWA’s extended COVID-19 response plan for
$94.6 million to cover needs through the end of the year
is only 5 per cent funded.
Concerning arrests have also taken place. On
19 July, Israeli police arrested and detained the PA
Governor of Jerusalem. On 9 September, the Internal
Security Force (ISF) further notified the Governor of an
order restricting his movement. Later, on 21 September,
the Palestinian Security Forces arrested seven members
of the Fatah Democratic Reform Bloc.
In another negative development, the media
reported that Israel’s Security Cabinet passed a motion
on 2 September to withhold the bodies of Palestinians
killed in armed attacks, or alleged armed attacks,
that caused injury or death to Israelis, expanding its
existing policy to withhold the bodies of Palestinians
whom Israel identifies as known militants.
In its resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council
called upon all States
“to distinguish, in their relevant dealings, between
the territory of the State of Israel and the territories
occupied since 1967”.
No such steps were known to have been taken
during the reporting period.

S/PV. 8762

Resolution 2334 (2016) also called upon all parties
to continue, inter alia, “to exert collective efforts to
launch credible negotiations”.
The agreements between Israel and Bahrain and
between Israel and the United Arab Emirates, which
were formalized in a signing ceremony at the White
House on 15 September, highlight the criticality
of achieving a just, comprehensive and enduring
resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that meets
the legitimate needs and aspirations of both peoples.
On 27 August and earlier today, the Envoys of the
Middle East Quartet met virtually to discuss these
latest developments and agreed to remain engaged on
the matter and chart a way forward.
On 9 September, the League of Arab States held a
ministerial meeting. In the final statement, participants
reinforced the commitment of all Arab League States to
ending the occupation and establishing an independent
Palestinian State based on the 1967 lines, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, and stated that the Arab Peace
Initiative remains the basis for achieving a lasting, just
and comprehensive Arab-Israeli peace.
I would like to share some broad observations
concerning the implementation of the provisions of
resolution 2334 (2016) during the reporting period.
First, the resurgence of COVID-19 is having a
devastating effect on the ground. The United Nations
and its partners will continue to support the Palestinians
in responding to the pandemic, including by addressing
critical gaps in medical supplies and equipment. It is
important to focus particularly on Gaza, given the
unique situation and extreme vulnerability of the
population. Any increased responsibilities taken on
by the United Nations should be limited, time-bound
and not replace the responsibilities of the Palestinian
Authority or the Government of Israel. I urge the
parties to find a path forward to address this urgent
health crisis. I also urge support for UNRWA as well
as for the inter-agency COVID-19 plan and the United
Nations development response plan in support of the
efforts of the Palestinian Government.
Second, we must also remain focused on addressing
the steadily eroding situation on the ground. While
over the past reporting periods we have seen limited
settlement advancement, I remain concerned by plans
for settlement construction in the E1 area and other
sensitive locations in the occupied West Bank, which are

20-251155/20

S/PV.8762

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

pending approval by the Israeli authorities. As clearly
set out in resolution 2334 (2016), the establishment
by Israel of settlements in the Palestinian territory
occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem, have
no legal validity and constitute a flagrant violation of
international law.
Third, I am deeply concerned by the serious spike
in demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned
structures in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
I urge Israel to cease this policy immediately, in line
with its obligations under international humanitarian
law.
Fourth, Israel’s suspension of plans to annex parts
of the West Bank removed a critical threat that had
the potential to upend peace and regional stability.
Annexation would have constituted a most serious
violation of international law and dealt a devastating
blow to the prospect of the two-State solution. The
threat, however, to the viability of the two-State
solution posed by continued settlement expansion and
demolitions remains. In that regard, I am concerned
by recent discussions in the Knesset that demonstrate
the intensifying pressure by the Government on
Palestinians living in Area C.
Fifth, given the severe economic and health crisis
faced by the Palestinian people, I take this opportunity
to call on the Israeli and Palestinian leaderships to
urgently re-engage and strengthen efforts to advance the
goal of a negotiated two-State solution. This financial
crisis can and must end. Both sides should re-examine
the nature of their economic relationship and improve it
to the benefit of both peoples.
Sixth, daily violence continues to fuel mistrust
and drives us further from a peaceful resolution of the
conflict. Settler-related violence continues, and I urge
Israel, as the occupying Power, to ensure the safety
and security of the Palestinian population and to hold
the perpetrators of the attacks accountable. I reiterate
that the Israeli security forces must exercise maximum
restraint and should use lethal force only when strictly
unavoidable in order to protect life and also investigate
all incidents of the possible excessive use of force
swiftly, thoroughly and independently.
Seventh, I also emphasize that the indiscriminate
launching of rockets and incendiary devices towards
Israeli population centres violates international law,
and I call on all Palestinian militants in Gaza to halt
such attacks. Likewise, children and schools should
6/20

29/09/2020

never be the target of violence by any party; children
should not be exposed to violence at all.
Eighth, I also welcome the 13 August
understandings, which have de-escalated tensions in
and around Gaza and appreciate Qatar’s continued
generous support to the Gaza population. I nevertheless
remain seriously concerned about the fragile calm and
the unacceptable suffering of Palestinians in Gaza. The
risk of another major escalation has not been eliminated.
No amount of humanitarian or economic support alone
will overcome Gaza’s challenges. The fundamental
problems are political. They require the necessary
leadership to reunite Gaza and the West Bank under a
single democratic, national leadership as well as to lift
Israeli closures in line with Security Council resolution
1860 (2009).
Ninth, I welcome the recent meeting of the PLO
Executive Committee and the heads of Palestinian
factions as well as the subsequent efforts made by the
leadership to strengthen Palestinian unity. It is critical
that the important Egyptian-led intra-Palestinian
reconciliation efforts also continue. The United
Nations firmly supports all such efforts, and I call upon
all Palestinian factions to build on this momentum
to reunite Gaza and the West Bank under a single,
democratic national Government and advance towards
general elections, which are critical for restoring
belief in the democratic Palestinian leadership and
institutions. Gaza must remain an integral part of a
future Palestinian State as part of a two-State solution.
I am concerned about reports by Palestinian rights
groups of arrests by Palestinian security forces in Gaza
and the West Bank based on political affiliation, without
clear charges or accusations. Such politically motivated
arrests should stop, and the rule of law should prevail.
I would like to reiterate that the fate of two Israeli
civilians and the remains of two Israeli soldiers held
by Hamas in Gaza remains an important humanitarian
concern. I call upon Hamas to provide full information
on them, as required by international humanitarian law.
I also remain concerned about Israel’s practice
of holding the bodies of killed Palestinians and about
reports of a recent expansion of that policy. I call for
the return of the withheld bodies, in line with Israel’s
obligations under international humanitarian law.
In conclusion, we are again at a pivotal moment in
the search for peace as a convergence of destabilizing
20-25115

29/09/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

factors threatens to pull Israelis and Palestinians further
towards a one-State reality of perpetual occupation
and conflict. I remain committed to supporting both
sides to resolve the conflict and end the occupation,
in line with the relevant United Nations resolutions,
international law and bilateral agreements, in pursuit
of achieving the vision of two States — Israel and
an independent, democratic, contiguous, viable and
sovereign Palestinian State — within secure and
recognized borders, based on the pre-1967 lines, with
Jerusalem as the capital of both States.
I reiterate the Secretary-General’s call for the
members of the Middle East Quartet, key Arab partners
and the Israeli and Palestinian leadership to urgently
re-engage and strengthen efforts to advance the goal
of a negotiated two-State solution before it is too late.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Mladenov for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I will lead
off today by offering our condolences to the people of
Kuwait for the death of their Amir, Sheikh Al-Sabah.
The Amir was a peacemaker in every sense of the word,
and we are grateful for his years of dedicated service to
the people of Kuwait and to making the region a more
stable, prosperous and peaceful place. His leadership
during Kuwait’s two years on the Security Council were
particularly noteworthy and appreciated. Our thoughts
and prayers today are with the people of Kuwait and
his family.
I thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his
briefing today. As always, we appreciate his hard work
and that of his team in addressing this issue.
Last month, the United States began by highlighting
the most significant step towards peace in the Middle
East in over 25 years — the agreement to normalize
relations between Israel and the United Arab Emirates
(see S/2020/837). For the second month in a row, we are
pleased to draw the Council’s attention to yet another
momentous step on the path towards peace in the
Middle East — on 11 September, Bahrain and Israel
agreed to normalize relations.
President Trump’s bold diplomacy and rejection
of the old conventional wisdom enabled him to broker
these agreements — the Abraham accords — the first
such agreements between Israel and Arab countries

S/PV. 8762

since 1994. I want to emphasize what President Trump
highlighted about those agreements: in Israel’s entire
history, there had previously been only two such
agreements. Now we have achieved two in a single
month’s time, and we are hopeful there will be more
to follow.
To commemorate those breakthroughs, President
Trump hosted a historic signing ceremony on
15 September at the White House, where the Israeli
Prime Minister and the Foreign Ministers of the United
Arab Emirates and Bahrain signed the Abraham
Accords Declaration. Israel, the United Arab Emirates
and Bahrain have committed to the exchange of
embassies and ambassadors, as well as cooperation in a
broad range of fields including education, health care,
trade, energy and security.
President Trump’s leadership, vision and expertise
made this momentous event possible. He built trust
with our regional allies and reoriented their strategic
calculus by identifying shared interests and common
opportunities, moving them away from a vested
interest in perpetuating the same old conflicts. Instead
of just talking about peace month after month, Security
Council meeting after Security Council meeting,
the United States led the way through action, and we
achieved tangible results.
We began this year by laying out the President’s
vision for peace — a comprehensive, fair and realistic
plan for Israel and the Palestinians to live peacefully,
side by side. The Abraham accords will allow further
exploration of that vision. Both the vision for peace and
the Abraham accords demonstrate the commitment of
the United States and Israel to peace, prosperity and
security throughout the Middle East.
Despite those achievements, however, Palestinian
terrorists fired a barrage of rockets on 15 and
16 September, just as Israel and its new Arab partners
were commemorating their historic peace deals.
We deplore and reject such violence, which has only
brought misery and suffering for far too long.
We now call on Palestinian leaders, who owe
it to their people to reject violence, to embrace the
opportunities for broader peace that the Abraham
accords offer, and to work with Israel to resolve their
long-standing issues. We hope that other Arab States
can build on the accords while also encouraging the
Palestinians to hold direct talks with Israel.

20-251157/20

S/PV.8762

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Tomorrow, along with the United Arab Emirates,
we will be co-hosting an informal briefing with Security
Council members to discuss these peace agreements.
That briefing will provide an opportunity for candid
discussion about how these agreements could serve
as a springboard to break the deadlock on the IsraeliPalestinian conflict.
We encourage the members of the Security Council
to embrace the opportunities presented by the Abraham
accords, and we hope they will join us in publicly
supporting these historic breakthroughs.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Let me begin by
thanking Special Coordinator Mladenov for his useful
and frank briefing on the current situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory.
I join my colleague from the United States in
offering our heartfelt condolences to Kuwait for the
passing on of His Highness the Amir of Kuwait.
During the recently held general debate of the
General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session, we
heard many Member States reflect on the birth of the
United Nations and its shared values of peace, justice,
equality and dignity for all, as well as the notion of
saving successive generations from the scourge of war.
However, despite those august ideals, Palestine and its
people remain under illegal occupation and continue to
be deprived of the shared values and ideals we spoke
about. Palestine is one of the world’s oldest unresolved
international conflicts, firmly entrenched in the
agendas of both the General Assembly and the Security
Council for almost as long as the United Nations has
been in existence. Nevertheless, 72 years later, the
status quo remains and little progress has been made to
ensuring the right of Palestinians to self-determination,
independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty.
Despite numerous agreements and newly forged
partnerships, it is shameful that Palestinians continue
to live under occupation and are denied their very basic
civil and human rights. We should ask ourselves — do
these agreements that some of us welcome change the
day-to-day lives of those living under occupation?
In that regard, South Africa reiterates its position
that no peace plan or initiative can have any merit or
succeed if it does not include all parties to the conflict
in the talks as equal partners from the very beginning.
Any initiative aimed at a resolving the Israeli occupation
must take into account the needs and aspirations of the
8/20

29/09/2020

Palestinian people. In addition, any such peace plan
must ensure that Palestinian statehood is not reduced
to an entity without the basic tenets of sovereignty,
territorial contiguity and economic viability. A realistic
and credible peace plan will result in a genuine twoState solution; not one viable State and a Bantustan.
South Africa will continue to work with
like-minded countries to support international efforts
aimed at the establishment of a viable Palestinian
State existing side by side in peace with Israel within
internationally recognized borders, based on those
existing on 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as capital
of both States, in line with all relevant United Nations
resolutions, international law and internationally
agreed parameters. We therefore support President
Abbas’ call in his statement at the general debate of
the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly for
the Secretary-General, together with the Middle East
Quartet and the Security Council, to begin preparations
for an international conference with the participation
of all the parties concerned and for discussions on
a genuine peace process, including to resolve all
final-status issues.
Turning to the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016), South Africa once again calls for the full
implementation of this and previous resolutions on the
question of Palestine. The Council heard today that,
while settlement activity may have slowed slightly
due to the ongoing coronavirus disease pandemic, this
illegal practice by the Israeli authorities continues, in
contravention of international law.
With regard to the demolition and seizure of
Palestinian property, the recent statement by Mr. Jamie
McGoldrick, Deputy Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, is deeply disturbing. From March
to August 2020, we saw the demolition or seizure of
389 Palestinian-owned structures, the highest average
destruction rate in four years. This activity took place
despite the Israeli authorities’ indication that they would
refrain from such actions during the global pandemic.
As Special Coordinator Mladenov indicated, these
demolitions and seizures have left 442 Palestinians
homeless, at a time when Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territories are under lockdown. Where are
these Palestinians, deprived of their rightful homes,
meant to go? Where must they go? Of additional
concern is the destruction of critical infrastructure,
such as water, hygiene and sanitation facilities, during
20-25115

29/09/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8762

a pandemic where universal guidance leans towards the
need for regular hand-washing and social distancing.

(2016) and all other relevant provisions of international
law and United Nations resolutions.

All resolutions adopted by the Security Council, be
they unanimous or not, must be uniformly implemented.
We cannot pick and choose which Council resolutions
should be implemented. In a similar vein, overt
violations of Council resolutions, as is the case with
the continued settlement activity in the occupied
Palestinian territory, usually evoke stricter measures
on the party responsible for the infringement.

In this context, it is relevant to underscore that
international efforts to promote a peaceful settlement
can bear success only by facilitating direct and
meaningful negotiations between the parties. We call
on the Middle East Quartet to renew its efforts and
restore belief among Palestinians and Israelis that a
negotiated peace agreement remains possible.

In conclusion, South Africa reiterates its position
that direct dialogue and negotiation between the
relevant parties on an equal footing is the only credible
and sustainable path to peace in the Middle East. We
must all do our part to bring the parties together, instead
of driving them further apart.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
I also thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, Nickolay Mladenov, for his
comprehensive briefing.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains deeply
concerned about the trends unfolding on the ground. It
is time for us as the Security Council to take significant
steps that would stabilize the current situation and
promote meaningful progress towards a two-State
solution.
The prolonged occupation and conflict have caused
immense suffering for the Palestinian people, as clearly
highlighted in the latest report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016).
Consequently, we remain particularly concerned about
the numerous reports of violent incidents against
civilians throughout the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem. We therefore call on those responsible
to respect their obligations under the Fourth Geneva
Convention to ensure civilian safety, protection and
well-being.
We wish to draw urgent attention to the grave
breaches of international law being perpetrated by
Israel, despite the international community’s continuous
calls for the complete, immediate cessation and reversal
of settlement activities. Israel continues its illegal
activities in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
Demolitions and settlement activity contravene
international humanitarian law and human rights law
and erode the viability of the two-State solution. We
strongly call on Israel to fully respect resolution 2334

Turning to Gaza, Israel continues to intensify
measures of repression against the Palestinians under
its control, most flagrantly by its illegal inhumane
blockade of Gaza. Over the years, the blockade has
deepened poverty in Gaza. According to State of
Palestine, Atlas of Sustainable Development 2020,
poverty rates in Gaza are higher and more severe than
in the West Bank, 53 per cent versus 13.9 per cent.
We commend the United Nations and its partners for
their continued efforts aimed at implementing urgent
humanitarian and economic interventions to help
sustain lives and livelihoods of the Palestinians in
Gaza. We call on Israel to end its blockade of Gaza.
We commend the work of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) in its rapid and responsive support to the
needs of Palestinian refugees that have been exacerbated
by the coronavirus disease. UNRWA continues to
deliver in a constrained financial environment. In
this regard, we call on the international community to
redouble its support to the Agency’s new humanitarian
appeal from August through December 2020 in order to
address the worst impacts of the pandemic on Palestine
refugees across its five fields of operation.
The Government of Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines reaffirms its principled position in relation
to the Palestinian question and remains committed to
achieving a negotiated two-State solution in conformity
with the international consensus. We wish to emphasize
our commitment to a peaceful and just solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Finally, I would also like to express our condolences
on the passing of His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad,
Amir of the State of Kuwait, who will most certainly
be remembered for his dedication and contribution to
peace and security in the region.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, I wish to take this opportunity to express

20-251159/20

S/PV.8762

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

our deep sorrow over the passing of the Amir of the
State of Kuwait and extend express our sympathy
and condolences to the Government and the people of
Kuwait. The Amir was a distinguished leader in the
Arab world who contributed to the development of
friendly and cooperative relations between China and
Kuwait.
I wish to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for
his briefing.
Today is the last day of the general debate of the
seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly. In their
addresses in the general debate over the past week,
many leaders referred to the situation in the Middle
East and the question of Palestine. Ceasefire, cessation
of violence, peace process, political settlement and twoState are frequently used expressions by many speakers.
That fully demonstrates that the Palestinian question
has always caused concern among the international
community and has never been forgotten. It remains
the international community’s common expectation to
push for a comprehensive, just and enduring solution to
the Palestine question as soon as possible.
The Security Council bears the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security and is duty bound to promote the
settlement of the Palestinian issue. There have been
recent developments in the situation in the Middle
East, and the Palestinian issue also now faces new
dynamics. The Security Council should listen to the
voice of the Palestinian people and countries of the
region, strengthen communication and coordination
with all parties in the international community and play
its part through ongoing efforts to promote the Middle
East peace process and the settlement of the Palestinian
issue.
First, with regard to strengthening political support,
the question of Palestine is at the core of the Middle
East issue and should remain high on the international
agenda. In his address to the General Assembly last week,
President Abbas called on Secretary-General Guterres
to join the Quartet and the members of the Security
Council in convening an international conference early
next year to discuss a genuine peace process. China
believes that such an initiative demonstrates Palestine’s
readiness to participate in the peace talks and promote
the peace process. All parties should attach importance
to it and make the necessary efforts to create favourable
conditions for the political settlement of the Palestinian
10/20

29/09/2020

issue. The international community, especially
countries with influence on Palestine and Israel, should
uphold an impartial and just position, actively promote
peace talks and make genuine efforts to advance the
Middle East peace process. President Abbas also
said that the Palestinian side was preparing to hold
presidential and parliamentary elections involving all
political factions. China wishes to place on record its
appreciation and looks forward to prompt and positive
progress in intra-Palestinian reconciliation and the
relevant political processes.
Secondly, with regard to abiding by the international
consensus, the relevant United Nations resolutions, the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the two-State solution are important foundational
agreements for resolving the Palestinian issue that must
be upheld in order to achieve peace in the Middle East.
The plan to annex parts of the occupied Palestinian
territory, if implemented, would be a serious violation
of international law and United Nations resolutions
and would undermine the two-State solution. China
is therefore seriously concerned. We note that the
implementation of the plan has been suspended,
and hope that the party concerned will respond to
the Secretary-General’s appeal by abandoning the
annexation plan and returning to the track of dialogue
and negotiations on an equal footing.
In addition, recently the situation in the Gaza Strip
has remained tense. It is hoped that all the parties
concerned will respond to the Secretary-General’s
global ceasefire appeal by sincerely observing the
ceasefire agreement reached at the end of August and
refrain from taking actions that exacerbate the situation.
Thirdly, on a people-centred approach, according
to the United Nations, the number of Palestinian
homes demolished between March and August this
year reached a four-year record, with hundreds of
people displaced. We urge the relevant parties to
earnestly implement resolution 2334 (2016), cease all
settlement activities in the occupied territories, stop the
demolition of Palestinian homes and the destruction of
Palestinian property and refrain from acts of violence
against civilians. At the same time, the relevant parties
should fulfil their obligations under international law,
ensure the coverage of basic services and humanitarian
assistance to those in need in the occupied territories
and fully lift the blockade on the Gaza Strip.
20-25115

29/09/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The coronavirus disease pandemic has had a
severe impact on the economic and social development
of Palestine. Israel and Palestine should resolve their
differences, strengthen cooperation and spare no
efforts in fighting the pandemic and saving lives.
The international community should enhance its
support to help Palestine to overcome its economic and
humanitarian challenges. China appreciates the efforts
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to ease
the humanitarian situation of Palestinian refugees and
help them to fight against the pandemic.
As a sincere friend of the Palestinian people, China
firmly supports the just demands of the Palestinian
people and all efforts to resolve the Palestinian issue.
We also support the Palestinian people in establishing
an independent State of Palestine that enjoys full
sovereignty on the basis of the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
China recently handed over the fourth batch of
anti-pandemic supplies to Palestine and signed a
donation agreement with UNRWA. In addition, further
progress has also been made in the Ramallah school
project, supported by the Chinese Government. We
will continue to provide assistance, within our capacity,
to the Palestinian people to combat the pandemic,
develop the economy, improve people’s livelihoods
and make a positive contribution towards achieving
a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the
Palestinian issue as soon as possible.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing
on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016).
The recent developments serve to underscore the
ongoing significance of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The parameters for its settlement have long been
known — two States, living side by side in peace and
security within secure and recognized borders based on
the 1967 lines, both with Jerusalem as their capital. On
that basis, it is now our responsibility to work towards a
resumption of dialogue between the two parties.
The announcement of the normalization of Israel’s
relations with the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain
signals a new dynamic, which may make a positive
contribution to regional stability. We welcome it.
However, regional stability also requires a
resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that

S/PV. 8762

respects the aspirations and rights of both parties and
is consistent with international law and the parameters
agreed by the Security Council. France, which is a
friend of both the Israelis and the Palestinians, remains
convinced that neither of the two peoples will be able to
fulfil its aspirations at the expense of those of the other.
France will not compromise Israel’s security, just as it
will not abandon the Palestinian people in the pursuit
of their rights.
In conjunction with its European and Arab partners,
France is ready to support a gradual resumption of
dialogue. In that spirit, Minister Le Drian and his
German, Egyptian and Jordanian counterparts met in
Amman on 24 September in the presence of the European
Union Special Representative. The four ministers
expressed their determination to act collectively to that
end on the basis of tangible and realistic commitments
to be made by both parties. It is also important that
the parties resume their cooperation at all levels, in
accordance with the agreements reached, including in
dealing with the current pandemic.
In order to achieve a resumption of dialogue, there is
an urgent need to re-establish a climate of trust between
the parties. That first requires that the suspension by
the Israeli authorities of the planned annexation of
Palestinian territories become a definitive measure.
That is the message that our ministers reiterated in
Amman. It is also the message that, together with my
European counterparts, we conveyed ahead of this
Council meeting.
It also requires an end to the settlement policy and
the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). France
is very concerned about the continuing settlement
activities and the unprecedented increase in the
demolition of Palestinian structures over the past six
months despite the health situation. Settlement activities
must not allow a de facto annexation. France calls
on Israel to suspend the construction of new housing
units in the West Bank settlements and East Jerusalem,
particularly in sensitive areas around Jerusalem, such
as Givat Hamatos, Har Homa and in the E-1 area, and to
implement an effective freeze on demolitions.
France also calls for progress in the intra-Palestinian
reconciliation process and hopes that the meeting in
Ankara will allow progress to be made in that direction.
We welcome the Palestinian Authority’s renewed
commitment to holding elections and encourage it to

20-2511511/20

S/PV.8762

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

make rapid progress in preparing for this important
date for the Palestinian people.
Moreover, France will continue to give its full
support to the work of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
We call on all States to contribute to its budget to help
it overcome its financial crisis.
Lastly, France remains committed to upholding
international humanitarian law and human rights, in
particular through support for Palestinian and Israeli
civil society organizations.
France stands ready to support any initiative based
on international law and the agreed parameters. It calls
on the Council to come together on that basis, which we
have built together.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I would like to thank
Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing.
Estonia welcomes the signing of agreements
between Israel and the United Arab Emirates and
between Israel and the Kingdom of Bahrain. We also
welcome the constructive role played by the United
States in this respect. The normalization of relations
is a positive development that contributes to the peace
and stability of the whole region. It is positive that,
along with these agreements, Israel has committed to
suspending plans to unilaterally annex areas of the
occupied Palestinian territory.
We believe that these historic developments
contribute to peace and stability in the whole region and
give momentum to finding a comprehensive solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. A two-State solution
and a lasting peace can be achieved only through
direct negotiations, taking into account the legitimate
aspirations of both parties and Israeli security concerns.
We urge the Israeli and Palestinian leaders to re-engage
in meaningful negotiations.
We also call on the parties for the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016) and to refrain from any
unilateral steps that could undermine the prospects of
the two-State solution and increase instability in the
region. We would like to recall that the resolution calls
for immediate steps to prevent acts of violence against
civilians, including acts of terror, as well as acts of
provocation, incitement and destruction. We condemn
the continued firing of rockets into Israel and the
attacks against civilians.
12/20

29/09/2020

Estonia strongly condemns the heinous killing of
Rabbi Shai Ohayon on 26 August. We call on all parties
to exercise maximum restraint in order to avoid an
escalation of violence.
We call on the Palestinian Authority to resume
cooperation based on cooperation agreements with
Israel. This would be especially vital in the context of
the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Finally, we note the positive signals that the
Palestinian factions have once again reached consensus
on holding elections. Hopefully, this agreement will soon
result in the announcement of a date for the elections
throughout the occupied Palestinian territories.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I would like at the outset to thank the Special
Coordinator, Mr. Mladenov, for his detailed briefing
and him and his team for their tireless efforts.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is at an impasse.
The situation on the ground remains unstable in both
Gaza and the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and
the parties seem further apart than ever. Our priority
today must therefore be the resumption of negotiations.
First of all, we call on Israelis and Palestinians to
come to the negotiating table without preconditions and
to resume meaningful negotiations. This is indeed the
only way to achieve a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace. We also call on all parties to refrain from any
unilateral action that could jeopardize the resumption
of these negotiations.
This conflict, which has been the subject of many
Council resolutions, will find a positive solution only
if these resolutions and international law are respected.
Belgium, together with its European partners, remains
committed to a negotiated and viable two-State solution,
with Jerusalem as the future capital of both States,
based on agreed parameters and international law.
My second point concerns the normalization of
relations between Israel and the Arab world, which
is an important element for peace and stability in the
region. We welcome the agreements reached between
Israel and Bahrain and between Israel and the United
Arab Emirates. We hope that these developments will
create a new momentum towards the resolution of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict on the basis of the two-State
solution.
20-25115

29/09/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The announcement of the suspension of plans
to formalize the annexation of certain parts of the
occupied Palestinian territory is a step in the right
direction. However, we urge Israel to definitively
abandon its annexation plans. Annexation, regardless
of its scope and how it is described, is a serious
violation of international law. Moreover, annexation
would definitively close the door to the resumption
of negotiations and deal a final blow to the two-State
solution.
Now more than ever, it is time to reverse the
negative trends on the ground. We call for full respect
for and full implementation of resolution 2334 (2016).
We also call on the Palestinian Authority to resume
fiscal and security coordination with Israel, given its
impact on the Palestinian people.
The third point of my intervention concerns
settlements. Israel’s illegal settlement activities, which
are accompanied by expropriations, demolitions,
confiscations and displacements of population, must
cease immediately. We are deeply concerned about
the recent increase in demolitions, despite indications
by the Israeli authorities that they are refraining
from demolishing inhabited Palestinian homes. The
demolitions have also included water, sanitation and
hygiene facilities, further limiting Palestinian access to
basic services and commodities, which is particularly
worrisome in the context of the current pandemic.
My fourth point concerns Gaza. Belgium welcomes
the relative calm that has prevailed in Gaza following
the escalations in August and calls on all parties to
exercise the utmost restraint. We recall the obligation
of the parties to respect international humanitarian law
and to ensure the protection of the civilian population.
We welcome the de-escalation efforts in this regard,
including those of the United Nations, to temporarily
facilitate the transfer of patients out of Gaza. If we want
to reverse the trend in Gaza, we must invest at both
the humanitarian and political levels. We call on all
parties to ensure the free access of humanitarian actors
and underscore the crucial role of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East. At the political level, the only just solution
is the lifting of the blockade and the full reopening of
the crossings, while taking Israel’s legitimate security
concerns into account.
My fifth point concerns the organization of
elections in Gaza and the West Bank. A strong,

S/PV. 8762

accountable, inclusive and functional Palestinian
Government, based on respect for the rule of law and
human rights, is essential to the two-State solution.
Elections are an important element in this regard. We
welcome the recent efforts of the Palestinian factions
towards reconciliation and hope that these will pave
the way for genuine, free, fair and inclusive legislative
and presidential elections throughout the Palestinian
territory, including in East Jerusalem.
Finally, I would like to express Belgium’s concern
about the continued hostile actions and policies against
civil society and human rights defenders. Their work
contributes to creating an environment that is conducive
to peace and respect for human rights. They are an
important element of an open and democratic society
and, therefore, must be allowed to carry out their work
without impediment.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I would like to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for his valuable briefings.
I join other members in expressing our deepest
condolences to the Government and the people of
Kuwait on the passing away of His Highness Sheikh
Al-Sabah, late Amir of the State of Kuwait.
Viet Nam joins the Secretary-General, his Special
Coordinator and many other countries in expressing its
serious concern over the grave, mounting hardship that
the Palestinian Authority and people have had to suffer
in recent months. The spread of the coronavirus disease
pandemic in Palestine continues to be a major concern,
as the number of confirmed cases and deaths almost
doubled in the past month. The impact of the pandemic
and the restriction measures on Palestine’s economy
is devastating. The socioeconomic conditions in the
Gaza Strip and the occupied Palestinian territory have
gone from bad to worse. In addition to the economic
constraints, foreign aid to Palestine has dropped sharply
since early 2020. Against that backdrop, we call on
international donors to continue their assistance to the
Palestinians to help them overcome the ongoing crisis.
We also urge all parties to strengthen their cooperation
and to ensure the delivery of humanitarian assistance
in accordance with their respective obligations. It
is therefore also important to maintain and increase
assistance to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East so that
essential agency can fulfil its important task of helping
the Palestinian people.

20-2511513/20

S/PV.8762

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In the face of such multifaceted challenges — the
hostilities continue and civilians, including children,
are being killed — the long-standing issue of the
continued expansion of Israeli settlements in the West
Bank remain unresolved. We also note with concern the
increased number of demolitions of Palestinian homes
in the West Bank, which have led to the displacement of
more and more people. As resolution 2334 (2016) clearly
affirms, the establishment by Israel of settlements in
the occupied Palestinian territory has no legal validity
and constitutes a violation under international law and
a major obstacle to the achievement of the two-State
solution and a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in
the region.
We call on all parties to stop the hostilities so
that the tension and violence do not escalate into a
large-scale conflict. We commend the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Coordinator and the countries
of the region on their efforts to reduce tensions and
restore calm. We also welcome the recent steps by the
relevant Palestinian parties to prepare for elections
in the months ahead, which will hopefully help them
address common challenges and meet the expectations
of the Palestinian people.
However, we remain concerned that the situation
is fragile, since the deep-seated roots of the conflict
have not been eradicated. We continue to urge all
parties to refrain from any unilateral action that
could lead to recurrent violence. At the same time,
we welcome all initiatives and measures in the pursuit
of a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the
Palestine question that would contribute to promoting
dialogue, cooperation and stability in the Middle East.
We reaffirm our strong support for the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Coordinator. Given the grave
situation in which the Palestinians find themselves,
it is high time that the international community, the
countries of the region, the United Nations and other
relevant partners redouble their efforts to restart
international negotiations as well as those among the
parties directly concerned in order to bring about
concrete steps toward de-escalation and the resolution
of all outstanding issues.
To conclude, we would like to reiterate Viet
Nam’s unwavering support for the legitimate struggle
of the Palestinian people and their inalienable
rights. We strongly support the two-State solution,
including the establishment of a State of Palestine
that peacefully coexists alongside the State of Israel,
14/20

29/09/2020

with East Jerusalem as its capital, and with secure and
internationally recognized borders on the basis of the
pre-1967 lines and in accordance with international
law, the United Nations Charter and the relevant United
Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016).
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me start by expressing
our sincere condolences on the passing of His Royal
Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah,
Amir of the State of Kuwait. May His Highness rest in
peace.
Let me also begin by expressing my appreciation to
the presidency of the Niger for having convened today’s
meeting and, of course, to the Special Coordinator,
Nickolay Mladenov, for his briefing.
As we commemorate the historic seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations, we are constantly
reminded of what the United Nations stands for. It
stands for peace, it stands for international order, and
it stands for equality. These are the principles that
Indonesia also believes in and emphasized at the 1955
Asia-Africa Conference as pivotal guidelines on the
subject of the independence of nations that are under
occupation or colonization.
Sadly, despite various United Nations resolutions
and widespread global support, and in defiance of
international law, Palestine remains the only country
attending the Conference that has not enjoyed its
independence. To this day, it is still illegally occupied,
and its people are discriminated against and their lands
often arbitrarily seized.
Indonesia affirms that it is time for the United
Nations to do more. We all need to do more. With that
in mind, allow me to share three important points.
First, peace without addressing the relevant root
causes is not peace at all. Indonesia would like to take
this opportunity to remind Member States that the root
cause of the Palestinian–Israeli conflict is the illegal
occupation. The conflict has been further amplified
by decades of Israel’s creeping annexation and illegal
settlement policy in the occupied territories, a policy
that is flagrantly unlawful and goes against resolution
2334 (2016).
As such, the idea of promising peace without
addressing root causes is just an illusion of peace. Any
efforts to resolve the conflict and achieve peace should
first and foremost be undertaken with the involvement
of the two main parties, the Palestinians and the Israelis.
20-25115

29/09/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Seeking solutions that disregard other parties is unjust
and one-sided.
I thus come to my second point: restarting a
credible peace process. We need to show our support
for the Secretary-General’s call urging both Israeli
and Palestinian leaders to re-engage in meaningful
negotiations. We also should welcome President Abbas’s
call at the high-level debate last week for the SecretaryGeneral to commence, together with the Quartet and
the Security Council, an international conference with
all concerned parties to engage in a peace process
based on international law, United Nations resolutions
and other internationally agreed parameters.
My third point is continued support for the
Palestinian cause. In addition to facing the menace
of forced evictions, the demolition of homes and
discrimination and violence, as well as years of
blockade, the Palestinians are now, sadly, also
confronted with the increasing coronavirus disease
pandemic and its socioeconomic spillover effects. Once
again, Nickolay’s briefing presented a gloomy picture
of the situation on the ground.
According to the World Health Organization,
between July and September the number of cases
soared from around 3,000 to more than 40,000. In these
crises, we need to show our solidarity. We need to show
our humanity.
I urge the Israeli Government to end the blockade of
Gaza and to allow unhindered access to humanitarian
assistance and goods. Furthermore, I urge the
international community to strengthen its commitment
to providing humanitarian and development aid to the
Palestinian people, particularly through the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East UNRWA, which supports
more than 5.6 million Palestine refugees.
To conclude, I would like to reaffirm Indonesia’s
unequivocal solidarity with and support for the
Palestinian people gaining their rights, including the
establishment of an independent State of Palestine,
within the pre-1967 borders and with East Jerusalem
as its capital.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to begin by expressing my condolences to the
brotherly people of Kuwait following the death of His
Highness Amir Al-Sabah, who contributed greatly to
humanitarian efforts and to peace and security in the
region and worldwide.

S/PV. 8762

I thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing, which contained updated information
reflecting the deteriorating situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, as well as human rights
violations, the policy of fait accompli, the continuing
occupation and the lack of desire to build peace.
During the high-level debate, world leaders
reiterated their countries’ commitment to the
internationally agreed upon parameters and United
Nations resolutions as a basis for achieving a lasting
solution to the conflict in order to put an end to the
occupation and allow the Palestinian people to regain
their legitimate rights, particularly their right to selfdetermination and their right to an independent State
based on 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital. That position has been continuously reiterated
by the international community, which has always
supported the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian
people and promoted a solution to the conflict.
In that context, Tunisia reiterates its support for the
just Palestinian cause and for the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people. We also call on the international
community and the Security Council, in particular, to
force Israel to freeze its settlement activities, which
run counter to international law, and to implement the
relevant Council resolutions, particularly resolution
2334 (2016).
Tunisia rejects Israel’s annexationist efforts and
calls on Israel to abandon them once and for all. My
country remains attached to peace as a strategic goal
and is ready to support any initiative aimed at shoring
up peace based on the agreed parameters, including the
Arab Peace Initiative, in order to re-establish peace,
justice and peaceful coexistence among the peoples
of the region. We believe that the participation of
the Palestinian side is a prerequisite to any initiative
to resolve the conflict and to find a fair and lasting
solution to the conflict.
We believe that it is the responsibility of the
Security Council to maintain international peace and
security and to resolve conflicts. With that in mind, we
recall the role of the Council in advancing the peace
process and putting an end to the impunity of Israel,
which continues to violate international law. We call
on the Quartet to play its rightful role and to revive
negotiations, in conformity with the agreed terms of
reference, in order to put an end to the occupation,

20-2511515/20

S/PV.8762

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

29/09/2020

achieve an independent Palestinian State based on 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and resolve
all final-status issues.

respond effectively to the needs of the sick and the
most vulnerable. A permanent ceasefire is critical to
enabling both countries to respond to the pandemic.

We support the call of President Abbas for the
convening of an international conference in order
to relaunch a credible peace process with a clear
timetable. We also welcome the genuine reconciliation
measures undertaken by Palestinian factions, as well as
the fact that presidential and legislative elections will
be organized in the upcoming months.

We welcome the announcement of President
Abbas, in his address to the General Assembly, of the
preparations under way for the holding of parliamentary
elections, followed by presidential elections, with the
participation of all political parties.

Israel pursues its aggressive policies and its
violations of legitimate Palestinian rights. We condemn
all incitement, destruction and actions that target
civilians. We must protect Palestinian civilians, who
suffer daily violations of their rights, and put an end
to the blockade imposed on Gaza, which is a form of
collective punishment and only serves to aggravate
the suffering of men and women and to complicate the
situation in the context of the pandemic by creating an
additional challenge.
We welcome the efforts of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, which provides support for 5.5 million Palestinian
refugees, and we call on donors to continue supporting
the Agency in order to meet the humanitarian needs of
Palestinian refugees. We urge regional and international
actors to step up their efforts to support the Palestinians
and the Palestinian authority.

The Dominican Republic supports regional efforts
that seek to create new conditions that are conducive
to peacebuilding. That is why we welcome the
normalization agreements between Israel and the United
Arab Emirates and, more recently, between Israel and
Bahrain, which has become the fourth Arab country
to establish direct dialogue with and links to Israel.
These efforts and strategies all deepen cooperation
among these nations, promote positive transformation
and could increase stability and security in the region.
However, above all, they should serve to promote the
legitimate aspirations of Israelis and Palestinians alike
to live in peace, prosperity and justice after so many
years of division, hostility and suffering.
Although we understand its position of resigning
from the chairmanship of the League of Arab States,
we call on Palestine to maintain its indisputable place
in the Arab world and take advantage of all spaces
to promote constructive commitments towards the
creation of new opportunities for its cause.

In conclusion, we believe that in order to ease
tensions and re-establish peace and security in
the Middle East, it is essential to put an end to the
occupation and to ensure justice for the victims.

For many Palestinians, this could be the darkest
hour, but we would like to remind them that it is
precisely after the darkest hour that there is always a
new dawn.

Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): The Dominican Republic wishes
to offer its most heartfelt condolences to the people of
Kuwait over the death of Amir Al-Sabah.

We reiterate that any movement towards annexation
in the occupied Palestinian territory would have serious
implications and violate international law, including
resolution 2334 (2016). The settlements not only
contribute to the escalation of tensions on the ground,
but also make the possibility of a peaceful two-State
solution more remote, hindering both social inclusion
and the aspiration to a lasting peace between Israelis and
Palestinians. Accordingly, we reaffirm our full support
for a two-State solution as set out in United Nations
resolutions and continue to adhere to the framework of
agreements between Israelis and Palestinians.

We thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov
for his briefing. We are extremely concerned about the
latest details on the pronounced deterioration of the
situation on the ground, as we note the resurgence of
cases of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on occupied
Palestinian territory and in Israel. This month,
COVID-19 cases in occupied Palestinian territory have
increased by 30 per cent and by 83 per cent in the Gaza
Strip, where it has more readily spread throughout
the community. Immediate measures are needed to
alleviate the humanitarian situation and prevent greater
deterioration. That includes the full cooperation of
Israeli authorities in allowing the Palestinians to
16/20

The fundamentals have not changed; there must
be a peace agreement between these nations. The
political leadership of both countries must be willing
to compromise, realize that the only way forward is to
negotiate their way out of this long and painful conflict
20-25115

29/09/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and lead their peoples on their own paths towards a
lasting peace for present and future generations.
I would like to take advantage of this penultimate
meeting for the month of the Niger’s presidency
of the Security Council, which ends tomorrow, to
thank President Abarry for the magnificent work
he and his team have accomplished on behalf of his
country. President Abarry has guided the Council in
a manner we have rarely seen, for which we sincerely
congratulate him.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): As always, I thank
Special Coordinator Mladenov for his words.
Like others, I would like to start today by
expressing sincere condolences following the death of
His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad, the Amir of the
State of Kuwait. As Prime Minister Boris Johnson has
said, the personal contribution His Highness made to
regional stability and humanitarian assistance will long
be remembered.
The United Kingdom has warmly welcomed the
historic steps taken over the last two months, with the
normalization of relations between three great friends
of the United Kingdom: Bahrain, the United Arab
Emirates and Israel. These positive steps are already
having an impact, such as direct flights from Israel
to the United Arab Emirates and early commercial
agreements. More positive progress is to come in trade,
cultural and scientific links and much more. We urge
others across the region to follow the example of the
United Arab Emirates and Bahrain.
We must acknowledge that the agreements
represent a profound shift in the region. It is critical
that as the international community we build on the
momentum of normalization to take forward resolution
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In his recent visit to
Israel and the occupied Palestinian territories, Foreign
Secretary Dominic Raab encouraged both the Israeli
and Palestinian leaderships to use the suspension of
annexation plans — plans the United Kingdom strongly
opposed — as an opportunity. We urge the Palestinian
Authority to resume cooperation with Israel in the
interests of the Palestinian people. We also call on both
parties to make constructive and open steps towards a
return to dialogue.
While the threat of annexation appears to have
receded, the United Kingdom remains concerned
by a number of negative trends on the ground. We
reiterate our call on both sides to halt any activity that

S/PV. 8762

makes peace more difficult to achieve. In accordance
with resolution 2334 (2016), this includes terrorism,
incitement, violence against civilians, demolition of
Palestinian property and settlement advancements.
In Gaza, we welcome the agreement reached on
31 August, which has restored a degree of calm and led
Israel to lift its ban on fuel and goods imports through
the Kerem Shalom crossing. On 15 September, Hamas
launched rockets into Israel once more. We condemn
these actions; they are unacceptable, unjustifiable and
must stop. As ever, dialogue is the only way to address
the situation.
We remain concerned at ongoing plans to take
forward settlements, including in Givat Hamatos and
Har Homa and in the E1 area. All settlements are illegal
under international law. Settlement construction in
these highly sensitive areas would damage prospects for
a two-State solution and threaten to further undermine
the viability of a future Palestinian State with its capital
in East Jerusalem.
Despite the spread of the coronavirus disease, 2020
is on course to be the worst year since 2016 for Israeli
demolition of Palestinian property, including of donorfunded structures paid for by Council members and
international partners. In all but the most exceptional of
circumstances, demolitions are contrary to international
humanitarian law. We call on Israel to desist from such
actions and to provide a clear and transparent route to
construction for Palestinians in Area C. We are also
concerned about ongoing evictions of Palestinians from
their homes in East Jerusalem.
Like all countries, Israel has a legitimate right to
self-defence and to defend its citizens from attack.
But in doing this, it is vital that all actions are
proportionate, in line with international law and that
they are calibrated to avoid civilian casualties. For
example, the shooting and injuring by the Israel Defense
Forces (IDF) of an unarmed, deaf and mute Palestinian
at the Qalandia checkpoint on 17 August is deeply
concerning. The Israeli security forces must provide
appropriate protection to the Palestinian people and be
seen to conduct prompt and transparent investigations
into claims of IDF misconduct.
The Palestinian leadership must continue its efforts
aimed at tackling terror and incitement, strengthen
institutions and develop a sustainable economy.
Hamas and other terrorist groups must permanently
end their incitement and rocket fire against Israel.

20-2511517/20

S/PV.8762

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The Government of the United Kingdom strongly
condemns all forms of violence and incitement to
violence. We welcome Fatah and Hamas efforts towards
reconciliation and hope that this can lead to the holding
of democratic elections across the occupied Palestinian
territories.
Let me end by reaffirming that the United Kingdom
remains active in the Middle East peace process. We
continue to work closely with international partners to
advocate a two-State solution and encourage a return to
meaningful negotiations.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, we would like to express our
sincere condolences in connection with the death of
the Amir of the State of Kuwait, His Highness Sheikh
Sabah. His passing is an enormous loss, especially given
the important role he played in the region. I would like
to offer our condolences to the Government and all the
people of Kuwait.
We thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing.
This month, we have seen the signing of agreements
between Israel and the United Arab Emirate and
Bahrain. At every juncture of work on the Middle
East peace process, Russia, as a permanent member of
the Security Council and a participant in the Middle
East Quartet, has always believed in the need for a
comprehensive solution to the conflict. However, there
has been an understanding that a just settlement of
the Palestinian question based on international law
as endorsed by the United Nations — including its
resolutions, and on the Arab Peace Initiative and the
fundamental principle of the two-State solution — must
be an inherent component of that solution. That basis
provides for the creation of an independent, sovereign
and territorially contiguous Palestinian State within
the 1967 borders and with its capital in East Jerusalem,
which would live in peace with Israel.
At the same time, we note once again that the
whole range of final-status issues should be determined
through direct negotiations between Palestinians
and Israelis. These negotiations must be launched
at the first possible opportunity. In his statement
at the general debate of the seventy-fifth session of
the General Assembly on 25 September, Palestinian
President Abbas addressed that aspect and put forward
an initiative aimed at the resumption of negotiations to
resolve the Palestinian question.
18/20

29/09/2020

We firmly believe that one-sided efforts will
not achieve a breakthrough. We need to strengthen
collective diplomacy to ensure that the international
community’s efforts to create the necessary conditions
for the implementation of the only viable two-State
solution through direct Palestinian-Israeli talks do
not fail.
We call on our partners in the Quartet — the United
Nations, the European Union and the United States — to
strengthen cooperation to that end. We are also ready
to engage in dialogue with key regional actors and to
involve them in the work of the Quartet. In addition,
Russia is actively working with various Palestinian
representatives in order to bridge differences, while
supporting the efforts of its Egyptian friends.
In that regard, we reiterate our call to refrain
from provocative actions and unilateral measures.
First of all, annexation plans must stop. Israel must
cease its settlement activities in the West Bank and
its policy of demolishing Palestinian property. There
must be an end to violence and terrorist activities. In
addition, the parties should refrain from aggressive or
provocative rhetoric.
The international community should take active
steps to alleviate the dire humanitarian situation in Gaza
and the Palestinian territories, which are experiencing
a socioeconomic crisis. The Palestinian people need
assistance in combating the coronavirus. We will
continue to support the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). There is both a humanitarian and a political
dimension to UNRWA’s work, as it has an important
stabilizing effect on the Palestinian territories and the
countries of the Middle East.
Mr. Sautter (Germany): Let me express our
condolences on the passing of His Highness the Amir of
the State of Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber
Al-Sabah, a tireless mediator in the Middle East. Let
me also express our thanks to Special Coordinator
Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing and his important
work. I would like to make five points.
First, on the normalization agreements between
Israel and the United Arab Emirates, as well as between
Israel and Bahrain, Germany welcomes the recent
signings of the normalization agreements between
Israel and the United Arab Emirates and between Israel
and Bahrain. We acknowledge the role played by the
United States in that regard and express our hope that
20-25115

29/09/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

those agreements will contribute to achieving peace
and stability in the Middle East.
The momentum generated by the signing of those
accords should now be focused on finally reaching a
just, lasting and comprehensive solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict on the basis of international
law, the relevant United Nations resolutions and the
internationally agreed parameters. Normalization must
not result in consolidating the status quo but, rather, it
should accompany the resumption of peace talks.
My second remark is on the two-State solution,
Germany remains committed to a negotiated twoState solution, where two sovereign, democratic and
independent States, Israel and Palestine, live side by
side in peace within secure and recognized borders
on the basis of the 4 June 1967 lines. That is the only
viable and the most realistic path to fulfil the legitimate
aspirations of Palestinians and Israelis for a life in
peace and dignity with equal rights.
We call on both parties to recommit to their signed
agreements and to fully restore the cooperation under
the Oslo Accords and the Paris Protocol.
Together with our partners Egypt, France and
Jordan, we will continue our efforts and offer our active
support and our good offices in facilitating a path
back to a credible dialogue and towards a negotiated,
peaceful settlement. At our meeting in Amman last
week, we emphasized that such serious, meaningful and
effective negotiations must be based on international
law and agreed parameters and be conducted either
directly between the parties or under a United Nations
umbrella, including the Middle East Quartet.
We have taken note of the call by President Abbas
on the Secretary-General to convene an international
conference early next year. Germany would be willing
to participate in such a conference and encourages the
Secretary-General and Special Coordinator Mladenov
to consult with all relevant parties.
My third remark is on settlement activities. We
reiterate our position that Israeli settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territories are illegal
under international law. They severely undermine the
prospects for ending the occupation and for a viable and
contiguous Palestinian State within the framework of a
negotiated two-State solution.
We trust that Israeli annexation plans are truly and
permanently suspended. We call upon Israel to end
the expansion of settlements, in particular in critical

S/PV. 8762

areas around East Jerusalem, and the legalization
of settlement outposts in order to prevent a de facto
annexation.
We are particularly concerned about the ongoing
confiscation and demolition of Palestinian-owned
structures and properties in Area C of the West Bank.
Such practices, as currently under way in so-called
Firing Zone 918 in the South Hebron Hills, lead to
the forced eviction and displacement of vulnerable
Palestinian residents in the midst of the pandemic. In
some cases, they contravene existing property rights
of Palestinian residents in the area, rendering such
practices incompatible with international law.
Any changes to the legal and traditional status quo
on Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount, as well as in the
city of Hebron, would further erode the substance of
signed agreements and mutual trust at a time when the
coronavirus disease crisis warrants close cooperation.
My fourth remark is on the full implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016). We call on both sides to
fully implement resolution 2334 (2016) with regard
to settlement activities, as well as all acts of violence
against civilians, including acts of terrorism, incitement,
provocative actions and inflammatory rhetoric.
In that context, we reiterate Germany’s
condemnation of all attacks and threats against Israel
by Hamas and other terrorist groups, including the
repeated firing of rockets from Gaza into Israel. Israel
has the right to defend itself against such acts in a
proportional manner.
My fifth, and last, remark is on intra-Palestinian
reconciliation. We keep stressing that intra-Palestinian
reconciliation remains key to achieving a negotiated
two-State solution. Gaza and the occupied West
Bank must be reunited under a single Government.
The democratic legitimacy of Palestinian institutions
must be renewed, and governance and responsiveness
to the needs of the Palestinian population must
be strengthened.
We therefore welcome the recent agreement to hold
parliamentary and presidential elections in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, and Gaza. We hope
that such elections will take place soon.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
the Niger.

20-2511519/20

S/PV.8762

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for
his briefing on the recent developments in the situation
in the Middle East.
I join previous speakers in addressing my heartfelt
condolences to Kuwait following the passing of His
Highness the Amir of the State of Kuwait.
On 15 September, we followed with interest the
signing in Washington, D.C., of the accords normalizing
relations between Israel and some of its regional
neighbours, including the United Arab Emirates and
Bahrain. The Niger supports all initiatives that enable
the region to return to peace and stability.
While the Abraham accords mark a new dynamic,
they should not overshadow the pressing need for a just
and lasting resolution of the Palestinian question, the
main source of tension in the Middle East for decades, as
we all know. Moreover, we welcome the rapprochement
between Palestinian factions that has taken place in
recent days, as it will enable Palestinians to speak with
one voice in the peace process.
Faced with this state of affairs, we must redouble
our efforts to bring the Israeli and Palestinian parties
back to dialogue. The United Nations and the members
of the international community that have influence on
the parties must spare no effort to seize this opportunity
presented by the warming of relations between the
Arab countries and Israel, to revitalize the peace talks,
in accordance with the internationally recognized
parameters and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016). That is
why the Niger calls for a mobilization of all efforts to
bring Israelis and Palestinians to resume dialogue as
soon as possible.
In that regard, I would like to recall that the cardinal
principles that should pave the way for dialogue towards
a lasting peace between Israelis and Palestinians have
already been clearly defined and are known to all. They
are: an end to the illegal occupation and annexation of
Palestinian land, in accordance with the provisions of
resolution 2334 (2016), and the two-State solution, with
Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and
security, on the basis of the 1967 borders, which is the
basis for resolving the conflict in accordance with the
provisions of resolution 1515 (2003).
At the humanitarian level, my delegation is
concerned about the spread of the coronavirus disease
in the region, in particular with the increase in the
number of cases of infection observed on both sides.
20/20

29/09/2020

A few days ago, this situation prompted the Israeli
authorities to tighten restrictive measures and impose
a new lockdown. It is urgent that the cooperation we
just recognized resume between the two parties in the
interest of their respective populations.
In order to prevent the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation, my delegation calls on the
international community to show more generosity
to ensure the continuity of the programmes of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, on which nearly 5 million
Palestinians depend today. It is also a duty of Israel,
as the occupying Power, to assume the responsibility
imposed upon it under international law in the
administration of territories under its control.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
time has come for us to resolutely seek a true and
just peace that takes into account Israel’s legitimate
security aspirations, as well as the inalienable right to
self-determination of the Palestinian people. We must
safeguard the two-State solution at all costs.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no further names inscribed on the list
of speakers. Before adjourning the meeting, as this is
the last scheduled meeting of the Security Council for
the month of September, I would like to express the
sincere appreciation of the delegation of the Niger to the
members of the Security Council and to the Council’s
secretariat for all the invaluable support they have
given us throughout this month. At the end of a busy
month, we can take pride in the fact that we were able
to reach consensus on several important issues within
our purview. We could not have done it without the
hard work, support and cooperation of every delegation
and the representatives of the Secretariat, including
the technical support personnel, conference service
officers, interpreters, translators, verbatim reporters
and security personnel. I wish to express to all of them
our sincere and profound gratitude. As our presidency
comes to an end, I know that I speak on behalf of all
the members of the Council in wishing the delegation
of the Russian Federation, with Ambassador Vassily
Nebenzia at its head, the best of luck in assuming the
presidency during the month of October.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.
20-25115
