S/2004/821

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 October 2004
Original: English

Letter dated 15 October 2004 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I should like to refer to the presidential statement dated 15 August 2004
(S/PRST/2004/30), in which the Security Council requested my Special
Representative for Burundi, in close contact with my Special Representative for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, to establish the facts and to report to the
Security Council on the massacre of refugees from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo at Gatumba, Burundi, on 13 August 2004.
Further to the oral briefing on the preliminary findings of the investigation,
which was provided by the Secretariat to the Security Council on 3 September 2004,
I have the honour to transmit to you the joint report of the United Nations Operation
in Burundi, the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights regarding the events that occurred at Gatumba on 13 August 2004.
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate my grave concern about the
crimes committed recently against innocent civilians in Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. As the Security Council has noted in several of its
resolutions and presidential statements, impunity must be brought to an end, and
perpetrators of crimes such as the one described in the attached report must be
brought to justice.
I should be grateful if you would make this letter and the report available to
the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

04-54319 (E) 221004

*0454319*

S/2004/821

Contents
Paragraphs

Page

I.

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1–6

3

II.

Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7–12

4

III.

The massacre in its regional context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

13–23

5

IV.

The Gatumba camp . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

24–37

7

V.

The massacre and its aftermath . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

38–60

9

A.

Reactions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

45–47

10

B.

Reactions in Burundi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

48–50

11

C.

Reaction of the Government of Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

51

11

D.

Political repercussions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo . . . . . . . . . .

52–56

12

E.

Political repercussions in Burundi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

57–60

13

ONUB-MONUC investigation and findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

61–98

14

A.

Reconstruction of the attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

66–78

14

B.

Response of the Burundi military, Gendarmerie and administrative officials .

79–85

16

C.

Allegations of involvement in the attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

86–97

17

D.

Allegations of the militarization of the transit centre . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

98

20

VII.

Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

99–105

20

VIII.

Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

106–110

21

I.

Abbreviations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

23

II.

Plan of the Gatumba transit centre at the time of the attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

24

III.

Map of the Gatumba area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

27

VI.

Annexes

2

S/2004/821

Joint report of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations Operation
in Burundi and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights into the Gatumba massacre
5 October 2004

I. Introduction
1.
On the night of 13 August 2004, a transit centre assisted by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and housing Congolese
refugees and Burundian returnees at Gatumba, Bujumbura Rural Province, Burundi,
was brutally attacked by a large group of armed individuals. A total of 152
Congolese refugees from the Tutsi communities of South Kivu known as the
Banyamulenge were killed, 106 were wounded and 8 remain missing. The refugees
appeared to be targeted because of their ethnicity.
2.
On 15 August, the Security Council called on the Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General for Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
conduct an immediate joint investigation of the massacre.
3.
On 14 August, an investigation was initiated by human rights officers from the
United Nations Operation in Burundi (ONUB) and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in Burundi. A first report was
ready in the afternoon of 14 August. Human rights officers from the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) joined
on 16 August. The team was assisted by ONUB military observers.
4.
In the course of its investigation, the team visited the site of the massacre at
Gatumba and interviewed a cross-section of individuals, including survivors,
witnesses, civilian and military authorities of Burundi and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, representatives of UNHCR and other humanitarian agencies, the
diplomatic community and other relevant actors in Burundi and the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo over the following two weeks. The preliminary
report of the human rights investigation was sent to the Secretary-General on
27 August 2004.
5.
After an oral briefing on 3 September, the Security Council requested ONUB
and MONUC to continue the investigation to identify those responsible for the
attack, and to submit a final report on the massacre. In response, the two missions
formed a multidisciplinary team, supplementing the human rights officers and
military observers with military officers, United Nations police, political and
disarmament and demobilization officers, and continued the investigation in both
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi.
6.
The present report reflects the findings of both the preliminary and the followup investigations.

3

S/2004/821

II. Summary
7.
The joint investigation by MONUC and ONUB into the events of 13 August
was able to establish the basic facts of the massacre, such as the time and method of
attack and the number and fate of the victims. However, despite extensive research
in both Burundi and the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United
Nations team was at this stage unable to conclusively identify who authored,
financed or carried out the killings. Nevertheless, sufficient information was
collected to warrant further investigation.
8.
The team was able to conclude that the available evidence points to a
Burundian rebel organization, the Parti pour la libération du peuple hutu — Forces
nationales de libération (PALIPEHUTU-FNL), the only group to claim
responsibility, as having probably participated in the massacre, but as being unlikely
to have done so on its own. Evidence of the presence of other groups, largely
produced by the testimony of survivors of the attack, was credible, but could not be
independently confirmed by the United Nations team in its subsequent
investigations.
9.
The attack targeted Banyamulenge refugees from the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo who had fled fighting there between army factions and
armed groups in the region in June. The fighting had complex political causes
related to the transitional process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
10. The Banyamulenge have long been perceived as pro-Rwanda by many actors
in the region, even though the Banyamulenge participated on both sides of the
fighting in June 2004, and many fled to Gatumba fearing reprisals. The
Governments of Burundi and Rwanda, as well as the Munyamulenge Vice-President
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, charged that the Gatumba refugees were
killed by an alliance of anti-Tutsi groups based in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo which may have included, depending upon the source, elements of the
Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, members of a Rwandan
Hutu rebel group partly composed of ex-forces armées rwandaises (FAR) and
Interahamwe, and the Mayi-Mayi. The United Nations team investigated each claim
and followed leads justifying further follow-up, but was unable to find conclusive
evidence implicating any of those actors.
11. The massacre was committed at a critical moment in the peace processes in
both the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi and threatened to scuttle
both. In the immediate aftermath of the attack, Burundi and Rwanda threatened to
invade the Democratic Republic of the Congo to pursue the groups they believed
responsible. It was exploited by extremist elements in the principal political parties
in both countries to harden positions on power-sharing, demobilization, military
restructuring and elections. Regional and international mediators, including some
from ONUB and MONUC, have attempted since the massacre to help the two
Governments to put the peace processes back on track. The political situation in
both countries remains fragile.
12. The conclusions of this investigation reflect the United Nations team’s
evaluation of the evidence it collected in the month after the massacre. Much of the
most useful evidence was lost because the scene of the massacre had been badly
contaminated before the team arrived, while bodies of the victims were buried
without forensic analysis. Nonetheless, the team collected sufficient information

4

S/2004/821

about this grave crime to recommend a thorough judicial inquiry at both the national
level, led by the Government of Burundi with the full cooperation of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda, and the international level, led by the
International Criminal Court.

III. The massacre in its regional context
13. The Gatumba massacre occurred at a critical moment in international and
regional efforts to establish stability, order and democratic institutions after 6 years
of war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and 11 years of conflict in Burundi.
14. In Burundi, the Arusha Agreement of August 2000 provided for a three-year
transition which began on 1 November 2001 and is scheduled to end on 31 October
2004 after the adoption of a new constitution and the holding of elections for a posttransition government. In November 2003, the Conseil national pour la défense de la
démocratie — Forces pour la défense de la démocratie (CNDD-FDD), one of two
rebel groups refusing to end hostilities, signed a global ceasefire agreement and
joined the Transitional Government, leaving Agathon Rwasa’s FNL as the last rebel
group outside the peace process.
15. The FNL leader, Agathon Rwasa, has consistently refused to join political
negotiations with the Transitional Government, insisting that he would only
negotiate with the real holders of power, the Tutsi political and military
establishment. FNL refuses to negotiate within the established framework of the
Arusha Agreement and claims to be the sole interlocutor with whom a powersharing agreement should be established.
16. FNL is a small force of approximately 1,500 fighters, operating primarily
within Burundi, mainly in the Provinces of Bujumbura Rural and Bubanza (both
bordering the Democratic Republic of the Congo) and the outskirts of Bujumbura.
Its strategic position allows it to keep pressure on the civilian population of the
capital. FNL forces remain in close proximity to the Forces armées burundaises
(FAB), and prefer to ambush FAB units rather than engage in open battles.
Combined FAB and CNDD-FDD forces had seriously weakened FNL in the months
prior to Gatumba.
17. The massacre occurred at a time of intensive negotiations over power-sharing
arrangements for the post-transitional period, the terms of a new constitution, and
the timing of national elections. On a parallel track, the Burundian Armed Forces
were also supposed to begin barracking their troops and integrating former rebel
combatants into their ranks, and to accept the disarmament and demobilization of
the majority of their soldiers.
18. The transition in the Democratic Republic of the Congo began on 30 June
2003 with the participation of all of the signatories of the Global and All-Inclusive
Agreement, signed in Pretoria in December 2002, but crucial security issues,
particularly the integration of all former belligerent forces into a new national army,
the Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC), and the
dismantlement of foreign armed groups, particularly the Rwandan rebels based in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, remained unresolved.
19. Since 1993, the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo has been the
crucible of the conflicts in the Great Lakes region. Massive outflows of refugees

5

S/2004/821

from Burundi and Rwanda in the 1990s further destabilized already fragile intercommunal relations. Congolese speakers of Rwandan languages, such as the
Banyamulenge of South Kivu, often became the victims of Burundian and Rwandan
armed groups. Targeted by some Kivu politicians as foreigners with no right to land,
political office or positions of power, the Banyamulenge largely supported the
Banyamulenge-led Rassemblement congolais pour la démocratie — Goma (RCDGoma), whose forces regularly committed atrocities against civilian populations in
the Kivus. The Banyamulenge thus became the principal enemy of the pro-Kinshasa
community-based armed groups fighting RCD-Goma and the Rwandan occupation
in the Kivus, known as the Mayi-Mayi.
20. Despite the signature of the Global and All-Inclusive Agreement and the
beginning of the transition in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Kivu
has remained the battleground for numerous armed groups. Community-based MayiMayi allied to Kinshasa have been officially incorporated into the new FARDC
chain of command structure but sometimes appear to act independently. Some of
them collaborate with a Rwandan armed group, the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda (FDLR), often identified as ex-FAR or Interahamwe, even
though the large majority did not participate in the 1994 Rwanda genocide. In the
Ruzizi plains, the Mayi-Mayi also interact with the Burundian FNL, who often cross
the border to obtain supplies and escape from the Burundian army. A Banyamulenge
armed group, led by Patrick Masunzu, opposing Rwanda and RCD-Goma and allied
with Kinshasa, also controls a section of the Ruzizi plains and the highlands of
Minembwe, and has been nominally integrated within FARDC.
21. The Bukavu crisis in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo in May
and June 2004 was, among other factors, a result of the lack of progress in the
transition and, in particular, the delays in military reform and integration. It slowly
built up from February 2004. Tensions between Colonel Jules Mutebutsi, Deputy
Military Regional Commander for South Kivu, and his Commanders (first Brigadier
General Prosper Nabyolwa and then, since April 2004, General Mbuza Mabe, both
representing the ex-Government component) started to rise after Mutebutsi, a
Munyamulenge with RCD-Goma allegiance, rebelled against his commanding
officers and retained control over several hundred troops.
22. The tensions in Bukavu took on a new dimension late in May and early in June
when Jules Mutebutsi, allied with Laurent Nkunda, another dissident ex-RCD-Goma
officer, captured Bukavu under the pretext of preventing a genocide against the
Banyamulenge population. Under international pressure, Nkunda’s troops finally
withdrew northwards on 6 June, while Mutebutsi’s troops withdrew south towards
Kamanyola on 8 June. The following morning, FARDC, whose strength had been
augmented through reinforcements from the western part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, were able to re-enter Bukavu.
23. All sides, including FARDC troops as they entered Bukavu on 9 June, looted
and abused civilians and, in some instances, raped women and girls. Banyamulenge
civilians were one of the prime targets of the violence, prompting them to flee from
Bukavu and Uvira in fear of FARDC reprisals after the withdrawal of Nkunda and
Mutebutsi. Those refugees ended up in Gatumba.

6

S/2004/821

IV. The Gatumba camp
24. The Gatumba transit centre is situated at the western outskirts of Gatumba
town in Bujumbura Rural Province. It lies between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo border, just 3.4 km to the west, and the Burundian capital city of Bujumbura,
20 km to the south-east. The closest town in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is Uvira, 6 km to the west. An infantry battalion of FAB, as well as a Gendarmerie
position, are stationed less than 1 km north-east of the transit camp.
25. The site had functioned since 1996 as a transit point for refugees from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundian refugees returning from that country
and, at times, Burundian internally displaced populations. It was re-activated in
October 2002 as a response to influxes of Congolese refugees from the South Kivu
area. Those refugees were largely relocated to Cishemeye transit camp (Cibitoke
Province) and replaced by groups of Burundian returnees coming back from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The facility comprised 31 tents, separated into
two clusters. The Congolese refugees occupied a cluster of 15 green tents, and the
Burundian returnees a cluster of 16 white tents. A distance of approximately 40 m
separated the two clusters. The centre was not fenced, in accordance with the
general policy of UNHCR of allowing refuges as much freedom of movement as
possible.
26. The influx of refugees from South Kivu in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo to Burundi started on 9 June 2004. Refugees crossed into the Burundian
Provinces of Bujumbura Rural and Cibitoke across the Ruzizi River border. They
arrived in groups divided according to their ethnic and geographical areas of origin
and settled in three transit locations, including Gatumba. At that time, the site was
occupied by groups of Burundian returnees from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and some internally displaced families from the neighbouring communes of
Bujumbura Rural Province.
27. The Banyamulenge refugees at the Gatumba transit centre were, for the most
part, from Uvira. A number of sources suggested that camp residents were divided
between supporters of Jules Mutebutsi, the Banyamulenge colonel close to RCDGoma who led the June attack on Bukavu, and Patrick Masunzu, the Banyamulenge
leader of a pro-Kinshasa armed group. However, the United Nations team was
unable to determine the composition or political allegiances, if any, of the camp
population at the time of the massacre.
28. At the time of the attack, the refugee population of the Gatumba transit centre
was estimated at 411 families, comprising 1,767 individuals, of whom 820 were
residents. The remaining population was scattered in Gatumba commune or
Bujumbura city. The recent arrivals had close relations with the Banyamulenge
communities that had long been settled in Bujumbura, and especially the former
civil servants of Uvira.1 Some 317 Burundian returnees from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the United Republic of Tanzania were also sheltered at
the transit centre.
29. On 12 June 2004, the Burundian Ministry of the Interior convened a meeting
with the United Nations Humanitarian Coordinator, United Nations agencies and the
__________________
1 A number of Banyamulenge from South Kivu, and especially from Uvira, had been residing in

Bujumbura for many years, and had been commuting between Bujumbura and Uvira to work.

7

S/2004/821

newly established ONUB to discuss immediate actions to be taken in the light of the
refugee arrivals from the Democratic Republic of the Congo.2 At the end of the
meeting, the Government of Burundi agreed on the need to transfer refugee
populations away from the border in accordance with international principles and
committed itself to providing UNHCR with the names of the designated locations
for the organization of the new camps. It was furthermore agreed that the
Government of Burundi would reinforce civilian and Gendarmerie personnel to
assist in the management and protection of the sites. The meeting closed with the
commitment of the Government to designate transfer locations within three days.
30. While UNHCR pressed for relocation, the refugees themselves expressed a
strong reluctance to relocate to camps at a safer distance from the border, in the
expectation that they would be able to return to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo once the situation stabilized. Several visitors from the Democratic Republic
of the Congo reportedly also encouraged the refugees to wait for repatriation. These
included the Governor of South Kivu on 27 June 2004, a member of the Senate on
26 July, the Minister of Social Affairs and his delegation on 31 August and
1 September and Vice-President Azarias Ruberwa on 12 and 13 August, who met a
delegation of refugees at his hotel. The refugees remained reluctant to be relocated
even after the Gatumba massacre.
31. In accordance with the agreements, the Gendarmerie increased the number of
personnel deployed on the Gatumba site from 6 to 10. Nevertheless, the Government
delayed the designation of alternative sites for several weeks despite repeated
reminders from UNHCR of the need to expedite transfer and the insistence by
humanitarian actors that the camp’s proximity to the border posed serious risks to
the refugees.
32. As the instability in South Kivu continued, security concerns remained a
critical issue. From mid-June to the date of the massacre, United Nations and nongovernmental organizations working with the Congolese population regularly
received reports of armed individuals and/or groups entering Burundi from the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, the presence of weapons in the transit
sites, visits of South Kivu local leaders from various factions, irregular cross-border
movements of people trying to reach Burundi, and people “commuting” between
Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.3
33. Reports from Burundi border authorities concerning armed individuals
prevented from crossing the border confirmed that the Government was applying
measures to separate civilians from armed individuals and groups. At the same time,
however, the arrest of a number of armed individuals in the Karurama transit site in
Cibitoke late in June, and later in Bujumbura Rural Province, were indications that
gaps existed in the screening procedures at the border.
__________________
2 At the meeting, the Government of Burundi was represented by the Ministers of the Interior,

Public Security, Defence, and Reintegration. The United Nations was represented by the
Principal Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General at ONUB, the Humanitarian
Coordinator, UNHCR, WFP and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
3 The “commuting” movement between Uvira and Gatumba was confirmed during weekly crossborder missions of staff of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in the period
July-August. Interviews with refugees indicated that they were travelling to Uvira to check on
the status of their houses and property. Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs/Burundi, Mission Reports, July-August 2004.

8

S/2004/821

34. The presence of armed Congolese and Rwandan groups in Cibitoke and
Bubanza Provinces along the border of the Democratic Republic of the Congo had
been a constant feature since the beginning of the year.4 Early in July,
approximately 200 armed FDLR fighters entered Cibitoke Province, an incursion
into Burundian territory that the Burundian Armed Forces were unable to control for
several days.5 In addition, despite the relatively improved situation in the northern
communes of Bujumbura Rural (including the area surrounding Gatumba), FAB and
the provincial administration confirmed that FNL was still active in the Rukoko
forest and in the communes of Bubanza Province bordering Bujumbura Rural.
35. In turn, the Governors of Cibitoke and Bujumbura Rural expressed concern
regarding the overall security environment in the communes where the refugees
were staying, as refugees mixed with local people and were not staying at the sites.
The low occupancy rate of some shelter units in Gatumba, confirmed by UNHCR
and non-governmental organizations, was an indication of the constant movement of
the refugees between the site, the surrounding local village, and Bujumbura.
36. During the weeks before the attack, tracts were distributed by the little-known
Mouvement congolais des combatants non-violents pour la démocratie (Congolese
Movement of Non-Violent Combatants for Democracy), calling for the
Banyamulenge to be attacked. The tracts, written in French and Kiswahili, were
found at Uvira and the central market in Bujumbura. One was also found in the
Gatumba transit centre itself. The Banyamulenge reportedly did not take the tracts
seriously, and did not inform UNHCR or the authorities when the tracts were
discovered circulating.
37. Despite all these concerns, neither the Burundian civilian authorities nor the
Burundian Armed Forces took timely or appropriate actions to ensure the protection
of the refugees and Burundian civilians at the site. Governmental action was
characterized by a perception — expressed by some Burundian civilian and military
authorities — that stability in South Kivu would be restored, allowing for an early
return of the refugees to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.6

V. The massacre and its aftermath
38. On 13 August 2004, between 2200 and 2230 hours, the Gatumba transit centre
was attacked for approximately 90 minutes, resulting in the death of 152 refugees.
An additional 106 were wounded and eight remain missing.7 Of the dead and
missing, an overwhelming majority, 147, were Banyamulenge.
39. Of the 15 tents housing Congolese refugees, 11 were burned, eight completely
and three partially. Bullet holes were visible in the Congolese refugee tents still
__________________
4 Office of the United Nations Security Coordinator Security Cell, weekly reports to the United

Nations Security Management Team, January-July 2004. The presence of armed groups in these
provinces prompted the Security Management Team to recommend the maintenance of security
phase IV in Bubanza and Cibitoke Provinces (February 2004).
5 Meeting with the FAB Chief of Staff, Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
Burundi, July 2004.
6 Meetings with the FAB Chief of Staff and Governor of Bujumbura Rural, Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Burundi, July 2004.
7 In the immediate aftermath of the massacre, 147 people died and 111 were injured. Five people
subsequently died from their injuries.

9

S/2004/821

standing. The attackers did not target any of the 16 tents in the cluster housing
Burundian returnees.
40. Most of the dead were women and children. Some 51 bodies were completely
burned, while the rest bore bullet wounds and burns. Of the injured, most suffered
bullet wounds, while others were burned. A machete blow to the head injured an 8year-old girl.
41. A MONUC official reached Gatumba on 14 August at 0700 hours and ONUB
staff arrived at 0900 hours, several hours after the massacre was carried out, by
which time the injured had been removed for medical treatment in Bujumbura. The
site of the massacre was not protected or cordoned off and many surviving camp
residents, aid workers, military and government officials were moving around the
centre.
42. On the night of the attack, only 6 of the 10 gendarmes assigned to monitor
activities within the transit centre and provide security for the inhabitants were
reportedly on duty. When the attack began, the six gendarmes were said to have
fled. They did not carry any means of communication.
43. Neither the 100 FAB soldiers nor the 30 gendarmes allegedly on duty near the
centre apparently attempted to leave their premises and defend the camp once the
killing began, despite the fact that the FAB unit had apparently alerted its General
Staff headquarters at the outset of the shooting. FAB and the Gendarmerie arrived
on the scene a few hours after the attack had ended.
44. The bodies of those killed were buried on 16 August 2004 in a mass grave near
the camp without prior forensic examination. Many were interred without having
been identified.

A.

Reactions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
45. A communiqué issued by the Presidency of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo on 14 August 2004 strongly condemned the massacre, characterizing it as “a
despicable act perpetrated against the Congolese civilian population”. President
Joseph Kabila asked for the immediate establishment of an international commission
of inquiry to identify those responsible and ensure that the perpetrators were
punished.
46. A separate statement published by RCD-Goma on 14 August denounced what
it termed a “genocide of Congolese refugees” committed at Gatumba. RCD-Goma
alleged that two FARDC companies led by one Major Ekofo, the deputy to Colonel
Nyakabaka, commander of the Ruzizi plains area of operations, had crossed into
Burundi on the night of 13 August and joined forces with FNL to perpetrate the
massacre. It further stated that the attack was planned by the FARDC Commander of
the Tenth Military Region, General Budja Mabe, in order to stop Banyamulenge
refugees from returning to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, particularly to
Bukavu and Uvira. The RCD-Goma statement concluded by demanding the opening
of an international inquiry leading to the prosecution before the International
Criminal Court of those responsible, the forceful disarmament of all allied
“genocidal forces”, including the Mayi-Mayi, and the rapid conclusion of military

10

S/2004/821

integration in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to improve security at the
border.8
47. On 16 August, as soon as the RCD-Goma delegation had arrived in Goma,
Laurent Nkunda published a communiqué, stating that he “would not make the same
mistake twice”, referring to his agreement to withdraw from Bukavu under
international pressure. He explained that his withdrawal had led to “the Gatumba
genocide”, that the massacre “confirms there is an extermination plan against the
Banyamulenge” and that he would continue his fight to remove the Transitional
Government in Kinshasa.9

B.

Reactions in Burundi
48. On the day after the massacre, the spokesperson for FNL stated to the press
that his organization had carried out the attack. The spokesperson initially suggested
that FNL had only attacked the Gendarmerie and FAB positions near the camp.
Subsequently, in a press communiqué dated 15 August, the FNL Secretary for
Foreign Relations stated that FNL had attacked the “military camp” at Gatumba,
alleging that the refugee camp was the base of the “Banyamulenge military
command”. The statement suggested that FNL had initially attacked the FAB and
Gendarmerie posts, and that elements of FAB had fled to the refugee camp where
armed Banyamulenge came to their defence. Other press statements made by FNL
sources subsequently insisted that the camp was attacked either because of the
presence of armed individuals, or because the Banyamulenge provided support to
FAB. Finally, some three weeks after the attack, an FNL source suggested that FNL
had not been involved in the attack at all but had publicly assumed responsibility in
exchange for arms supplied to FNL by the Congolese group behind the killings.
49. The President of Burundi, Domitien Ndayizeye, visiting the Gatumba camp on
14 August, strongly condemned the attack and blamed FNL for “trying to justify
their crime on military grounds”. He stated that Burundi had been attacked by an
armed group coming from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. He added that
preliminary elements of the investigation and testimonies from survivors indicated
that the attackers spoke Congolese native languages, Kirundi, and other languages
of the region. The President of Burundi committed his Government to doing
everything possible to bring the perpetrators to justice.10
50. The FAB spokesman also added at a press conference on 14 August that the
massacre “was a genocide against the Tutsi in the Great Lakes region because the
information we have is that FNL, combined with Mayi-Mayi militia, have attacked
the camp”.11

C.

Reaction of the Government of Rwanda
51. In a communiqué issued on 14 August, Rwanda accused FDLR of participating
in the attack together with FNL and Congolese armed groups, and asked the

__________________
8 RCD communiqué, 14 August 2004.
9 Press communiqué, Minova, 16 August 2004.
10 AFP, 14 August 2004.
11 Reuters, 14 August 2004.

11

S/2004/821

Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the international
community to forcibly disarm them. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Rwanda,
Charles Murigande, added that “if they failed to act, Rwanda would respond itself,
including, if necessary, by fighting the Hutu rebels inside Congo”.12

D.

Political repercussions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
52. The Gatumba massacre, which was perpetrated only two months after the
Bukavu crisis, sent shock waves through the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
put the transitional process at serious risk. The massacre happened several hours
after Azarias Ruberwa, the Munyamulenge Vice-President representing the RCDGoma component of the Transitional Government, had met with refugee
representatives of the Gatumba transit centre in Bujumbura. The Vice-President was
on an official visit to Burundi with the aim of encouraging the Banyamulenge
refugees to return to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
53. Mr. Ruberwa expressed outrage over the attack, which was carried out hours
after his own meeting with Gatumba refugees. In an emotional speech delivered
during the burial of the victims, he detailed the reasons why he believed the
massacre was an act of genocide. While calling for an international investigation, he
restated his claim that the perpetrators were Burundian, Rwandan and Congolese.
He also promised the survivors that they would return to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, by force if necessary. Mr. Ruberwa also negatively evaluated the state of
the transition in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, asserting that it had broken
down, that reconciliation had failed and security had not been restored, and that a
pause was necessary to identify the necessary remedies. He then left for Goma, the
RCD-Goma stronghold and capital of North Kivu, where he unilaterally declared a
week of national mourning.
54. After a week of mounting tension, Mr. Ruberwa announced from Goma on
23 August that RCD-Goma had suspended its participation in the transitional
institutions. The suspension was not supported by all RCD-Goma ministers and
members of parliament, and remained temporary. Under strong national and
international pressure, RCD-Goma ministers and members of parliament returned to
Kinshasa by 29 August and agreed to resume participation in the institutions of the
transition, on the condition that an evaluation of the performance of the Transitional
Government would be carried out.
55. The political cleavage created by the massacre, not only within the
Transitional Government and Parliament but also in public opinion, has made the
fostering of an inclusive transitional process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo more difficult. The Rwandophone faction of RCD-Goma, questioning the
transition’s legitimacy on the basis of its failure to prevent the massacre, found itself
isolated from the rest of the party and the country. As a result, Vice-President
Ruberwa may now have greater difficulty defending the RCD-Goma agenda in the
institutions of transition. This development could undermine the chances for a
genuine implementation of the Global and All-Inclusive Agreement. Extremist
Rwandophone forces who argue that the peace agreements have been violated, and

__________________
12 BBC News, 15 August 2004.

12

S/2004/821

that a return to armed conflict is their only option, have been able to raise their
voices, thus posing an additional threat to the transition.
56. Efforts to achieve true reconciliation, which would help to set the climate for
free and fair general elections, have also been jeopardized by Gatumba. The
massacre is the latest in a series of killings apparently targeting the Banyamulenge
community. As with previous massacres in the area (including of non-Tutsi
Congolese civilians) they have received no apparent attention from the Congolese
judiciary. Similarly, no FARDC officials or Nkunda and Mutebutsi combatants have
been charged for the killing of Banyamulenge and non-Tutsi Congolese civilians
during the Bukavu crisis.

E.

Political repercussions in Burundi
57. The Gatumba massacre has had repercussions for the transitional process in
Burundi, as well as for Burundi’s relations with its neighbours, in particular the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Regional Governments meeting in Dar es
Salaam in August condemned the attack, declared FNL a terrorist organization, and
requested the African Union and the Security Council to support this view. ONUB
suspended transition-related discussions with the FNL leadership. In the wake of the
massacre, the Burundian Armed Forces appear to have taken a more aggressive
military posture against FNL units in the field. While the motives for the FNL
declaration of responsibility for the massacre remain unclear, the practical result of
the claim has been the increased isolation of the group in Burundi and the region.
58. Since the massacre, Tutsi hardliner groups who have not accepted the powersharing formula agreed upon in Pretoria in June have utilized the attack to insist on
strengthening the role of Tutsi-dominated parties in post-transition government
institutions. These demands have blocked the conclusion of a power-sharing
agreement among all Burundi groups that would pave the way for the adoption of a
post-transition constitution and elections for a post-transition government.
59. Similarly, senior leaders in FAB have indicated a resistance to moving forward
on the integration of former rebel combatants into the army and the barracking of its
troops as a prelude to the launching of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process called for in the Arusha Agreement. The final step in the
transition process, the organization and implementation of elections for a posttransition government, depends upon a secure electoral environment, which in turn
depends upon the cantonment of rebel combatants and barracking of FAB troops.
60. In addition, the FAB Chief of Staff, General Germain Niyoyankana, has
declared that FAB did not exclude the possibility of an offensive in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, together with Rwanda, to protect its borders from the attacks
of an “alliance of negative forces” composed of FNL, FDLR and a section of the
Congolese army.13

__________________
13 AFP, 17 August 2004.

13

S/2004/821

VI. ONUB-MONUC investigation and findings
61. From the outset, the ONUB-MONUC investigation team faced a number of
difficulties beyond its control that limited its ability to collect and analyse
information crucial to identifying those responsible. Both missions were informed
about the massacre only several hours after it had ended: MONUC in the early
morning and ONUB at 0700 hours on 14 August. The missions were unable to take
any action during the night. The investigating team was not able to determine
exactly what occurred at the site from the time when the massacre ended until
United Nations officials arrived on the scene, beyond the fact that in the hours
following the attack FAB personnel, assisted by gendarmes, transported the injured
to hospitals in the capital.
62. Second, by the time MONUC and ONUB officials arrived, any remaining
evidence at the site had been contaminated. The Burundian authorities had not
cordoned off the area to protect evidence and large numbers of survivors, relatives
of those killed, government authorities and others were walking through the remains
of the camp. No physical evidence that could lead to the identification of assailants
was found at the site. The investigating team was not able to discover any casualties
suffered by the assailants or the Burundian army or Gendarmerie.
63. Third, the corpses of the victims were buried without any forensic
investigation.
64. Fourth, the testimony of survivors varied widely, and was sometimes
contradictory. Statements made by some witnesses contained inconsistencies, and
changed during different interviews. While this could be the result of the trauma
suffered, it may also be attributable to a fear of reprisals or the influence of political
and ethnic loyalties, given the possible wide-ranging political implications of the
massacre. Declarations by political and community leaders may also have
influenced the subsequent statements of witnesses and survivors.
65. Finally, the Burundian authorities have not, to date, provided the investigation
team with information that would clarify the reason for the apparent lack of
response of the military and civilian authorities — for example, the military was
unable to offer any substantial physical evidence to indicate that its Gatumba post
was attacked — or provide evidence to support the claims of Burundian
Government officials that Congolese groups were behind the killings.

A.

Reconstruction of the attack
66. Witness reports gathered at the site of the massacre suggest that the attack
commenced at 2200 hours or shortly thereafter on 13 August and lasted for 60 to 90
minutes.
67. Survivors of the massacre reported that the first indication of an impending
attack was the approaching sound of drums and religious chants. Several people
reported hearing the sound of a whistle and a shouted order before the attack was
launched.
68. The attackers were said to be “numerous” and reportedly included armed men,
women and children. Some were said to be wearing complete or partial military
uniforms while others were in civilian dress. Estimates given by observers regarding

14

S/2004/821

the number of perpetrators vary significantly. A suspect arrested by FAB who
alleges that he participated in the attack provided a figure between 90 and 120.
However, the reliability of this individual’s testimony has been questioned, given
that he provided the investigation team with varying accounts of the attack in
different interviews. FAB estimated the total number of assailants at 600. Some
witnesses claimed that there were 200. The military component of the investigation
team concluded that the real figure is impossible to establish from witness accounts,
but estimated from the execution and the duration of the operation that there were
probably between 100 and 300 assailants.
69. All of those interviewed, including refugees who escaped and the Burundian
returnees in the tents across from those attacked, stated that the assailants spoke
several different languages, including Kirundi, Kinyarwanda, Lingala, Kiswahili and
Kifulero. The latter three languages are spoken in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, from which the survivors and witnesses deduced that the perpetrators were
of Congolese origin.14 The first two languages, spoken in Burundi, Rwanda and the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, are closely related, and differences may
be difficult to establish under the circumstances of an armed attack at night-time.
70. Witnesses reported that slogans commonly used by FNL were shouted during
the attack, in Kirundi, the principal language of Burundi. They included the slogans
“we are soldiers of God”, “we will exterminate all the Tutsis in Central Africa”,
“kill these dogs, these Tutsis”, “today, you Tutsis, whether you are Rwandese,
Congolese or Burundese, you will be killed”.
71. The attackers also reportedly chanted or shouted other slogans such as “down
with the Banyamulenge” and “we must finish off the Banyamulenge, we don’t want
them to come back to the Congo”.
72. On the basis of survivor testimony, lines of fire and expended cartridge
patterns, the investigating team estimated that the assailants first formed a firing line
some 70 to 80 m north-west of the cluster of green tents housing the Banyamulenge
refugees, from which they fired initial rounds on the Congolese refugees’ shelters. It
appears that they then approached the tents, shooting indiscriminately into each
structure from the entrance and then moving inside to kill and burn remaining
survivors. Numerous bullet shells were found at the entrance of each tent, along the
central entrance aisle inside the tents, and on the surrounding footpaths.
73. Investigators found numerous bodies of victims lying in and around the tents.
Some had bullet wounds, and others were burned beyond recognition. The bodies
were gathered together and counted by the humanitarian workers present at the site.
74. Eight tents had been completely destroyed by fire; three had been partially
destroyed. Inflammable material, including cooking oil, had been distributed to the
refugees a few days earlier, and possibly contributed to the extent of the damage.
Bullet holes were visible in the sides of tents that were not totally destroyed. The
five tents that were not burned also showed the marks of bullets. The sides of some
tents had been torn, apparently by refugees trying to escape.
__________________
14 The border between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi is porous and local

ethnic languages are commonly spoken by those of different ethnicities. In the past, combatants
assaulting Congolese civilians have sometimes spoken in Kinyarwanda in order to mislead the
victims into thinking they were Rwandan Interahamwe.

15

S/2004/821

75. The side of the camp housing Burundian returnees was not touched in the
attack. Banyamulenge who were housed with the Burundians escaped unharmed.
The Burundian returnees interviewed believed that the attackers deliberately
targeted the Banyamulenge refugees. They stated that the attackers told the
returnees to stay calm, remain inside their tents, and promised not to harm them.
They also reported that the attackers shouted that they should fire on the green
tents — the tents housing the Banyamulenge.
76. Following the attack, the assailants withdrew, apparently leaving no trace.
Some witnesses stated that one group of attackers left the camp in the direction of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (to the west), towards Ruzizi (Kiliba), taking
six refugees with them. Another group of attackers was said to have headed in the
direction of Lake Tanganyika (just to the south). The testimony of the individual
who claimed to have taken part in the massacre and was subsequently arrested
contradicts this view. He stated that the attackers did not take anyone with them, but
killed three people outside the transit camp, on their way out.
77. No evidence of the assailants’ entry or retreat was found during a sweep of a
2-km radius around Gatumba camp, conducted on 22 August by ONUB military.
Nevertheless, the sweep was not definitive as the border region is very porous,
largely unguarded, and its natural characteristics permit individuals to easily pass
unnoticed by authorities on either side. The investigation team visited Kiliba, the
entry point on the Democratic Republic of the Congo side where RCD-Goma
claimed the perpetrators had crossed. Military authorities at both the Congolese and
Burundian border posts at Kiliba denied having seen or heard any movement on the
night of the massacre. The FARDC Uvira District Commander told the team that his
investigation into alleged border crossings of some assailants before or after the
massacre at the Kiliba and Gatumba checkpoints turned up no evidence of crossings
that night.
78. There were no reported casualties or injuries among the attackers. Efforts by
team members to canvass hospitals in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
to determine whether any individuals with combat-related injuries had been
admitted after the massacre were rebuffed by hospital officials, although informal
enquiries at the same hospitals failed to identify any patients potentially linked to
the massacre.

B.

Response of the Burundi military, Gendarmerie and
administrative officials
79. Neither the 100 FAB soldiers nor the 30 gendarmes stationed less than 1 km
north-east of Gatumba transit centre came to the defence of the camp, despite the
fact that the FAB company reportedly alerted their General Staff headquarters at the
beginning of the attack. FAB and Gendarmerie personnel arrived at the scene
several hours after the attack had finished.
80. The administrative authorities were also reportedly informed of the attack by
their Gatumba representative while the massacre was under way. No instructions for
a response were apparently given, and civilian authorities visited the site of the
massacre for the first time in the early hours of the morning of 14 August and
helped international humanitarian agencies to transfer the wounded to Bujumbura.

16

S/2004/821

81. No reinforcements arrived from Bujumbura or other positions to come to the
aid of the refugees, or to provide assistance to FAB or the Gendarmerie of Gatumba.
82. According to versions provided by military authorities, one group of attackers
surrounded the military camp and another the Gendarmerie camp to prevent any
efforts to rescue the refugees. The attackers, allegedly armed with rifles, grenades
and even rocket launchers, were said to have been posted at the various entrances to
the camps and to have prevented the soldiers and gendarmes from intervening.
83. Four days after the massacre, FAB personnel showed ONUB bullet shells that
were allegedly found approximately 230 m in front of the FAB barracks in
Gatumba, in support of their allegation that the FAB and Gendarmerie barracks had
come under simultaneous fire during the attack on the transit centre. The shells left
by the attackers close to the Gendarmerie barracks were, according to the Burundian
authorities, taken away by children in the neighbourhood.
84. The investigation team was not able to confirm these representations, however.
The view of the FAB barracks from the alleged location from which the assailants
were firing is obstructed by a thick row of trees and bushes. The military members
of the investigation team estimated that, had the assailants wanted to carry out a
serious “fixing” operation, it would not have been from that location. The team was
accordingly of the view that the alleged attacks on the FAB company and
Gendarmerie barracks were implausible from a military standpoint. It also doubted
that such an attack could have impeded FAB from reacting. There is no evidence
that any of the 100 FAB soldiers or 30 gendarmes at the barracks actually shot back
at the attackers. The investigation team was not allowed to enter the two barrack
compounds to verify any physical damage from the alleged attack.
85. As concerns the camp security, only 6 of the 10 gendarmes who normally
guarded the camp were apparently present on the night of 13 August. When
interviewed, they claimed to have fired the first shots in the direction of the
attackers and to have fired all the bullets in their possession before running off to
hide on the other side of the road. They did not carry means of communication. The
team was not able to verify their version of events.

C.

Allegations of involvement in the attack
Allegations of FNL participation
86. The investigation team concluded that the available evidence tends to support
the claim that FNL was a participant in the attack. The organization quickly claimed
responsibility; aspects of the method of attack as reported by witnesses, particularly
the chanting of religious songs, are consistent with FNL practices; and the killings
occurred in an area where FNL is active.
87. However, if FNL did indeed participate in the attack, the available evidence
would tend to indicate that it did not organize and carry out the attack on its own.
The FNL description of the events leading up to the massacre and its role in the
operation was confused and changed in important respects over the weeks following
the killings. The available information about the attack, particularly credible
accounts of the different languages spoken, suggests the participation of other
groups.

17

S/2004/821

88. In addition, motives of FNL for attacking the Banyamulenge, a group not
targeted by the rebel organization in the past, remain obscure. One theory suggests
that the group’s public declarations of responsibility could have reflected a strategy
to undermine a peace process that threatened to remove the organization and its
leaders as political actors while demonstrating a remaining capacity to carry out
military operations. The United Nations team was unable to verify this hypothesis.
Allegations of FARDC involvement
89. Right after the attack, on 14 August, RCD-Goma issued a statement in
Kinshasa, signed by its Secretary-General and its First Vice-President. It claimed
that two FARDC companies, led by a Major Ekofo, joined forces with FNL to carry
out the massacre to stop pro-RCD-Goma refugees from returning to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Uvira Military District Commander, interviewed by the
United Nations team about Ekofo’s alleged involvement, denied that he could have
participated. The evening before the interview, Major Ekofo had been severely
injured by a gunshot to his lower abdomen by an AK-47 round. The District
Commander claimed that the rifle of one of his guards had accidentally discharged.
The United Nations team has investigated to the extent possible, but has not
received permission to question Ekofo, who is allegedly still recovering from his
injury in a hospital in Bukavu.
Allegations of Mayi-Mayi involvement
90. The investigation team received allegations that various political and military
groups based in or allied with authorities in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
or Rwanda were behind the massacre. Some suggested the involvement of MayiMayi fighters, such as the Bafulero group of Colonels Nyakabaka and Kayamba,
who have fought against RCD-Goma in the past, and hold strong anti-Rwandan
sentiments. They tend to perceive the RCD-Goma Banyamulenge as a “fifth
column” pursuing Rwandan interests in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
refuse to accept them as Congolese nationals.
91. Since Patrick Masunzu’s uprising against RCD-Goma and Rwanda in February
2002, the Ruzizi Mayi-Mayi groups have established a modus vivendi with the
former Rwandan Patriotic Army officer and Munyamulenge political leader. They
fought together to retake Uvira from RCD-Goma in October 2002, after the
Rwandan Defence Force’s withdrawal from the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and more recently in Kamanyola against Mutebutsi’s troops. Since they have no
professional military training, it is not likely that any of these Mayi-Mayi groups
had the operational capacity to organize, lead and ultimately carry out a wellorganized joint military operation with FNL, at night, leaving no evidence of its
entry and exit. The Mayi-Mayi military record in the Ruzizi plains has never been
that of a well-organized, focused, competent or disciplined military force. The
possibility of involvement in the massacre of individual, specially selected MayiMayi elements cannot however be discarded.
92. On 14 August 2004, the Burundian Armed Forces handed a letter to MONUC
they claimed to have intercepted and which, they claimed, proved a link between
FNL and the Mayi-Mayi. FAB also distributed copies to ONUB and to the
international press. The letter, ostensibly sent to FNL by a Mayi-Mayi group called
Forces armées populaires, details the number of troops allegedly recruited by the

18

S/2004/821

Mayi-Mayi group in Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
mentions a dispatch of ammunition sent by that group to FNL. Upon analysis,
MONUC reached the conclusion that the letter was a forgery, and in all probability
was created to incriminate the Mayi-Mayi.15 The letter also mentions a Mouvement
congolais des combatants non-violents pour la démocratie, which on 29 July 2004
produced a tract inciting ethnic hatred. The authenticity of the tract has also been
questioned.
Allegations of FDLR involvement
93. FDLR is the largest Rwandan Hutu armed group in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It is composed of units from the ex-ALIR I (Armée pour la libération
du Rwanda), Rwandan combatants based in the Kivus, some of which are ex-FAR
and/or Interahamwe, and ALIR II, the Rwandan combatants who fought alongside
the Congolese Armed Forces during the second Congo war, which started in August
1998. FDLR was formed in 2001, and represents the armed wing of a group whose
political leadership lives in exile in Europe.
94. FDLR opposes the regime of President Paul Kagame in Rwanda and demands
the organization of an “inter-Rwandan dialogue” with the aim of negotiating a
power-sharing agreement with the ruling Rwandan Patriotic Front. FDLR organizes
military operations to destabilize Rwanda from its bases in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in order to force such a negotiation. Although their manifesto
professes adherence to reconciliation and development, FDLR officers’ discourse is
heavily tainted by an anti-Tutsi interpretation of politics in Rwanda and propagates
revisionist explanations of the 1994 genocide.
95. FDLR has remained focused on its objective of regaining power in Rwanda
and has not attacked Banyamulenge civilians in the recent past. The FDLR of South
Kivu has coexisted and sometimes allied itself with the Banyamulenge forces of
Masunzu against the Rwandan army. Its alleged motive for participating in the
attack on the Gatumba camp would have been to provoke a Rwandan intervention in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, thus forcing the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to use it as an ally in a new war. However, other
sources suggested that it would have been unlikely for FDLR to attack a camp
where some of Masunzu’s sympathizers and their families had sought refuge.
96. Nevertheless, not all ex-FAR elements answer to the FDLR chain of command.
A splinter group led by Faustin Nguba, a Rwandan Hutu formerly of FAR and
described by many in the local population as a warlord and a criminal, has engaged
in theft, rape, murder, and financially motivated kidnappings. His 70-member group
is suspected of killing bus passengers on the road between Kamanyola and Uvira
with FNL in January 2004. The team uncovered no concrete evidence linking Nguba
to the Gatumba massacre.
97. A group of Burundian FNL, led by Eugene Bitaryumunyu, had a base in the
Sange area, close to FDLR and Nguba positions. FNL allegedly used this location as
__________________
15 The letter was written by a Colonel Dunia Aochi, who is not a Mayi-Mayi. He is in fact a

civilian Bembe from Rusenga, Fizi territory. The serial numbers of the soldiers quoted in the
letter do not follow the Congolese format. The Forces armées populaires do not exist; this may
have been a confusion with the former Forces d’auto-défense populaires of FARDC General
Dunia. The letter mentioned the “zone de Fizi”; any Congolese would be aware of the fact that
Fizi is in fact a territory.

19

S/2004/821

a training camp in the past. Bitaryumunyu was arrested by the Burundian authorities
in June 2004, however, and no information was found to link his group to the
massacre.

D.

Allegations of the militarization of the transit centre
98. In the weeks preceding the massacre, humanitarian agencies and nongovernmental organizations reported rumours that pro-Mutebutsi elements in the
Gatumba transit centre were arming. Prayer sessions held at night outside the centre
were prohibited by the Burundian authorities, following reports that these were
meetings of combatants. The alleged militarization of the transit centre was a
justification advanced by FNL when it later claimed authorship of the massacre.
Reports from various sources indicate that, two days before the attack, the transit
centre was visited by a Rwandan military officer and a high-ranking Banyamulenge
RCD-Goma officer. The aim of the visit reportedly was to recruit combatants to join
Nkunda’s ranks. The team was also informed separately that between 20 and 37 proMutebutsi men left the camp several days prior to the massacre. UNHCR was aware
of the reports and found no evidence of weapons in the camp. Similarly, the
investigation team found no evidence at the post-massacre site of the presence of
weapons caches and was unable to independently verify the reports of military
recruiting.

VII. Conclusions
99. The Security Council requested ONUB and MONUC to investigate the
Gatumba massacre with the objective of identifying the actors responsible for
organizing and implementing the killing. After nearly one month of work, the
investigation team has been unable to establish who organized, carried out and paid
for the atrocity. It concluded that the available evidence points to FNL as probably
having participated in the attack, but it was not able to form a clear view of the
nature and extent of its probable role. Testimonies of the attack, particularly with
regard to languages spoken, past alliances among armed groups in the region, and
uncertainty about the capability of FNL to carry out the operation on its own, leave
open the possibility of significant involvement of other groups or individuals active
in the region.
100. The team uncovered very few facts beyond those reflected in the preliminary
report to the Security Council: the number of victims, the way they died, the claims
of responsibility by FNL and the wide range of accusations and theories presented
by political actors in the region after the event. The most important evidence — the
massacre site itself — was contaminated before investigators arrived some seven
hours after the killings ended. While there was general agreement on some
important aspects of the attack from the testimony of survivors — the methodology
used by the assailants, the chants and songs, the languages spoken — those elements
do not provide conclusive evidence about the attackers. Testimony from some key
witnesses was contradictory and thus not always reliable.
101. The attack was clearly directed against the Banyamulenge, and was therefore,
apparently, ethnically and politically motivated. As indicated in various parts of this
report, many of the armed groups operating in the eastern Democratic Republic of

20

S/2004/821

the Congo and Burundi border region harbour resentments against that group and
others may have political motives for preventing their return to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In addition, the team noted that armed groups operating in
both the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi involved in past
killings of civilians have a history of ad hoc collaboration with each other based on
financial interests and arms trafficking with little concern for political or ideological
principle. An attack organized as a mercenary operation cannot be ruled out.
Nonetheless, at the time of writing neither the factual evidence from the attack nor
analyses of political motives or operational capability provided sufficient support
for concluding that one or more of these groups probably participated.
102. While the facts uncovered did not permit the United Nations team to
conclusively determine the identity of the assailants beyond the likely participation
of FNL, credible, though not verified, information suggesting the potential
involvement of one or more actors in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
warrants a continuation of the investigation.
103. Whatever the intentions of the actors who masterminded, organized and
perpetrated the killings, the massacre certainly served the interests of those who
might wish to derail the fragile peace processes under way in the region. It has been
yet another serious setback for the transition process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and continues to be a heavy burden for its further progress. It has sent a
shock wave through the Burundian transition process at a moment critical to its
success.
104. As noted earlier in this report, although military and government officials
spoke with investigators in the field, the Government of Burundi has not provided to
the United Nations either an official clarification of the facts surrounding the FAB
and Gendarmerie responses on the night of the massacre or evidence supporting its
assertions that armed groups from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
participated. The Attorney General of Burundi has been unable to meet with ONUB
to discuss the status of his investigation. Contacts with the Government of Rwanda
did not produce any concrete evidence to support the claim that elements from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo were involved in the massacre.
105. Finally, the investigation team emphasizes that the Burundian authorities failed
to move the refugee camp to a safer location prior to the attack and failed to
adequately protect the refugees and come to their aid on the evening of the
massacre.

VIII. Recommendations
106. The Gatumba massacre was a crime carried out against civilians of a particular
ethnic group in a region marked by a pattern of war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide over the past half-century. In order to break the cycle of impunity
which has also marked these crimes, and the violent ethnic politics to which this
impunity has given rise, the Security Council should encourage the immediate
initiation of national and international judicial proceedings to ensure that the authors
and perpetrators of the killings are identified, prosecuted and brought to justice.
107. The Security Council should strongly encourage the Government of Burundi to
carry out a full police and judicial investigation leading to the identification and

21

S/2004/821

prosecution of those responsible. The Government of Burundi should be encouraged
to seek international technical assistance for the investigation and should be able to
rely upon the full cooperation of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Government of Rwanda.
108. At the international level, the appropriate body to continue this investigation
and to prosecute those responsible is the International Criminal Court, and the
Government of Burundi should be encouraged to immediately invoke the Court’s
jurisdiction. The ONUB-MONUC investigating team has collected information
which, although insufficient for drawing conclusions at this stage, could be useful
for an investigation by the Court.
109. In order to accord respect to the victims, and in view of the high degree of
political instability still persisting in the region, Governments and opinion leaders in
the region should be called upon to exercise restraint in their declarations
concerning the Gatumba massacre.
110. Finally, the Government of Burundi should be requested to immediately take
all measures necessary to protect refugee and internally displaced populations on its
territory, including moving refugee camps away from the border area and providing
security adequate to deter attacks against the sites.

22

S/2004/821

Annex I
Abbreviations
ALIR

Armée pour la libération du Rwanda

CNDD-FDD

Conseil national pour la Défense de la Démocratie — Forces pour
la défense de la démocratie

FAB

Forces armées burundaises/Burundian Armed Forces

FAR

Forces armées rwandaises/Rwandan Armed Forces

FARDC

Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo/Armed
Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo

FDLR

Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda

FNL

Forces nationales de libération

MONUC

United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo

OHCHR

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights

ONUB

United Nations Operation in Burundi

RCD-Goma

Rassemblement congolais pour la démocratie — Goma

UNHCR

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

WFP

World Food Programme

23

S/2004/821

Annex II
Plan of the Gatumba transit centre at the time of attack
A.

Estimated first stage of attack on Gatumba transit centre

N

Latrines
Attackers’ probable
firing position

Banyamulenge
refugee shelters

Burundian
returnee shelters

40 m

24

S/2004/821

B.

Estimated second stage of attack on Gatumba transit centre
Latrines

N

Probable Second line of
attack

Burundian
returnee shelters

Probable
First line of
attack

Banyamulenge
refugee shelters

25

S/2004/821

C.

Gatumba transit centre after the attack

N

Latrines

Banyamulenge
refugee shelters

Burundian
returnee shelters

26

Burnt down
tents

S/2004/821

27
