310

General Assembly- Fortieth Session

Taking account of the fact that, although the Ad Hoe
Committee has made some progress, it has not yet fulfilled
its mandate,
Reaffirming the need for the elaboration, at the earliest
possible date, of an international convention against the
recruitment, use, financing and training of mercenaries,
1. Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee
on the Drafting of an International Convention against the
Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries
and the progress made by the Ad Hoe Committee.
especially during its fifth session;
2. Decides to renew the mandate of the Ad Hoe Committee to enable it to continue its work on the drafting of
an international convention against the recruitment, use,
financing and training of mercenaries;
3. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee, in the fulfilment of
its mandate, to use the draft articles contained in chapter
V of its report, 40 entitled "Consolidated negotiating basis
of a convention against the recruitment, use, financing and
training of mercenaries" as a basis for future negotiation
on the text of the proposed international convention;
4. Invites the Ad Hoe Committee to take into account
the suggestions and proposals of Member States submitted
to the Secretary-General on the subject and the views and
comments expressed at the current session of the General
Assembly; 41
5. Decides that the Ad Hoe Committee shall accept the
participation of observers of Member States, including
participation in the meetings of its working groups;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Ad
Hoe Committee with any assistance and facilities it may
require for the performance of its work;
1. Decides that the Ad Hoe Committee shall hold its
sixth session for four weeks, from I 6 June to 11 July 1986;
8. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to make every
effort to complete its mandate at its sixth session and to
submit a draft convention to the General Assembly at its
forty-first session;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Report of the Ad /lot'
Committee on the Drafting of an International Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training
of Mercenaries".
I I 2th plenary meeting
I 1 December 1985

40/75. Report of the International Law Commission
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its thirty-seventh session, 24
Emphasizing the need for the progressive development
of international law and its codification in order to make it
a more effective means of implementing the purposes and
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations
and in the Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations 2 and to give increasing importance to its role in
relations among States,
Recognizing the importance of referring legal and drafting questions to the Sixth Committee, including topics
which might be submitted to the International Law Commission, and of enabling the Sixth Committee and the
Commission further to enhance their contributions to the
41 Ibid.. fi,rtwth Semon. Snth ( ·,,,n1nill1'c. 11th to 17th. 44th and 4Xth
meetings.

progressive development of international law and its codification,
Recalling the need to keep under review those topics of
international law which, given their new or renewed interest for the contemporary international community, may be
suitable for progressive development and codification of
international law and therefore may be included in the
future programme of work of the International Law Commission,
I. Takes note of the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its thirty-seventh session;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the International Law
Commission for the work accomplished at that session;
3. Recommends that, taking into account the comments of Governments, whether in writing or expressed
orally in debates in the General Assembly, the International Law Commission should continue its work on the
topics in its current programme, bearing in mind the clear
desirability of achieving as much progress as possible in
the preparation of draft articles on specific topics before
the conclusion of the term of office of the present membership;
4. Expresses its satisfaction with the conclusions and
intentions of the International Law Commission concerning its procedures and methods of work, as reflected in
paragraphs 297 to 306 of its report; 24
5. Reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the
increased role of the Codification Division of the Office of
Legal Affairs of the Secretariat and those concerning the
documentation of the International Law Commission;
6. Appeals to Governments and, as appropriate, to
international organizations to respond as fully and expeditiously as possible to the requests of the International Law
Commission for comments, observations and replies to
questionnaires and for materials on topics in its programme of work;
7. Reaffirms its wish that the International Law Commission continue to enhance its co-operation with intergovernmental legal bodies whose work is of interest for the
progressive development of international law and its codification;
8. Expresses the wish that seminars will continue to be
held in conjunction with sessions of the International Law
Commission and that an increasing number of participants
from developing countries will be given the opportunity to
attend those seminars and appeals to States that can do so
to make the voluntary contributions that are urgently
needed for the holding of the seminars;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
International Law Commission, for its attention, the
records of the debate on the report of the Commission at
the fortieth session of the General Assembly4 2 and to prepare and distribute a topical summary of the debate.
112th plenary meeting
II December 1985

40/76.

Preparation for the United Nations Conference on the Law of Treaties between States
and International Organizations or between
International Organizations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 37/112 of 16 December 1982,
hy which it decided that an international convention
should be concluded on the basis of the draft articles on
42 /hid .. Sixth ( ·omm111,•e, 23rd to 36th,--46th and 47th meetings; and 1h1d.
Snrh Comm1tte1·. Sess,onal Fasc1cle. corrigendum.
