S/PV.9428

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9428th meeting

Thursday, 28 September 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hoxha. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Moretti
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Nanga
Mr. Korbieh
Mrs. Shino
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Hauri
Ms. Shaheen
Mr. Phipps
Mr. Wood

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-28126 (E)
*2328126*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9428

Maintenance of international peace and security

majority, more than 130,000 people, arriving in Italy,
an increase of 83 per cent compared to the same period
in 2022.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Ruven Menikdiwela, Director of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
in New York, and Mr. Pär Liljert, Director of the
International Organization for Migration Office to the
United Nations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. Menikdiwela.
Ms. Menikdiwela: I would like to express the
appreciation of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) for this
opportunity to brief the members of the Security
Council and other invited participants on critical issues
relating to the protection and human rights of refugees
and migrants involved in irregular sea movements from
North Africa to Europe.
As a front-line humanitarian agency — and
despite our advocacy, assistance and other efforts with
States to alleviate human suffering — we continue to
bear witness to the tragedies of lives lost at sea and
on land routes with no end in sight. Please bear with
me, Mr. President, while I provide some numbers that
provide a sobering picture of the dimensions of the
problem. Between January and August of this year, it is
estimated that more than 102,000 refugees and migrants
attempted to cross the central Mediterranean Sea to
Europe from Tunisia alone, a 260 per cent increase
compared to last year, in addition to more than 45,000
people from Libya. Some 31,000 people were rescued
at sea or intercepted and disembarked in Tunisia, in
addition to 10,600 in Libya. Departures from Algeria
were more limited, with almost 4,700 arrivals in Spain
by August, an increase of 18 per cent compared to last
year. In addition, a total of 3,700 people were rescued
or intercepted by the Algerian authorities during the
same period, a 68 per cent increase from last year. In
total, between January and 24 September some 186,000
people reached Southern Europe by sea — in Italy,
Greece, Spain, Cyprus and Malta — with the vast
2/14

28/09/2023

By 24 September, more than 2,500 people were
accounted dead or missing in 2023 alone. That number
represents a two-thirds increase over the total of 1,680
people for the same period in 2022. Lives are also being
lost on land, away from public attention. The journey
from West Africa, or from the eastern Horn of Africa,
to Libya and onward to points of departure on the
coast, remains one of the most dangerous in the world.
Refugees and migrants travelling along the land routes
from sub-Saharan Africa risk death and gross human
rights violations at every step.
The high departure rates in Tunisia result from
perceptions of insecurity among refugee communities,
following incidents of racially motivated attacks and
hate speech, as well as collective expulsions from Libya
and Algeria. That is taking place in a broader context
of the deterioration in the security situation of several
countries neighbouring North Africa, triggering more
secondary movements, with land arrivals and asylumseeker registrations in Tunisia seeing a marked increase
this year. While UNHCR is dealing with restrictions in
registration in Libya, nearly 50,000 refugees and asylum
seekers there are nevertheless registered with our Office.
The fact that UNHCR is not authorized to access some
disembarkation points controlled by entities involved
in interception and rescue at sea limits our ability to
assist the people who are disembarked and brought to
detention centres.
The conditions for thousands of refugees and
migrants in both official and unofficial detention
facilities in Libya remain of grave concern. UNHCR
continues to advocate for ensuring the registration of
all persons seeking international refugee protection and
is seeking Libya’s support to ensure access to them and
appropriate responses for them. UNHCR also remains
concerned about the disembarkation in Libya of refugees
and migrants rescued or intercepted at sea, since Libya is
not a place of safety for the purposes of disembarkation
following rescue at sea. While UNHCR recognizes
States’ sovereign and legal right to engage with other
States and take measures to enhance the management of
their borders, effective border management is compatible
with respect for human rights. UNHCR, together with
the International Organization for Migration and other
partners, is committed to assisting the Tunisian and the
Libyan authorities in addressing the mixed movements
of refugees and migrants arriving at their borders.
23-28126

S/PV.9428

Maintenance of international peace and security

The situation on Lampedusa, Italy, is cause
for serious concern. The UNHCR recognizes the
difficulties posed by the very large number of people
arriving simultaneously on a small island, where
reception capacities are limited. The UNHCR is present
on Lampedusa to support the authorities and appreciates
their efforts to quickly decongest the island. That is a
top priority in order to ensure that people, including the
most vulnerable people, get the assistance they need.
While the solidarity of the people of Lampedusa is
laudable, Italy cannot be left on its own to respond to
the needs of the arrivals. The UNHCR has repeatedly
called for the establishment of an agreed regional
disembarkation and redistribution mechanism for
people who arrive by sea, in a spirit of responsibilitysharing and solidarity with front-line States.
As recently emphasized by the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the challenges of
mixed movements of refugees and migrants require a
panoramic approach to population movements. That
implies moving away from the sole focus of controlling
arrivals at borders to looking at their geographical
complexity and doing so at all steps of their migratory
routes, including by addressing the root causes in
the countries of origin, such as conflict and violence
interacting with climate change, weak governance and
lack of development.
At the core of that approach is the recognition of
the importance of the right to seek asylum at borders
without being turned away or violently pushed back.
People should not be prevented from seeking protection
under international human rights law and international
refugee law. The route-based approach also calls
for renewed efforts to establish proper, legal and
substantive migration pathways to keep economies
and social systems going, as well as to provide proper
entry points for migrants and complementary pathways
for refugees.

28/09/2023

and predictable disembarkation mechanisms. Saving
lives at sea and providing humanitarian assistance is
one of the most basic obligations of humankind, and
those performing rescue operations or helping in good
faith should not be penalized for doing so.
Thirdly, with regard to the prosecution of
smugglers and traffickers, all States must renew their
efforts to cooperate in order to effectively investigate
and prosecute smugglers and traffickers and those who
enable those crimes to be committed on such a large scale,
while also protecting the victims of such trafficking.
Fourthly, with regard to resettlement and
complementary pathways, UNHCR urges all States to
strengthen investments in development and inclusion
in countries of asylum and transit, remove barriers to
accessing family reunification and expand resettlement
quotas for refugees in Libya and those evacuated to
the emergency transit mechanisms. The resettlement
quotas for refugees in other North African countries,
as well as other pathways for refugees and migrants,
should also be increased.
Finally, from 13 to 15 December, UNHCR, together
with Switzerland, Colombia, France, Japan, Jordan
and Uganda, will be organizing the second Global
Refugee Forum in Geneva. We call on States and other
stakeholders to use that opportunity to advance their
commitments to addressing the challenges of mixed
movements through transformational pledges that
can translate those four urgent recommendations into
actions to save lives.
The President: I thank Ms. Menikdiwela for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Liljert.

First, with regard to human rights safeguards, any
cooperation or assistance provided by other States to the
Libyan or Tunisian authorities for border management
purposes should ensure that the human rights of
refugees and migrants are upheld.

Mr. Liljert: On behalf of the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) and as the Director
of the IOM Office to the United Nations here in New
York, I would like to acknowledge the Permanent
Mission of the Russian Federation for initiating
this important discussion and granting the IOM the
opportunity to address the Security Council. We would
like to begin by highlighting the dire conditions facing
the migrants and refugees traversing the many known
mixed-movement routes, an issue that has brought us
here for today’s discussion.

Secondly, with regard to increased search-andrescue efforts at sea, all Mediterranean States must
urgently step up those efforts and implement effective

The Mediterranean Sea has historically been a
region that has witnessed the significant and sustained
movement of people. However, in recent decades, it has

UNHCR has four urgent recommendations in the
context of today’s meeting.

3/14

23-28126

S/PV.9428

Maintenance of international peace and security

been at the forefront of global attention owing to the
migration of thousands of people crossing its waters
annually in search of asylum or new opportunities.
Many of those individuals, in the absence of alternative
options, resort to often risky and dangerous methods
to reach their destination, with irregular migration to
Europe being the most visible.
The IOM is cognizant of the staggering numbers of
migrant deaths and missing migrants worldwide, with
the most dangerous corridors that migrants and refugees
navigate being regularly recorded by our Missing
Migrants Project. Recent data demonstrates that from
January to September, more than 187,000 individuals
crossed the Mediterranean in pursuit of a better future
and the promise of safety. Tragically, during that same
period, the IOM recorded 2,778 deaths, with 2,093 of them
occurring along the treacherous central Mediterranean
route. While significant attention is dedicated to deaths
at sea, the stories shared by migrants suggest that several
tragedies may be going unnoticed, especially during the
crossing of the Sahara Desert.
Despite the emergence of other significant migration
routes in recent years, the Central Mediterranean
route remains the most dangerous. Yet despite its clear
dangers, in 2023 there has been an increase by more
than 300 per cent in arrivals to Greece along that route.
Meanwhile, by contrast, the number of arrivals in Spain,
which are primarily through the Atlantic route to the
Canary Islands, have remained steady as compared to
the numbers recorded at the same time last year.
In 2023, the IOM has witnessed a significant increase
in arrivals by sea to Europe as compared to 2022,
with more than 130,000 individuals arriving this year
compared to approximately 70,000 in 2022. Notably, the
transit and departure points in the Central Mediterranean
route have evolved to also include Tunisia, with the route
through and from Tunisia showing increased departures
compared to recent years.
The impact of the recent upheavals in the Sudan,
which have resulted in significant displacement, has also
become visible in the demography of those arriving in
Europe through the central Mediterranean route. For
example, in August, 1,294 Sudanese transited through
Tunisia. Land crossings from Libya to Tunisia have also
increased, with migrants coming directly from Libya to
Sfax, Tunisia, and beyond.
Discrimination, xenophobic attacks and negative
narratives against migrants and refugees are
unfortunately increasing along the Mediterranean route,
4/14

28/09/2023

and that is a concern. The IOM urges all States to ensure
the safety and dignity of those within their borders, as
per the applicable international instruments.
The IOM advocates for a human rights-based
approach that prioritizes saving lives, ensuring
predictable
disembarkation
and
promoting
responsibility-sharing, and we remain concerned
about the migrants, refugees and asylum-seekers
who are intercepted at sea and returned to places not
considered safe for returns. Individuals returned to
unsafe locations often end up in appalling conditions
in detention centres, where they are exposed to abuse
and extortion. As of 16 September, a total of 10,992
migrants have been intercepted at sea and returned to
potential dangers, including 276 in the second week of
September alone.
We also cannot ignore the exacerbating impact
of climate change and food insecurity in countries
of origin and transit, which affects living conditions
and contributes to further displacement and irregular
migration. The 2021 World Bank report Groundswell
Part 2: Acting on Internal Climate Migration indicated
that across the six regions considered, as many as
216 million people could be forced to migrate within
their countries by 2050. In the light of those challenges,
the IOM strongly encourages the expansion of safe and
regular migration pathways. Such pathways have the
potential to reduce the use of irregular channels and
prevent unnecessary loss of life.
The IOM is actively supporting the promotion of
labour mobility schemes and capacity development
activities between countries to facilitate regular entry
for skilled migrant workers and empower communities
in countries of origin and transit. Furthermore,
avenues for safe and dignified returns, readmission
and sustainable reintegration must be promoted. The
IOM has seen progress in recent agreements such as
the memorandum of understanding on a strategic
and global partnership between the European Union
and Tunisia, which was signed in July 2023, and the
Rome process launched in July 2023, which we hope
will reinforce the shared international commitment to
address the political, socioeconomic and climate drivers
of migration and foster regular and safe pathways
for migration.
The IOM also notes that principles such as respect
for national sovereignty, shared responsibility, solidarity
and the safety and dignity of all migrants, within the
framework of international law, should continue to
23-28126

S/PV.9428

Maintenance of international peace and security

28/09/2023

be embedded in these agreements and offer us a new
model for cooperation between countries who aim to
facilitate regular migration opportunities among them.

saving lives. Simultaneously, migration and asylum
mechanisms must be effective in managing cases once
rescue operations are completed.

As the world is experiencing higher rates of
conflict, disasters and environmental degradation than
at any time in the past three decades, compounded
by glaring inequalities and increased poverty, we can
expect more and more people to embark on these kinds
of dangerous journeys. To address this, allow me to
reiterate a few important recommendations on behalf
of our organization.

Allow me to conclude by recalling that the dire
situation of migrants and refugees requires urgent
and coordinated efforts. To that end, the IOM is
committed to continuing to support States and to
working closely with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and other partners
to ensure lasting solutions for the forcibly displaced,
migrants, refugees and asylum seekers.

First, the international community needs to
actively identify solutions and pathways to foster
regular migration, in conjunction with working actively
to combat the smuggling and trafficking of migrants
along migratory routes. It is essential to strengthen
the application of national legislation, support national
anti-trafficking agencies, collect data on trafficking
cases, provide victim-centred direct assistance and
enhance cross-border cooperation for comprehensive
victim assistance. Further, the regularization measures
for migrants, who often do not qualify for refugee
status, can offer protection and stability. Regular
pathways for admission and stay should be enhanced in
the form of humanitarian visas, temporary protection
permits, private sponsorships, education opportunities,
temporary work permits, planned relocation, family
reunification and medical evacuations.

The President: I thank Mr. Liljert for his briefing.

Secondly, we need to ensure that the rights of
those who find themselves in irregular situations are
respected. States, as duty bearers, hold the primary
responsibility to respect, protect and fulfil the rights
of all individuals within their jurisdiction or effective
control. Collectively, we need to support national and
regional authorities and their capacity to prevent and
resolve forced displacements and to identify root causes
and monitor trends of disasters and conflicts, including
work with communities affected by such movements,
to build their resilience to the root causes, including by
improving community cohesion.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the representatives of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
in New York and the International Organization for
Migration for their assessments of the situation of
migrants, refugees and asylum seekers who attempt to
cross the Mediterranean Sea in search of refuge.
We requested today’s meeting after reading the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 2652 (2022) covering the period from
August 2022 to July 2023 (S/2023/640). According to
the report, 3,111 people have died in the Mediterranean
Sea while trying to reach European shores. This year,
there was a 77 per cent increase in the number of deaths
at sea compared to the previous period. In fact, the
number of victims has doubled in a year, and the overall
number of dead or missing at sea over the past six
years is in excess of 23,000 — migrants, refugees and
asylum-seekers, including women and children, whose
protection is expressly provided for under international
law. What we see here is a very sordid picture.

Thirdly, we must recognize that solutions to
irregular migration cannot solely rely on preventing
departures but must also rely on ensuring that we are
effectively addressing the various drivers of migration
in countries of origin, transit and often in countries of
initial destination.

We would like to state that, year in year out,
the Mediterranean Sea remains the most dangerous
migration route, with the highest mortality rate, and
is becoming a death trap for many desperate people.
This year alone, we witnessed horrific tragedies off
the coast of Greece on 14 June, when 78 people died
and approximately 750 people went missing, and off
the coast of Italy on 28 February, when 81 migrants,
including 33 children, died.

Lastly, we must increase search and rescue
operations, capacity, resources and cooperation,
both at border hotspots and at sea, which is vital for

Clearly, the mechanism provided for by
resolution 2240 (2015) and subsequent Security
Council resolutions is not working, or, at the very least,

5/14

23-28126

S/PV.9428

Maintenance of international peace and security

is extremely ineffective. It is therefore legitimate to ask
why we need this resolution, if the European Union is
incapable of properly carrying out the functions set
out in the resolution, which were assigned to it at its
own request.
It is obvious that those tragedies would not have
happened had timely assistance been extended to those
in distress at sea, as required by both international law
and mere humanity. However, in most cases, rescuing
drowning people is not a priority. Furthermore, it is
often the case that European Union member States
not only do not take measures to rescue the vessel, but
actually forbid other vessels to come to the rescue of
those in distress. Those who all the same dare to do
so face criminal prosecution and can be accused of
human trafficking. Furthermore, and as we can see in
the Secretary-General’s report, some European Union
vessels intentionally try to push back vessels in distress
out of their jurisdiction, condemning people to an
agonizing death. In other words, everything is being
done, as Mr. Borrell Fontelles said, to protect one’s own
blooming garden from the guests from the jungle.
We would like to put a direct question to our
European colleagues: are they generally conducting
investigations of cases in which assistance was not
provided by the European border services to migrants in
distress, and are they prepared to share that information
with other Council members? Despite the assurances
provided by European colleagues, it is obvious that the
activities conducted by European bodies that use the
mandate of resolution 2240 (2015) on combating the
smuggling of migrants and trafficking in human beings
are not yielding tangible results in terms of suppressing
smuggling. According to the report, most of the
criminals avoid arrest, including through corruption.
Such criminal activity continues to flourish.
The next question that arises is what measures
are being undertaken by European Union countries to
rescue people at sea as part of Operation Irini. I ask
because, according to the report, the vast majority of
migrants and refugees at sea were rescued or intercepted
by other forces and structures about which nothing
is known. I would like to recall here that conducting
operations involving the use of force on the high seas is
authorized by the relevant Security Council resolution,
and Council members should receive comprehensive
and exhaustive information about the results. The
Secretary-General’s report does not provide any such
information. At the same time, it would seem that
6/14

28/09/2023

European Union authorities interpret resolution 2240
(2015) solely as an “indulgence” permitting the harsh
suppression of illegal migratory flows.
Moreover, as we can see from the recently
announced plan of the European Union, there are
plans to reinforce and expand the scope of the socalled maritime operations in the Mediterranean,
which journalists and human rights advocates have
already labelled a naval blockade. We are left with
the impression that the European Union is waging an
undeclared war on migrants, who are dying because no
safe alternative routes exist. How does that correlate
with resolution 2240 (2015)?
Even those few migrants and refugees who are
fortunate enough to reach European shores safely
face harsh and inhumane treatment, detention and
deportation, regardless of their circumstances or status.
Let us recall here that extending assistance to migrants,
refugees, asylum-seekers and stateless persons today is
an important component of efforts aimed at maintaining
peace, security and stability. Member States should
adhere firmly to their international obligations
regarding refugees, internally displaced persons and
stateless persons under the 1951 Convention relating to
the Status of Refugees and the 1967 Protocol thereto.
Moreover, the mass exodus of people from the Near
East and North Africa region to Europe is a consequence
of the irresponsible and thoughtless intervention of
Western countries, including the European Union,
in the internal affairs of sovereign States in order to
destabilize them and remove undesirable Governments
by force. Those countries bear the primary responsibility
for such consequences.
However, the European Union is thus far essentially
dealing only with migration issues in relation to
Ukrainians. Citizens from the countries of North
Africa and the Near East obviously cannot count on a
similar level of solidarity, or indeed humane treatment
in general, from Europeans. It is time for Brussels
to stop blaming smugglers for people’s deaths and to
shoulder its responsibility rather than limiting itself to
paying lip service to the tragedy of the lives lost among
yet another group of migrants and refugees.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the three African
members of the Security Council, namely Gabon,
Ghana and Mozambique (A3).
23-28126

S/PV.9428

Maintenance of international peace and security

The A3 wishes to thank Ms. Ruven Menikdiwela,
Director of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees in New York, and Mr. Pär
Liljert, Director of the International Organization for
Migration Office to the United Nations, for
their briefings.
The A3 is deeply concerned about the continued
escalation of the migrant crisis in the Mediterranean
Sea. The number of deaths is estimated to be above
2,300 during the reporting period, making the central
Mediterranean the deadliest route for refugees and
migrants. We express our deepest condolences to all the
families of migrants who have perished on that journey.
This is a tragic reality that demands urgent and
comprehensive action. The international community
should give high priority to assistance, search-andrescue efforts, protection and humanitarian support for
people crossing the Mediterranean Sea. In that regard,
the A3 urges all parties to ensure that all rescued
migrants be assigned a safe port of disembarkation and
be treated equally with humanity and dignity, and that
their rights be fully respected, regardless of their origin,
religion, age or status in accordance with international
law, international human rights law and international
refugee law.
In parallel, it is crucial to address the root causes
that lead men, women and children to decide to make
the deadly journey to cross the sea. It is imperative that
we redouble our joint efforts in addressing conflict,
terrorism, poverty and climate change, which are some
of the factors leading to the worrisome scenario that we
are witnessing today.
The flux of migrants through Libya towards
Europe has led to the creation and sustenance of
well-established smuggling and trafficking networks
in Libya, in flagrant violation of international law
and international human rights law. We therefore
underscore the need to renew our commitment to the
implementation of global instruments such as the Global
Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration and
the Global Compact on Refugees. Those instruments
remain essential in improving migration governance in
a manner that would help to end impunity for human
traffickers and migrant smugglers. Those instruments
are also crucial for enhancing access to protection,
assistance and justice for survivors. What is required is
for Member States to make good on their commitment
to implementing the provisions of those forwardlooking instruments.
7/14

28/09/2023

Equally important is the need to strengthen
cooperation around regional initiatives such as the
African Union (AU) Migration Policy Framework for
Africa. The provision of technical assistance, capacitybuilding and funding to support the implementation
of such regional instruments is essential. We note the
United Nations-AU-European Union task force on
migration and underscore the need to intensify work on
that framework.
In that regard, the A3 notes with appreciation that
the ongoing close cooperation with other countries and
agencies led to the recent arrest and extradition of two
key suspects of crimes against migrants and refugees
from Ethiopia to the Kingdom of the Netherlands and
Italy, respectively. We take this opportunity to thank
the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the European Union Agency for
Law Enforcement Cooperation and INTERPOL, among
others, for their support.
The A3 continues to urge the Libyan authorities,
with the support of the international community, to
work effectively to improve the plight of migrants and
refugees in Libya. We strongly condemn the massive
arbitrary detention of asylum-seekers and refugees in
cruel and inhumane conditions. We therefore call on
the national authorities to ensure that migrants are
protected against any human rights violation, including
trafficking, torture, sexual and gender-based violence
or extortion. We echo the Secretary-General’s call for
alternatives to detention to manage migration in line
with international law.
We would like to call for a renewed commitment
and sense of urgency from the Libyan authorities,
with the support of the Council and the international
community at large, for the stabilization of Libya
as soon as possible. It is our firm belief that Libya’s
stabilization would allow for it to strengthen control
over its territory, dismantle smuggling and human
trafficking networks and alleviate the migrant crisis in
the Mediterranean Sea.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I listened
very carefully to the briefings by Ms. Menikdiwela and
Mr. Liljert.
Recently, the eastern region of Libya was devastated
by a severe storm that resulted in heavy casualties and
extensive property damage. China was among the
first to send emergency humanitarian assistance to
the country. The Red Cross Society of China provided
23-28126

S/PV.9428

Maintenance of international peace and security

emergency cash assistance to the Libyan Red Crescent
Society. Ninety tons of humanitarian and disasterrelief supplies from China have arrived in Libya. China
stands ready, along with the international community,
to extend a helping hand to the Libyan people in order
to help them overcome the disaster and rebuild their
homes as soon as possible.
The issue pertaining to refugees and migrants
along the coast of Libya has been going on for several
years. The situation remains grave. The convening
of this meeting, on Russia’s initiative, will help the
international community to conduct an in-depth study
of the problem so as to seek a solution that addresses
both the symptoms and the root causes.
I would like to emphasize three points.
First, China supports the Security Council’s
authorization to combat the smuggling of migrants and
trafficking in persons on the high seas off the coast
of Libya. We note that the Secretary-General states
in his report (S/2023/640) that the practice of such
maritime operations threatened basic human rights and
endangered the lives of refugees and migrants. I wish
to point out that some European countries have always
blamed others under the banner of protecting human
rights. And yet, when it comes to protecting refugees
and migrants, they have shirked their responsibilities.
They have remained indifferent to, or even participated
in, several serious human rights violations. We urge
the countries concerned to abide by the norms of
international law and effectively protect the human
rights and fundamental rights of refugees and migrants.
We urge the countries concerned to address the issue of
refugees and migrants with an open and tolerant mindset,
rather than allowing tragedies to unfold time and again.
Secondly, the causes giving rise to illegal
immigration on the high seas off the coast of Libya
are complex. They are closely related to the problems
of extreme poverty, social unrest and armed conflict
in the neighbourhood. Who would be willing to drift
from place to place, enduring hardships and embarking
on perilous journeys if their homes were not destroyed
and their very survival difficult to ensure? We hope
that the relevant parties will realize that, instead
of interception at sea or removal on shore, a better
approach would be to take proactive measures to host
the refugees and migrants locally. European countries
should effectively deliver on their official development
assistance commitments, help the countries of origin of
those refugees and migrants develop their economies
8/14

28/09/2023

and improve people’s general well-being so as to
completely eradicate the underlying causes of refugees
and migrants and, ultimately, create conditions for the
refugees and migrants to return home.
Thirdly, the long-standing instability in Libya
has created a fertile breeding ground for illegal
migration. The international community should adhere
to the Libyan-led and -owned principle and provide
constructive support for Libya’s political transition,
development and reconstruction so as to promote an
early restoration of long-term peace and stability in
the country. There are currently 700,000 refugees and
migrants from more than 40 countries in Libya. Their
presence exacerbates the humanitarian crisis there. The
international community should fully take into account
the genuine difficulties faced by Libya, intensify its
humanitarian assistance and provide constructive
support to Libya in order to improve the management
of refugees and migrants.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I would
like to thank the directors of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) for their briefings and
for the work they and their teams do every day to protect
migrants. Their commitment is noted, and we appreciate
the role of the IOM and the High Commissioner for
Refugees to ensure migrants and refugees are treated
in accordance with international law.
The United States remains deeply concerned about
migrant smuggling and human trafficking in Libya and
around the globe. Europe and the United States share
many challenges related to irregular migration. We
both share responsibilities for managing migration on
our respective borders and a commitment to promote
safe, orderly, humane and regular migration. We believe
prioritizing both access to international protection and
humane border management measures are essential
to address forced displacement and the challenges
of irregular migration. We also look to regional,
multilateral approaches to migration. We thank the
European Union (EU) for its commitment, through
the EU Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI
to rescuing refugees and migrants on the high seas
off Libya’s coast when there are reasonable grounds
to suspect the vessels are being used for migrant
smuggling and human trafficking.
Smugglers routinely subject those they are
transporting to sexual violence, extortion and beatings.
They are transported in horrific conditions and, as
23-28126

S/PV.9428

Maintenance of international peace and security

the Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2023/640)
notes, tactics by smugglers remain largely unchanged.
Operation IRINI is a key component of international
efforts to alleviate the human tragedy of migrant deaths
on the high seas. The people dying in the Mediterranean
are often fleeing violence or extreme hardships in
their own countries, only to be exploited by human
traffickers and smugglers en route before finally losing
their lives at sea. Migrants returning to Libya often
face human rights abuses. Nearly half of the migrants
and refugees in Libya are from sub-Saharan Africa,
according to the latest Secretary-General’s report,
which also notes an increasing number of migrant
expulsions to neighbouring countries. We want to
commend the attention the EU has given to ensuring
Operation IRINI places a primary focus on the human
rights of the migrants themselves.
This challenge is bigger than just Operation
IRINI. The international community can do more to
help vulnerable migrants by supporting the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a holistic approach to address the
root causes of irregular migration. We want to thank
the members of the Council for their engagement on
a resolution to extend Operation IRINI for another 12
months. We particularly appreciate the efforts of the
penholders, Malta and France, in incorporating strong
human rights language that stays within the scope of the
resolution. We hope for Council consensus to renew this
important part of our larger effort in the coming days.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank Ms. Ruven Menikdiwela, Director
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees in New York, and Mr. Pär Liljert, Director
of the International Organization for Migration Office
to the United Nations, for their briefings today.
Global migratory flows and the situation of security
and human rights facing migrants, refugees and asylum
seekers in all regions of the world is a growing concern,
especially with regard to those who are made more
vulnerable by conflict situations.
Ecuador has a long tradition of international
humanitarian protection that has made us a regional
and worldwide reference. We are one of the countries in
Latin America with the highest number of requests for
refugee status. To date, we have registered hundreds of
thousands of people who need international protection
from some 88 nationalities, of which more than 75,000
were recognized as refugees.
9/14

28/09/2023

Ecuador is a country that has experienced all facets
of the migratory phenomenon, be it country of origin,
destination, transit, return and refugee. As such, we
have undertaken great efforts to promote safe, orderly,
regular and responsible migration that guarantee the
duties and rights of persons who are in a situation of
human mobility, as well as to combat human trafficking
and illegal migrant smuggling networks. The SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2023/640), on the implementation
of resolution 2652 (2022), details the proliferation of
illicit trafficking of migrants in the Mediterranean Sea.
Risky migration, through various routes, is a danger that
exposes people to sexual violence, torture, trafficking,
slavery and other conditions of exploitation — both
during transit and at the destination. The loss of life,
crimes committed against migrants and refugees and
forcible returns must end. International cooperation
should be intensified so that human traffickers and
migrant smugglers are held accountable and brought
to justice. Migrants, including asylum-seekers, must
be treated with humanity and dignity, and their rights
fully respected. It is the responsibility of States to fulfil
their obligations under international law, including
international human rights norms and international
refugee law. It will be important to step up searchand-rescue efforts and to put in place effective
disembarkation mechanisms on risky maritime routes
through the coordinated efforts of States of origin,
transit and destination.
We agree with the Secretary-General about the
need to take a holistic approach to addressing the
root causes of migration, through greater cooperation
and solidarity, while prioritizing human rights and
the dignity of migrants. We call for the entire United
Nations system to take a thorough approach to
addressing the issue. Where the Security Council is
concerned, it should focus on situations that could pose
a threat to international peace and security.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I thank the Director of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
Office in New York and the Director of the International
Organization for Migration Office to the United Nations
for their briefings.
Before speaking about my own region, I should
recall that several countries in Africa are facing
a considerably more difficult situation, despite
bravely carrying the burden of significant migratory
pressures. With regard to my region, the Mediterranean
continues to be a perilous migratory route. Malta
23-28126

S/PV.9428

Maintenance of international peace and security

remains committed to saving lives and to the effective
management of mass migration in a manner that fully
respects international law. We remain concerned about
the continued precarious journeys of refugees, asylumseekers and other migrants. They often lead to suffering
and abuse, and many migrants never make it.
Those journeys, from countries of origin through
countries of transit and to countries of destination,
are most often facilitated by human traffickers and
smugglers, criminals who exploit vulnerable people for
illicit gains. That is why resolution 2240 (2015) is focused
on decapitating the networks of human traffickers and
smugglers. The links between transnational organized
crime and terrorism also deserve our full attention.
The Council’s adoption of resolution 2240 (2015) and
its subsequent renewals reaffirm its determination to
combat the smuggling of migrants and trafficking of
persons off the coast of Libya. It is also a clear sign of
the Council’s willingness to address the situation in the
Mediterranean, which is the last stop for migrants on
a long and arduous route, with many perishing along
the way. The resolution’s renewal will enable us to
continue tackling the networks of human traffickers and
smugglers in a manner that safeguards human rights.
In that context, we would like to highlight the
contribution made by European Union Naval Force
Mediterranean Operation IRINI in supporting the
detection and monitoring of human smuggling and
trafficking networks in its area of operation and in
saving lives every year. We stress that the ongoing
fight against migrant smuggling and human trafficking
must be carried out in a manner consistent with our
obligations under international law. The human rights
and fundamental freedoms of all must not be infringed
on. Malta, along with the European Union and its
member States, remains committed to saving lives
and to responding to displacement crises around the
world through both humanitarian and development
efforts. Collectively, we continue to provide access to
international protection for people fleeing war, conflict
and persecution in other parts of the world.
We continue to believe that the Council has a role to
play in addressing the root causes of irregular migration
and forced displacement. That requires an integrated and
comprehensive approach that must involve countries of
origin, transit and destination. It must also encompass
conflict resolution and prevention, humanitarian aid,
development cooperation, climate action and longterm sustainable solutions. At the same time, States
10/14

28/09/2023

should work to counter human trafficking and migrant
smuggling in full respect for human rights. Malta
supports the provision of capacity-building measures
to that effect, especially because they are fundamental
to preventing more lives from being endangered.
In closing, we reaffirm that establishing effective
partnerships based on the principles of solidarity and
shared responsibility is crucial to managing migratory
and refugee flows. We must also support countries on the
front lines and provide durable solutions that safeguard
the dignity, safety and human rights of all.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I thank
the Director of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees Office in New York, Ms. Ruven Menikdiwela,
and the Director of the International Organization for
Migration Office to the United Nations, Mr. Pär Liljert,
for their informative briefings.
Thousands of people die every year in the
Mediterranean. The estimate of the Missing Migrants
Project of the International Organization for Migration
for that region is that 28,105 migrants have gone missing
since 2014. We know that there are many more who are not
included in that total. Those are not just numbers. They
are individual fates. Switzerland is deeply concerned
about the situation and would like to express its sincere
condolences to the families of the victims, who remain
without news of their loved ones more often than not.
Migration flows are a common concern for countries
of origin, transit and destination. Governments on
every continent therefore have a shared interest and a
moral duty and obligation to take action. That is why it
is essential for States to work together and strengthen
the protection of the vulnerable people along migration
routes. We would like to make three points in that regard.
First, we must combat the trafficking and exploitation
of migrants. To that end, improving the protection of
migrants, especially those in distress, is crucial. That
means strengthening respect for their human rights.
Switzerland is working to ensure the protection and
sustainable integration of refugees, displaced persons
and migrants in the first areas that migrants reach and
along migration routes. When refugees and migrants do
not find adequate support in the first country they reach,
they are often forced to continue their journey to other
regions or countries, often in perilous conditions. They
risk becoming victims of human trafficking or other
human rights violations or having to use the services
of smugglers. It is imperative to put an end to that
dangerous dynamic.
23-28126

S/PV.9428

Maintenance of international peace and security

28/09/2023

Secondly, we must address the root causes of
forced displacement. The continuing increase in forced
displacement is a result of armed conflict as well as
the consequences of climate change. In that respect,
the Security Council must strengthen its commitment
to crisis prevention and to the protection of civilian
populations affected by armed conflict and its
consequences. That includes a sustained commitment
by the Council to ensuring strict compliance with
international humanitarian law, international refugee
law and human rights law.

11 million people, including almost 6.3 million
refugees. More than 4 million are being hosted by
countries of the European Union. I think it is important
to remember that at this table.

Thirdly, we need strong partnerships in order to be
able to tackle those issues effectively. Only a multilateral
system adapted to today’s challenges can address the
problem on a global scale. That is why Switzerland
is working with other countries, in particular within
the context of the Rabat Process. We also maintain
other partnerships, such as the Global Alliance for
Missing Persons, established in collaboration with the
International Committee of the Red Cross, which seeks
to improve the prevention and resolution of cases of
separation and disappearance. Through those efforts,
Switzerland is committed to improving the search for
missing persons and restoring family ties.

Secondly, we have a collective duty to protect
migrants. In the Mediterranean, France is committed
to combating human trafficking and smuggling
from Libya, in which the absence of a unified State
encourages networks of smugglers, traffickers and
militias. That is why France is committed to supporting
the establishment of a stable, unified Libyan State,
as it is the only way to put an end to trafficking. The
sanctions regime established by the Security Council
makes it possible to target the traffickers. We must do
all we can to facilitate cooperation among States on
migration issues and prevent the tragedies that continue
to occur in the Mediterranean.

The Global Refugee Forum to be held in Geneva
in December represents an excellent opportunity to
announce new multi-stakeholder commitments and
exchange best practices, as well as inspire greater
burden and responsibility sharing. Let us use this key
moment to advance refugee protection, while continuing
to address the root causes of forced displacement by
working, as a Security Council, for international peace
and security.

Thirdly and in conclusion, we must address the root
causes of the displacement of populations. Insecurity
and human rights violations during conflicts are
among the primary causes of displacement. To prevent
those violations, all members of the Security Council
must assume their responsibilities. We cannot block
humanitarian assistance to Syria and then deplore
the consequences of the humanitarian crisis in that
country. The presence of the Wagner Group in the Sahel
contributes to the instability of the region, which fuels
terrorism and leads to the displacement of persons.

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the representatives of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and the International Organization
for Migration Office to the United Nations for
their statements.
I would like to highlight three points.
First, Europe is a land of welcome and asylum.
France has always distinguished itself through its policy
of welcoming forcibly displaced populations. France
currently hosts almost 700,000 refugees and asylum
seekers, making it the third largest host country in the
European Union. Those refugees include Ukrainians
who have fled Russia’s war of aggression. The conflict
has resulted in the forced displacement of more than
11/14

France contributes approximately €93 million to
the UNHCR budget, and the European Union and its
member States contribute approximately €1.5 billion.
That represents 50 times and 750 times, respectively, the
amount of the contribution of the Russian Federation,
which does not respond to humanitarian crises.

Mass migration is caused by conflict, violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law,
poverty and environmental and climate conditions. We
must invest in all areas of sustainable development:
education, women’s rights, climate, the protection
of biodiversity and health. That is the purpose of the
partnership between the European Union and the
African Union. At least €8 billion will be earmarked to
that end for the period from 2021 to 2027.
France is doing its utmost to ensure that no one is
left behind. It recently became the fourth largest donor
globally of official development assistance in 2022,
with a total of €15.1 billion.
23-28126

S/PV.9428

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Phipps (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking Directors Menikdiwela and Liljert for their
briefings today. The United Kingdom would also like to
thank France and Malta for their efforts in drafting the
renewal of United Nations resolution 2652 (2022), which
we fully support.
As we are all aware, Libya is a complex operating
environment for tackling migration and human
smuggling. All refugees and migrants, regardless of their
migration status, should be treated with the humanity
and dignity that they deserve.
The United Kingdom continues to be deeply
concerned about abuses of migrants and refugees in
Libya. We continue to call on the Libyan authorities to
take steps to end the exploitation and abuse of migrants
and refugees, working towards the closure of all detention
centres. A more holistic approach is needed to tackle
the drivers of migration across Africa and the Western
Mediterranean route, and we are committed to working
closely with Member States and the United Nations to
achieve that. We take note of the recommendations by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the International Organization for
Migration today.
The United Kingdom also continues to urge the
Libyan authorities to comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law and implement a
functioning migration system that respects migrants’
and refugees’ human rights.
Unfortunately, these challenges will sadly endure in
Libya in the absence of a political solution, which is why
driving forward the process is front and centre of our
work. We continue to support Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Bathily and the work he is doing
to reach an inclusive political agreement, as well as the
wider efforts of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) to support peace and stability in Libya.
Before concluding, let me also note that we hope the
Russian delegation will give equal focus to language on
human rights and international law when the Council
discusses UNSMIL’s mandate next month.
Ms. Shaheen (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank the briefers for their briefings on the
situation of migrants, refugees and asylum seekers.
Today, we are discussing an important issue. The
world faces many interconnected challenges, foremost of
which are conflicts, climate change and food insecurity.
12/14

28/09/2023

That compels and exacerbates the displacement and
migration of millions of people, amounting to more
than 110 million displaced people worldwide, half of
whom are displaced owing to conflicts. Many of them
face additional risks while seeking refuge and safety,
especially women and children, who are subjected to
sexual and gender-based violence. In that regard, we
stress the need to provide protection to refugees and
displaced people, respect their rights and provide them
with basic services.
We are concerned in particular about the situation
in the Mediterranean. Reports of the Secretary-General
indicate that the number of dead and missing persons
trying to cross to Europe between August 2022 and June
2023 was 77 per cent higher than the same period in
the previous year. That trend demands the international
community’s attention. In that connection, we support
the renewal of the Security Council’s mandate to
Member States and regional organizations to combat
networks of migrant smuggling and human trafficking
off the coast of Libya. That is an important mechanism,
but the international community must do more in
that regard.
We reiterate that improving our international
response to this phenomenon requires a common
international approach that focuses on addressing the
causes of irregular migration and forced displacement,
not only on addressing their ongoing impacts. That
also requires promoting development, stability
and prosperity in communities across all stages of
peace operations.
Moreover, it is important in post-conflict situations
to create an environment conducive to the voluntary and
safe return of refugees and displaced persons to their
communities. That can be done through early recovery
and reconstruction projects which will help refugees to
live a normal life after returning to their homes.
The international community must work
collectively to support countries’ efforts to address
irregular migration and its root causes while respecting
their sovereignty. We need to enhance current national
cooperation mechanisms among countries of origin,
transit and destination while supporting relevant
regional and international agencies and initiatives. We
must also enhance the capacity of countries of transit
to address irregular migration, human trafficking and
relevant transnational organized crime. As we have
previously mentioned in the context of strengthening
collective efforts to address the challenges related to
23-28126

S/PV.9428

Maintenance of international peace and security

displacement, the United Arab Emirates announced
at the International Conference on Migration and
Development, held in Rome, that it would contribute
$100 million in support of development projects in
countries affected by irregular migration, including by
supporting the initiatives proposed in Rome.
We must acknowledge that climate-induced
migration is expected to rise significantly in the coming
decades, with forecasts by the Institute for Economics
and Peace estimating that by 2050, more than 1 billion
people could be displaced worldwide as a result of
climate change and natural disasters. Extreme weather
phenomena result in consequences such as rising sea
levels, food and water insecurity and fierce competition
for resources, compelling millions of people to leave
their countries. In order to prevent and address
climate-induced displacement, we must urgently invest
in promoting the capacity of communities for resilience
and adaptation. It is therefore critical to focus on the
nexus between climate change and conflicts and on how
to support fragile and conflict-affected States, as well
as those States that will be affected by climate-induced
migration and displacement.
Finally, I would like to reaffirm that the United
Arab Emirates will continue to work with all relevant
stakeholders to meet the needs of migrants, refugees
and asylum-seekers and to strengthen prevention and
protection mechanisms.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I thank Director Menikdiwela
and Director Liljert for their briefings.
With regard to the draft resolution that will renew the
authorization set forth in resolution 2240 (2015), Japan
supports the co-penholders’ efforts to seek a constructive
compromise among Security Council members.
It is shocking that more than 3,000 persons died
or went missing in the Mediterranean Sea between
August 2022 and June 2023. Japan expresses its
deepest condolences to their families. Such tragic and
unacceptable loss of life must end. It is also reported
that almost 170,000 people arrived in Europe between
September 2022 and July 2023. While many of them
departed from Libya and Tunisia, we should not consider
that flow of people as merely a local issue in North Africa.
International and regional collective efforts are required
to solve the problem. Japan welcomes Member States’
continuous efforts to rescue migrants, intercept boats
and prevent and combat the smuggling and trafficking of
persons off the coast of Libya.
13/14

28/09/2023

Japan echoes the Secretary-General’s call for a
holistic approach to address the root causes of irregular
migration, which is needed more than ever. The Panel of
Experts of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya
reports that it has identified eight human trafficking
and migrant smuggling routes in Libya, with elements
in 17 Member States, including African, Asian and
European countries. The international community must
show solidarity to tackle the problems in the migrants’
countries of origin.
The human rights of refugees and migrants must be
upheld. We are concerned about the reports of violence,
including sexual violence, and abuse perpetrated
against detained refugees and migrants, as well as of
their arbitrary detention. Japan calls on Libyan actors
to fully respect human rights and welcomes the efforts
of the United Nations and regional organizations to
support Libya in that regard.
I would like to conclude my statement by reiterating
Japan’s commitment to actively participating in the
international efforts to end the tragedy.
Mr. Moretti (Brazil): I join others in thanking
Directors Menikdiwela and Liljert for their briefings.
The coercive measures exceptionally authorized
by the Security Council under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, through resolution
2240 (2015), have been justified as necessary to
combat the smuggling of migrants and trafficking of
persons in the Mediterranean Sea off the Libyan coast,
since they undermine the process of stabilization of
Libya and endanger the lives of thousands of people.
Those measures do not — and should not be taken
to — criminalize migration. They must be implemented
in a manner that is fully consistent with international
humanitarian law, international human rights law and
international refugee law for the benefit of all migrants
and refugees who cross the Mediterranean Sea. We echo
the recommendations made by the Secretary-General
in his report (S/2023/640) on the implementation of
resolution 2652 (2022), which extends the Council’s
authorization to intercept vessels off the Libyan coast
until 29 September. All actors involved must place
human rights and the immediate needs of migrants
and refugees at the core of their efforts to prevent
and counter smuggling and trafficking. The issue
should not be politicized and taken out of its already
terrible context.
23-28126

S/PV.9428

Maintenance of international peace and security

As the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of
migrants has pointed out, States must ensure that border
governance measures do not run against the prohibition
of collective expulsions. They also must respect the
principle of equality and non-discrimination, the
principle of non-refoulement, the right to seek asylum,
the right to life, the prohibition of torture, the promotion
of gender equality, and the rights and best interests
of children. Those measures must also comply with
Member States’ search-and-rescue obligations under
international maritime law.
The coercive measures authorized by the Council
under resolution 2240 (2015) have been in place for eight
years. Yet, the situation today is unfortunately worse
than ever. Without peace and sustainable development,
migration flows will continue to increase. We will
continue to witness death and suffering, including
among children and other vulnerable persons. Brazil
concurs with the Secretary-General’s assessment of the
need for a holistic approach to address the root causes of
irregular migration, through enhanced cooperation and
solidarity. In that regard, we underscore the importance
of effectively implementing the Global Compact for
Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration. We also hope that
the upcoming second Global Refugee Forum will foster
ambitious commitments to improving the situation of
those fleeing persecution. We must not allow for the
horror that we have seen in the Mediterranean Sea to
continue any further.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Albania.
Albania shares the concerns expressed by
others — including our briefers, whom we thank — about
the large number of irregular migrants from Africa,
who seek to reach the Mediterranean coast through
smuggling routes and other illicit means. We deplore the
illegal migration that puts at risk the lives of innocent
people. We stand for the fair and humane treatment

14/14

28/09/2023

of all migrants. Despite their unsustainability, those
migrant flows are leading to tragedies, with a very
high cost for everyone. The death toll is unacceptable,
and sustainable solutions must be sought and found.
The European Union’s Naval Force Mediterranean
Operation IRINI has been doing remarkable work to
save lives in danger, and we look forward to the renewal
of its mandate.
In our view, preventive measures are key to
disrupting criminal networks from gaining the upper
hand. In that vein, it is crucial to strengthen dialogue
among the migrants’ countries of origin, transit and
destination in order to seek long-standing solutions to
the massive interregional and Mediterranean flows. An
efficient preventive system should focus on continued
and strengthened efforts, including through close
coordination among countries, to deal with the root
causes of migration, such as poverty, food insecurity,
climate change and underdevelopment, as well as
terrorism and conflict. It should enhance collaboration
among countries in combating human traffickers and
strengthening border management, promote concrete
and implementable alternative options to migration,
such as job creation and sustainable development, and
support all instruments that foster legal migration
for those who are genuinely and legally entitled to it.
We should bear in mind that the safety and dignity of
human lives must be protected at all costs. We reaffirm
our commitment to contributing in any way we can
to peace and stability everywhere, in order to tackle
the deep roots of instability, the lack of perspective
and terrorism, as well as climate change and its
consequences, as factors that fuel irregular migration.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

23-28126
