UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

.i

_I.w_
UN LuiRARY

-..’

YEAR

JAN2 9 m6

1891 st

MEETING:

17 MARCH

1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l891)

.. .. ... ... .. .. .. ... .. ... .. .. .... .. ...

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*.........................

1

Request by Mozambique under Article 50 of the Charter of the United Nations
in relation to the situation which has arisen as a result of its decision to
impose sanctions against Southern Rhodesia in full implementation of the
relevant decisions of the Security Council:
Telegram dated 10 March 1976 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Mozambique to the President of the Security Council (S/12009) . . . . . . . .

1

,S/PV.1891

NOTE
* .Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined wi’th figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
document.
.” i -I’-I--.
! .c. ‘. Nations
I:-*Ii, *t i
*1_
Documents of‘the ‘Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The, date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1891st

President:

MEETING

Held in New York on Wednesday,

17 March

Mr. Thomas S. BOYA (Benin).

2. Mr. JACKSON
(Guyana): Let me at the outset,
Sir, congratulate
you on your assumption
of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
Since you come from a country which has always
championed the cause of freedom and the dignijy of
the human being, it is fitting that you, the representative of the sister Republic of Benin, should be guiding
our deliberations
on the issue currently before the
Council. We are confident that under your wise and
mature leadership the Council will reach decisions
which will make significant contributions to the liberation struggle the world over.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/l891)

of the agenda

4. This series of meetings is specifically occasioned
by the decisions-courageous
decisions-taken
by
the Government of Mozambique on 3 March this year
to close its border with Rhodesia and to apply fully
the rkgime of sanctions instituted by the Security
Council against the rebels temporarily usurping power
in Zimbabwe. These decisions are entirely consonant
with Mozambique’s
unequivocal and unchallengeable
support for the just struggles of liberation movements
in Africa and elsewhere, not least of which is the
continuing struggle of the people of Zimbabwe. They
are consonant, as ~$11, with Mozambique’s
commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations.

was called to order at 11.15 a.m.
Adoption

p.m.

3. May I take this opportunity
to say a brief word
regarding our President for February, former Ambassador, now Professor, Moynihan.
Since we did not
have an opportunity
in the Council formally to say
goodbye to him, I would ask the delegation of the
United States to convey to Professor Moynihan our
best wishes and to remark that we will be following
his fortunes with an interest the keenness of which
derives from our previous association with him.

Request by Mozarhbique under Article 50 of the
Charter of the United Nations in relation to the
situation which has arisen as a result of its decision
to impose sanctions against Southern Rhodesia in
full implementation
of the relevant decisions of the
Security Council:
Telegram dated 10 March 1976 from the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Mozambique
to the President of the Security Council (S/12009)
The meeting

1976, at 10.30

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Request by Mozambique under Article 50 of the Charter
of the United Nations in relatiod to the situation which
has arisen as a result of its decision to impose sanctions against Southern Rhudesia in full implementation ‘of the reievant decisions of the Security Cduncil:
Telegram dated 10 March 1976 from the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Mozambique
to the President
of the Security Council (S/12009).

5. Is not the fortitude of the people of Mozambique,
dynamically
led by FRELIMO
[Front for the Liberation of Mozambique],
.amply demonstrated
by the
long and arduous battles they successfully waged
against colonialism imposed by their erstwhile oppressors? Is their commitment
to the full development
of the human personality not self-evident from the
structured manner in which they have sought resolutely to confront the ravages of the colonialist
exploitation
of their society in the few months since
they have recaptured their own freedom and independence? Guyana salutes FRELIMO
and the people
of Mozambique
and applauds their aspirations and
their goals.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
In accordance with the decisions taken yesterday at the
1890th meeting, I invite the representative of Mozambique, as well as the representatives of Egypt, Jamaica,
Kenya and Zambia, to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote.
At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Chissano
‘(Mozambique)
took a place at the Council table and
Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr. Thompson (Jamaica),
Mr. Maina (Kenya) and Mr. Kamana (Zambia) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Cou&il
chamber.
1

6. It is, however, the determined people of Mozambique against whom Ian Smith and his henchmen,
harassed and perplexed by the freedom fighters within
Zimbabwe, directed their most recent provocative and
aggressive acts. President Samora Machel addressed
not only the people of Mozambique but also the whole
international
community when nearly two weeks ago
he spoke of aggression against his people, of the
violation of the territorial integrity of his country and
of the additional
actions which Mozambique
has
undertaken in pursuit of the goal of genuine freedom
and independence for Zimbabwe.

to Mozambique.
Further action in this regard was
agreed upon earlier this month, on 4 March, at a
meeting of the Commonwealth
Sanctions Committee.
Indeed, pursuant to decisions taken at that meeting,
the Commonwealth
Secretary-General,
Mr. Shridath
Ramphal, is now in Maputo discussing with President
Samora Machel the areas in which and the modalities
by which the Commonwealth
can be of assistance to
Mozambique.
12. Guyana consistently
supported the fraternal
people of Mozambique,
morally,
politically
and
materially, during their battle for the recovery of their
freedom and independence.
We regarded it as our
inevitable duty, and we continue to support them now
as they seek to consolidate that independence and to
make secure that freedom.

7. But actions by States founded on principle and
justice sometimes exact a heavy price. However, when
such actions are perceived to offend more powerful
countries, threats to the stability and indeed to the
survival of the States concerned have been some of the
punitive measures in the arsenals of those who believe
they are offended. Unhappily,
the international
community is as yet too ‘acquiescent to faits accomplis
resulting from the employment of such measures in the
exercise of naked power.

13. While it is true that ‘we are not discussing the
situation in Zimbabwe per se, the question before us
derives from the untenable and intolerable situation in
that Territory, for the essential reason for our meeting
stems from the brutal and callous denial of the rights
of the black majority
in Zimbabwe
by a white
minority, entrapped and imprisoned by their own racist,
and exploitative concepts.

8. But the United Nations, in the language of its
Charter, anticipated situations in respect of which its
Member States contracted obligations with regard to
special economic problems faced by any State carrying
out preventive or enforcement
measures authorized
by the Security Council-I
refer to the provisions of
Articles 49 and 50-and this is the case of Mozambique.

14. The loaic of unfolding events in southern Africa
-the peoples’ victories in-Mozambique
last year and
more recently in Angola-has
made it abundantly
clear to most, except, it seems, to Ian Smith, that
majority rule in Zimbabwe is inevitable.
The real
question is not whether, but rather when. As my
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Wills, said at the
thirtieth session of the General Assembly on 1 October 1975:’

9. We heard yesterday [1890th meeting] a graphic
description from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Mozambique
of some of the presently ascertainable
effects on his country of the implementation
by
Mozambique
of sanctions against Rhodesia in accordance with Security Council resolution 253 (1968). He
articulated succinctly the linkages of dependency by
which the Portuguese colonialists,
in concert with
the white minority racist cliques installed in Salisbury
and Pretoria, had enveloped the people of Mozambique. It is a situation of structural distortion, a distortion which has been a legacy for many of us.

“Having crossed his Rubicon in 1965 by a unilateral declaration of independence, the rebel leader
Ian Smith has now had to face up to the political
realities of the continent, and justice, which limped
behind him for 10 years, has finally cornered him in
Zimbabwe.”
Continued prevarication
and duplicity by Smith can
only serve to compound
the wrath which will
accompany his overthrow.

10. It seems abundantly clear to my delegation that
the international
community
should now respond
urgently and effectively to assist Mozambique so that it
can continue unimpeded in the tasks of economic and
social reconstruction
upon which its people have
embarked, for Mozambique
should not be required
to shoulder the conscience of makind alone.

15. Yet, even as the white minority regime continues
its despoliation
in Zimbabwe,
some countries still
endeavour to buttress it by words and others by
deeds. We call upon those whose utterances are taken
by the racists in Salisbury as signals of support to
reorient their thinking and to reorder their priorities.
Further. my delegation is constrained to observe that
from press reports it appears that those other racists
in southern Africa-the
Pretoria regime-seek
to profit
from the act of courage by Mozambique
by making
available to Smith and his band of rebels additional
facilities to compensate for the lack of access to the
ports of Beira and Maputo.

11. The Minister for External Affairs of Jamaica
reminded us yesterday [ibid.] that heads of Govemment of the Commonwealth,
meeting at Kingston in
May of last year, had also anticipated this situation.
At that time they emphasized that the prospects for
freedom in Zimbabwe could be enhanced by the
application
by Mozambique
of sanctions against
Rhodesia. Those heads of Government were in favour
of the implementation
of a programme of assistance
2

16. As the struggle for freedom in Zimbabwe intensifies, the Security Council may yet be called upon
to deal effectively and appropriately
with the chief
sanctions-breaker,
South Africa, for there lies the
bastion of racism in southern Africa.

people of the world, not excluding, we still hope, the
white minorities
whose leaders have set up barricades against progress and brotherhood
and good
sense.
22. Yesterday we heard the statement of the Foreign
Minister of Mozambique,’
to whom I should like to
extend the welcome and good wishes of my delegation, a statement which explained with clarity and
without rancour the difficult situation in which his
country finds itself as a result of its decision to break
off all its economic links with Southern Rhodesia.
The value and enormous practical significance of this
act of solidarity with neighbours fighting for emancipation by a State which has itself only just emerged from
a long period of colonial rule will not be long in making
themselves felt. The implications
have certainly not
been lost on the illegal regime of Ian Smith, to judge
by its desperate acts of aggression against Mozambique. However, a strain of wider loyalty marked the
statement of the Foreign Minister, a loyalty to the
internationalist
duty, if I may use his own words, of
Mozambique
as a Member of the United Nations in
implementing
the sanctions imposed by the Security
Council against the Southern Rhodesian regime some
eight years ago. This example of respect and practical
support for the principles and decisions of the United
Nations is commendable
and worthy of emulation.

17. Let there be no doubt that the racists in southern
Africa will not be permitted to keep intact for ever
their “luagers of repression”. The progressive forces
in the world, including, importantly,
peoples of the
black diaspora, will no longer be frustrated by pious
asseverations
of so-called strategic and economic
interests. Those forces are now more than ever
prepared to translate their commitment
into action.
18. Guyana, along with other freedom-loving
countries, is marching side by side with the people of
Mozambique.
We share with them a belief in the worth
of the individual human being, and we are working
together for his triumphal emancipation.
We believe in
the provision of assistance for noble causes. At the
dawn of the independence of Mozambique,
Guyana
made a modest contribution
of assistance, fully
confident
of Mozambique’s
intention
to continue
resolutely the struggle for the freedom of Zimbabwe.
We are prepared today to make a further contribution.
19. Mr. AKHUND
(Pakistan): Mr. President, in the
first place I should like to offer you my personal
welcome and the congratulations
and good wishes of
my delegation.
Despite the great distance which
separates us, relations between your country and mine
have been of the best, based on the co-operation
between our two missions here and on a common
approach to many of the major world problems.

23. The predicament
in which Mozambique
finds
itself, as the Foreign Minister told us, is rooted in the
colonial history of his country. The dependence of
Mozambique
on South Africa and Southern Rhodesia
was deliberately built into Mozambique’s
relationship
with them, with the object of serving their interests,
and it has served to strengthen the economic and
political
domination
of alien minorities
over the
indigenous people. The distortion of economic and
social objectives and priorities which colonialist policy
has brought about in southern Africa is to some
degree characteristic of the economic imbalances and
injustice which prevail all over the world, the correction and redress of which are among the most urgent
items on the international
agenda. I do not want to
digress into a matter which is the subject of discussion
elsewhere. It is important, however, to recognize that
Mozambique,
a developing country and one which has
scarcely recovered from a protracted and bitter fight
for freedom, in deciding to break with Southern
Rhodesia
has accepted a double challenge-the
challenge of an aggressive and ruthless minority regime
bent on maintaining its power and ill-gotten privilege
by every means, at the same time as Mozambique
is engaged in the task of carrying through fundamental
change and the reconstruction of an inequitable system
left behind by colonial rule.

20. I should like to take this occasion also to pay a
tribute to your predecessor in the office of President
of the Security Council, Professor Moynihan.
We
saw him presiding over the Council last month and
could not help but be impressed by his impartiality
and diligence, particularly
in the many informal consultations he was called upon to hold. We also knew
him for the vigour with which he espoused his views.
He may not have won over many converts, but he
certainly lost no friends, and we do miss his presence
here. We look forward now to welcoming his successor, Governor William Scranton, who brings with
him an impeccable reputation as a statesman and a
: man of vision.
2 1. Many of the preceding speakers have remarked on
the appropriateness
of the fact that a distinguished
representative of Africa is presiding while the Security
Council is discussing a situation of primordial interest
to the people of Africa. It is indeed right and proper
that this should be so, for it is in Africa that we find
entrenched the last remnants and the most virulent
form of colonialist exploitation and of injustice based
on race. It is Africa which today leads the struggle
against these evil practices and doctrines, even though
the success of the struggle will be beneficial to all the

24. The burden this decision places on the economy
of Mozambique,
a burden it carries on behalf of all of
us and for the United Nations Organization as a whole,
‘was explained with considerable precision in the statement of the Foreign Minister of Mozambique.
Tens
3

of thousands of people will lose their jobs; tens of
millions of dollars worth of revenues will be lost; new
sources will have to be found for importing
food
grains and other essentials, and new markets for
products hitherto exported to Southern Rhodesia. All
this, even without taking into account various intangibles which cannot be estimated in advance, will pose
staggering problems for Mozambique
and call for
major adjustments on its part. The need for international help and assistance is therefore obvious and is
widely recognized. The decision of the Commonwealth
Sanctions Committee
and the long list of Council
members sponsoring the draft resolution introduced
yesterday by the representative of Tanzania [s/12013]
are evidence of the international
community’s
determination to rally to Mozambique’s
side. The United
Nations arranged help for Zambia in similar circumstances some years ago and must do no less in the
present case. In fact, we should do well to bear in
mind what the representative of Zambia told us yesterday [/89&h mcefing] about the need to translate the
Security Council decision on this matter into concrete
and effective forms of assistance. We also agree that
the urgency of the situation is such that action cannot
await a detailed evaluation by a fact-finding mission
and the like. We are encouraged by the fact that the
Secretary-General,
as is his custom, has not allowed
the grass to grow under his feet and has already made
an appeal for a favourable response to the Mozambique
Government’s
request for assistance.

of a violent solution uttered here yesterday by the
representative of ‘Zambia should be seriously heeded
by the minority regime of Southern Rhodesia and by
its ,friends. Recent developments
in Angola offer
lessons for ail of us. It is characteristic of Ian Smith
that, to judge by. the press interview published in
yesterday’s issue of The New York Times, he has
drawn all the wrong lessons. He speaks of the balance
of power between the free world and &he Communist
world and of a tragedy for the free world if his
regime is allowed to go down. The tragedy for the
world is that selfish and benighted individuals,
like
the ones who lead the Southern Rhodesian regime and
other forces, are making of Africa a cockpit of
international
power politics.
28. In a recent press interview on the subject, Prime
Minister Bhutto cautioned that any attempt to run
against the current of history in the third world or to
resort to neocolonialist
practices would prove counterproductive. In a message he sent to the Afro-Asian
Peoples’ Solidarity Conference held in Mozambique
last year, Prime Minister Bhutto outlined Pakistan’s
stand on the situation in southern Africa:
“The dismantling
of the Portuguese
colonial
empire, to which the site of your Conference bears
testimony, has changed the political map of Africa
and strengthened and extended the common front
against the remaining bastions of colonialism
and
racial oppression. This advantage must be pressed
and the struggle against the colonial
regimesintensified.”

25. Sanctions were imposed on Southern Rhodesia in
1968. In the eight years which have elapsed there
has been no noticeable progress towards bringing the
illegal Ian Smith regime to book or even bringing it to
its senses. Part of the reason for the failure of sanctions to achieve their proclaimed objective-I
say this
while recognizing their political value in isolating the
Southern Rhodesian regime-lies
in the loopholes
provided on the one hand by South Africa and on the
other by the so-called Byrd Amendment in the United
States.

29. We consider the Mozambiaue
Government’s
courageous decision to impose sanctions on Southern
Rhodesia one of the most important steps, a turning
point indeed, in a struggle which is now approaching its
decisive phase. In the press interview to which
I referred a moment ago, Mr. Ian Smith pleaded with
the United States and other Western nations “to give
us a second chance”. The talks he is holding with
Mr. Joshua Nkomo offer him, in the words of the
representative of the United Kingdom [ibid.], the last
chance for an orderly and early transfer to majority
rule so that all the people of the Territory, black and
white, may live in peace. There are not many signs that
he will take this chance, but on this subject we shall
have more to say when we take it up in substance.

26. Resolution 253 (1968) was adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter and is therefore mandatory.
Furthermore,
it was adopted without dissent. It is an
obligation on all Member States under the Charter to
implement
mandatory decisions of the Organization.
If I may say so in passing, this obligation rests all the
more heavily on those who criticize the United Nations
on the ground that the majority of its Members acts
in a thoughtless manner and seeks to impose its will
on the minority.

30. Mr. RYDBECK
(Sweden): Mr. President, first
of all let me congratulate you on your assumption of
the office of President of the Security Council. The
Swedish delegation is particularly pleased to see you
in the chair during a month when the Council is
dealing with the important African issue on our agenda.
I pledge our full support and co-operation with you in
the fulfilment your duties.

27. The truth is that the process of change we are
witnessing in Africa has been set in motion not by
sanctions but by the success of the struggle of the
people of the former Portuguese colonies against
colonial rule. The possibility of a similar development
in other parts of southern Africa, and first of all in
Southern Rhodesia, now looms ever larger. The
warning of the possibility and perhaps the inevitability

31. I should like also to ask the United States
delegation to convey to Mr. Moynihan the most warm
and sincere tribute of my delegation for the impartial
4

and effective way in which he guided the consultations
and the debates of the Council during the month of
February. We also ask the United States delegation to
convey to Mr. Moynihan our best wishes for the future.

now facing his country. It was of the greatest value
for the Council to receive that information
as it now
proceeds to respond to the request of the Government of Mozambique.

32. The decision announced recentlv bv the Peonle’s
Republic of Mozambique
to close its *borders bith
Southern Rhodesia and to apply fully the system of
sanctions affords, together with the previous parallel
decision of the Government of Zambia, an outstanding
example of the solidarity among the nations of Africa,
without which the process of decolonization
could
never have reached its present stage. The collapse of
the former Portuguese colonial empire in southern
Africa has drastically changed the situation for the
rulers in Salisbury. They find themselves more isolated
than ever before and under heavy international
pressure. It is to be hoped that the Smith regime
will now finally be able to see the writing on the wall
and that a rapid transition can take place to the long
cherished goal, freedom and independence
for the
people of Zimbabwe.

36. Because of the interdependence
between the
economies of Mozambique
and Southern Rhodesia,
the negative effects on the economy of Mozambique
of the decision of its Government will rapidly be felt.
This makes it all the more necessary for the Security
Council, and through it the world community,
to act
urgently. Because of the urgency of the matter my
delegation considers the appropriate course of action
to be to take a decision in the Council immediately
so that machinery can be set up at once for the coordination
of the assistance, whether bilateral or
multilateral,
to Mozambique.
We have understood
that the Secretary-General
envisages the dispatch of
a group of experts immediately
after the Council’s
decision to verify the needs in further detail on the
spot. My delegation is confident that the global figure
of assistance needed can be established quickly so
that the flow of assistance can start without delay.

33. It is against this background that we today hail
this courageous decision of the Government
of the
People’s Republic of Mozambique.
The Charter does in
this context impose clear obligations
on the Member States. Just as under Articles 24 and 25 of the
Charter all Member States have accepted the obligation to accept and carry out the decision of the Security
Council to apply the system of sanctions against
Southern Rhodesia, they are called upon under Articles 49 and 50 to join in affording mutual assistance in
carrying out the measures decided upon by the Council.
I quote Article 50:

37. The Government
of Sweden has supported the
liberation struggle of the people of Mozambique
and
continues to support the development
of the newly
independent
State. My Government
has decided to
increase the bilateral assistance foreseen this year
from 50 to 70 million kronor, that is from approximately
$11.4 to $16 million. The Swedish Minister for Development Co-operation,
Mrs. Gertrud Sigurdsen, is at
this very moment visiting Mozambique,
and upon her
return the Swedish Government will positively study
the question of giving further assistance in response to
the Security Council resolution, the draft of which my
delegation has joined as a sponsor. We sincerely hope
that it will have the unanimous support of the members of the Council. A unanimous decision by the
Council would be a sign of solidarity of the Member
States with the people of Mozambique
and also a
means of showing the full solidarity of the United
Nations with the people of Zimbabwe in its struggle
for freedom and independence.

“If preventive or enforcement measures against
any State are taken by the Security Council, any
other State, whether a Member ofthe United Nations
or not, which finds itself confronted with special
economic problems arising from the carrying out of
those measures shall have the right to consult the
Security Council with regard to a solution of those
problems.”
34. The Council is at present carrying out such a
consultation at the request of the People’s Republic of
Mozambique
following its decision to apply the sanctions against Southern Rhodesia. Indeed Mozambique
is confronted with “special economic problems arising
from the carrying out of those measures.“.
The
problems are special since under Portuguese colonial
rule the structure of the economy of Mozambique
was fashioned in such a way as to become interdependent with the structure of the economy created in
Southern Rhodesia by its illegal regime. No great
imagination
is needed, therefore, to understand the
negative impact on Mozambique’s
economy of the
recent decision of its Government.
35. The Foreign Minister of Mozambique
,gave us a clear picture of the immediate

38. Mr. VINCI
(Italy): Mr. President, may I be
permitted first of all to convey to you my delegation’s
and my personal congratulations
on your accession to
the presidency of the Council and to recall on this
occasion the friendly
relations
that my country
maintains with your qwn. You can rely on the full
and sincere support of my delegation in the exercise
of your high responsibilities
now and through the
next two weeks of intense deliberations.
39. I should also like to associate myself with the
thanks that you and previous speakers have addressed
to your predecessor, the Permanent Representative
of the United States. He and the Acting Permanent
Representative,
Mr. Bennett, have carried out their
duties, which involved an important and delicate issue,
in a very commendable,
discreet and constructive

yesterday
problems
5

way. for which we all in the Council are certainly
grateful.
40. The point on our agenda deserves indeed our
earnest attention and consideration together with our
deep respect.
41. I should like to assure you, Mr. President, as
well as the other members of the Council, that my
Government is fully aware of the serious critical
situation now confronting the Government of Mozambique as a result of its bold decision and of the
continued defiance represented by the presence at its
borders of a minority illegal regime, the regime of Ian
Smith which has been outlawed by the United Nations
and by world public opinion.
42. To the Government and people of Mozambique,
which have honoured the Council by dispatching
here their Minister for Foreign Affairs, I should first
of all like to address again the warm welcome and the
sincere good wishes which were expressed to them by
the Italian representative in the Security Council on
18 August 1975 [1838th meeting],
when we unanimously voted in favour of the recommendation to the
General Assembly for the admission of Mozambique
to the United Nations. I am glad to note that since
that time, when we expressed our readiness to establish
official friendly relations with Mozambique, those
relations have already developed in a very friendly
way; they have been formalized with the exchange of
diplomatic missions.
43. In consistency with its longstanding conviction
that the process of decolonization in Africa is to be
completed as. soon as possible, and of course the
sooner the better, my Government did not fail to give
its support to the course which eventually led to the
independence of Mozambique.
44. We all remember those long years when
FRELIMO carried out its valiant struggle for independence. At the beginning, the scattered actions, the
lighting of the flame by nobly inspired minorities;
later, the endeavours of ever growing numbers of
patriots committed to freedom and advancement, at
whatever price; finally, the victory of an entire people
and the prize of a well-deserved independence.
45. Throughout all those years when an anachronistic
and useless war was waged against the people of
Mozambique, Italy, acting on,a unilateral.basis as well
as together with its allies and with its partners in the
European Community, never ceased to put pressure
on the ruling Power so that it would change the course
of its policy in Africa, and particularly in Mozambique.
46. We take some satisfaction in the help we were
able to provide to both parties following the establishment of democracy in Portugal, for at that time we
were in a position to be able again to talk freely to the
leaders of that country, with whom we have since

come to share the ideals of a free and democratic
society. We had at that time the opportunity to act
as go-between, a fact which caused a spokesman of
my Government to state on 15 September 1975:
“Italy is glad to have contributed to the process
of negotiations between Portugal and FRELIMO,
thus facilitating contacts designed to,help towards a
better understanding of the objectives and the viewpoints of the interested parties; this reflects, moreover, the full and constant adherence of Italy to the
objectives of self-determination and independence
for peoples still subject to colonial rule.”
47. Unfortunately, the struggle for decolonization
in southern Africa requires further efforts. In Southern
Rhodesia, as well as Namibia, men and powers, who
obviously nourish deceptive illusions as to where the
trends of history lead, are still trying to prevent the
rise of the day which will bring dignity, independence,
self-determination and justice to all the people of those
two countries. However, Mr. President, you know,
I know and all the members of the Council know that
it is only a matter of time for Rhodesia as well as
Namibia to become free, sovereign States. So why
should we be confronted once again with useless
efforts to delay events, such as independence on the
basis of majority rule?
48. The tragic aspect of any vain endeavour to turn
the clock back is that it will inevitably carry with it
more human suffering for all people in Rhodesia and
elsewhere, black and white. The toll of those who will
die may rise again. How many human and economic
resources shall be lost, and for what?
49. According to an ancient Latin saying, Jupiter
prius
quos vu/t perdere,
which I would
translate into English: “God makes mad those whom
he wants to perish”. Unfortunately, time passes,
centuries pass by, but some people, like Ian Smith
-and not only in Rhodesia-never learn and are
unable to adjust to the changes outside in the real
world.

dementat

50. But in spite of all the historic records to the
contrary, at this final stage Italy still wants to believe
in, and stands for, responsible and quick action in
Southern Rhodesia. There is one last chance for
peaceful evolution, leading eventually to a constitutional agreement, in conformity with the purposes b
and principles of the Charter. But time is running
short and the chance must be seized at once. This has
been forcefully pointed out by the Foreign Ministers
of Mozambique and of Jamaica; by the current chairman of the African Group, our colleague from Kenya;
by the.representative of Zambia and by other speakers,
We could not agree more with those statements.
5 1. I should like to assure the Council that, at a time
when the risk of violence erupting again is increasing,
the interest and concern of the Italian Government

Security Council for March. It is a fortunate coincidence that a distinguished representative of an African
country is presiding over the Council at the very time
when this body is considering problems of particular
interest to the whole of Africa. We should like to
extend to you our best wishes for success in the
performance of your tasks as President, and at the same
time I should like to assure you of our whole-hearted
co-operation.

with regard to what is going on in southern Africa
remain unchanged. In fact, events. in that area have
retained, and, indeed; @t-eretaining, our fullest attention and consideration, not only for the, sake of the
populations directly concerned but for the effects on
international society as a whole. This is a time for
unilateral and multilateral concerted action within the
framework of the United Nations, a principle and an
objective which the Foreign Ministers of the nine
members of the European Community had in mind
when they met on 23 February in Luxembourg and
deemed it necessary to confirm once again their
common stand on the issues in southern Africa. On
that occasion they ranked their support of the right
to self-determination and independence of the peoples
in Rhodesia and Namibia as one of their basic
positions.

56. I should also like to thank Professor Daniel
Moynihan, who has just left us, and Ambassador
Tapley Bennett, Jr., of the United States, who presided
with such competence and distinction over the Council
in February.
57. The letter addressed to us by the distinguished
Foreign Minister of the People’s Republic of Mozambique and his important statement yesterday in the
Council make abundantly clear the danger of the policy
and aggressive actions of the minority regime of
Southern Rhodesia to the peace and security of
Mozambique, of Africa, and of the whole world.

52. Italy will continue to play an active role among
the nine member States of the European Community
for the implementation of the principle and objective
I have just mentioned. We are therefore convinced
that under present circumstances aid to Mozambique
should be granted by all Member States. in view of
these objectives which we share with all the African
countries. In this connexion, we welcome the decisions
taken at Kingston as early as May 1975 by the heads
of Government of the Commonwealth in a show of
solidarity which sets a significant example morally
and politically, not just economically.

58. The facts presented and the convincing arguments developed yesterday by the Foreign Minister
of Mozambique and by other participants in the
debate have introduced important new elements which
help us to understand better the political and economic
realities in southern Africa. This will without doubt
help the Council to take the necessary measures to
meet the grave situation created in this part of the
world.

53. We are perfectly aware of Mozambique’s selfimposed hardship today. We are aware, as well, of the
particular and difficult circumstances which that
country finds itself in after a long period when all its
resources had been diverted from development and
expansion because of the long war for independence.
All this throws light on the tremendous sacrifices
which the people of Mozambique is prepared‘to endure
further in favour of a cause ‘which transcends its
national borders and its national interests, since it is
a common cause of the African countries and, I dare
say, of the world community as a whole-in short, of
the United Nations.

I

59. The Romanian delegation believes that it is only
natural that the Council should react with speed,
effectiveness and unanimity to the appeal from the
Government of Mozambique for assistance in its
efforts for the peaceful and independent development
of its country.
60. The persistence and tolerance of the remnants of
colonialism, the policy of apartheid and racial dis- . .,
crimination are so many permanent sources of tension
:..
causing acts of aggression and jeopardizing intemational peace and security. It is high time for such
~‘1
anachronisms-anachronisms, that is, when compared
_,
with the present level of contemporary law and
morality-to be completely eliminated. That is why,
in the view of the Romanian delegation, the measures
that should be taken to help the young, independent
State of Mozambique are a matter of principle for
the entire international community and therefore
should be conceived and placed within the broadest
possible context of the concern of the Security Council
about the situation in southern Africa.

54. Of course I could have said much more on the item
under consideration, but I have tried to be as brief
as possible, following the recommendations to us by
the Secretary-General, by the representative of
Tanzania and by you, .Mr. President. 1~hope, nevertheless, that I have explained clearly enough the
essential reasons that have led Italy with 10 other
members of the Council to sponsor the draft resolution
contained in document S/12013. As did our colleague
fromTanzania, who, as usual, so eloquently introduced
the text, we commend it to the unanimous approval
of the Council.

61. In accordance with the principles of its foreign
policy, the Socialist Republic of Romania has
consistently fought for the recognition of and respect
for the right of peoples to independence and
against the policy of racial discrimination and crpart-

55. Mr. DATCU (Romania) (interpretation
from
French): Mr. President, it is a particular pleasure for
me and for my delegation to congratulate you most
sincerely on your assumption of the presidency of the
7

heid. My country has always favoured the recognition

assistance to the peoples struggling to recover their
independence, to consolidate their national sovereignty
and to ensure their independent economic develop‘merit. Faithful to its foreign policy principles, Romania
takes firm action to implement
the United Nations
resolutions, including resolutions on economic sanctions, with a view to putting an end to colonial domination and the policy of racial discrimination.

of the right of the people of Zimbabwe to self-government and to the establishment of a Government which
would reflect the composition
of the population
of
that Territory,
guarantee broad democratic liberties
and ensure the country’s accession to independence.
62. The Security Council cannot disregard the actions
of the racist regimes in southern Africa reflected in
the breach of fundamental principles which enshrine
the right to self-determination
and independence of
colonial countries and peoples. The Council cannot
disregard the persistent violation of United Nations
resolutions relating to the elimination of racist domination in Southern Rhodesia, in despite of the legitimate
aspirations. to freedom and independence
of the
people of Zimbabwe, who represent the vast majority
of the people of this non self-governing
territory.
It is necessary, therefore, at this stage in the situation,
for the Council to condemn resolutely the aggressive
actions-whatever
their nature-of Southern Rhodesia
against the People’s Republic of Mozambique.

67. My country therefore whole-heartedly
supports
the decision of the People’s Republic of Mozambique
to apply economic sanctions against Southern Rhodesia and expresses its conviction
that this act will
contribute
to the urgently needed solution of the
political situation in that Territory.
68. I should like to reaffirm here the militant solidarity
of socialist Romania with the struggie of the people
of Mozambique
for the defence of their national independence and to overcome the difficulties which are
resulting from the fuI1 application
of the economic
sanctions imposed by the United Nations against
Southern Rhodesia. The links of solidarity and fraternal
assistance between Romania and Mozambique
were
established and consolidated
in the course of the
struggle of the people of Mozambique
for the independence of their fatherland. Last year, on the very
day of the independence
of Mozambique,
our two
countries and Governments
established diplomatic
relations. The development of these relations will, as
the President of my country stressed at the time,
without any doubt “contribute
to the independent
economic and social expansion of each country and fall
within the framework of the general struggle against
imperialist,
colonialist and neo-colonialist
domination
and the struggle being waged by the peoples of the
world for the total elimination
of all national and
social oppression”.

63. With regard to assistance measures to be taken,
we should take account of the foreseeable economic
consequences of the courageous decision of the
Mozambique
Government
to close the border with
Southern Rhodesia. The adoption of international
assistance measures is entirely in keeping with the
provisions of the Charter and United Nations resolutions and is particularly necessary because the Government of Mozambique
only a few months after its
independence finds itself involved in a vast programme
of reconstruction of its national economy, an economy
to which so much damage was done during the
centuries of colonial domination.
64. We consider that these are sufficient reasons to
adopt urgent assistance measures for Mozambique and
also, to this end, to establish appropriate machinery
with the support of international
economic bodies and
the specialized agencies. In this regard the Foreign
Minister of Mozambique
submitted to us reasonable
and justified
assessments and suggestions which
deserve the complete attention of the Security Council, the Secretary-General
and the bodies concerned.

69. In conclusion, I should like to repeat the appeal
made here by our colleague Ambassador Salim of
Tanzania and by other representatives that the draft
resolution of the 11 countries which we have representatives that the draft resolution of the 11 countries
which we have before us should be adopted unanimously.

65. The Romanian Government considers that it is
necessary for the Secretary-General
to be authorized
to act together with the specialized agencies and the
United Nations bodies concerned in order to take
appropriate measures for the immediate assistance of
the People’s Republic of Mozambique
in its application of sanctions against Rhodesia. The positive
experience accumulated by the Secretary-General
in
similar situations, and also the possibility of using the
machinery of the United Nations, are guarantees for
the effective organization
of the assistance to be
granted on the basis of the resolution to be adopted
by the Council.

70.

Mr.

HUANG
Hua (China) (f-anslurion from
The Chinese delegation
welcomes the
participation
of the’Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the
People’s Republic of Mozambique inthe discussion of
the Council. Yesterday we listened to his statement,
.which will no doubt be. very helpfuI.to the Council in
its present deliberations.
Chinese):

71. The Chinese delegation would now like to make
the following remarks on the question under discussion. In recent years, the speedy and vigorous
development
of the national liberation movement in
southern Africa and the armed struggle victoriously
carried out. by the Zimbabwe. people have landed the
Southern Rhodesian racist regime in unprecedented
isolation. In order to wage a death-bed struggle, the

66. My country,
Romania,
has always given
assistance and will continue to give every possible
8

Southern Rhodesian racist regime is stepping up its
counter-revolutionary
dual tactics. While harping on
its old tune about “reconciliation”,
it is intensifying
its encirclement
and suppression of the Zimbabwe
people’s armed forces. Of late, under the pretext of
going in hot pursuit of guerrillas, it has even intruded
into Mozambique,
launched attacks on the Mozambican villages, declared its border areas “operational
areas” and clamoured that “such action conforms
with international
law and custom”. This is extreme
truculence and constitutes a threat and provocation
against Mozambique
as well as a serious encroachment on the state sovereignty of Mozambique.
These
acts of aggression by the Southern Rhodesian racist
regime have aroused the indignation and condemnation
of just public opinion in the world.
72. After prolonged armed struggles, the courageous
Mozambican people have finally won the great victory
of national independence.
To defend their fruits of
victory and to support the Zimbabwe people in their
struggles for independence and liberation, the Mozambican people have been carrying on tit-for-tat struggles
against the Smith racist regime. Not long ago, President
Samora Machel of Mozambique
declared the closure
of all its borders with Southern Rhodesia, prohibition
of all forms of communication
with Southern Rhodesia,
confiscation
of all goods of Southern Rhodesia in
Mozambique
and full implementation
of the United
Nations resolution on the sanctions against Southern
Rhodesia. President Samora Machel also called on the
people of the whole country to mobilize themselves
and be ready at all times to wipe out the enemy
intruders. These righteous acts have received forceful
support from the African States.
73. As everyone knows, a handful of white racists
in Southern
Rhodesia has cruelly exploited
and
oppressed the Zimbabwe people for a long time. The
armed struggle waged by the Zimbabwe people to
. overthrow the dark rule of the white racist regime and
to win national independence and liberation represents
an entirely just cause. It is only natural that the
African countries actively support their struggle in
accordance with the spirit of the Charter of the
Organization
of African Unity. The fact that the
Southern Rhodesian
reactionary
authorities
outra-

geously encroached upon the territory of a sovereign
African State on the pretext of going in hot pursuit
of Zimbabwe guerrillas reveals their ferocious features
as the enemy of the African people. The acts of the
Southern Rhodesian racist regime, which go against
the tide of history, can only arouse the stronger
resistance of the Zimbabwe and other African peoples
and will finally lead to that regime’s complete
destruction.
74. The Chinese Government
and people fully
sympathize with and firmly support the Mozambican
people in their just struggle and strongly condemn
the Smith racist regime’s aggression against Mozambique. We hold that the United Nations should give
assistance to the Mozambican
people in their just
struggle, solemnly condemn the Southern Rhodesian
white racist regime for its aggression against Mozambique, expand and strengthen the sanctions against
Southern Rhodesia and take all measures to guarantee
the implementation
of the United Nations resolution
on sanctions against Southern Rhodesia.
75. Africa belongs to the African people. Nobody
can alter the excellent situation in which the African
people are winning successive victories in their struggle
for national liberation. Of course, the imperialists and
racists are still waging a death-bed struggle. The Soviet
social-imperialists
are hatching new schemes in the
wake of their armed intervention
in Angola in an
attempt to interfere in and undermine the national
liberation movement in southern Africa. But the raging
torrents of the African peoples’ struggle against
colonialism,
imperialism
and hegemonism
are irresistible, no matter how tortuous their road of advance
may be. Final victory certainly belongs to the people
of Mozambique,
Zimbabwe and the whole of Africa.
76. The Chinese delegation is in favour of the draft
resolution in document S/12013 and hopes that the
Council will adopt it as speedily as possible.
The meeting

rose at 12.25 p.m.
Notes

’ Official Records of tlfe General Assembly, Thirtieth
Plenary Meetings, 2370th meeting.

Session,

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore
or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
auprts de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
B : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAK

IIOjIY’lllTh

&%‘SALHWR

JWHLX
mum.t

OpraHw3aqHH

ZI3AAHHII

OPrAHEi

06’beAUHeHHbIS

3AqHIl

Harlwfi

OKbEAUHEHHI>IIX

MOH(H0
HCLBOJWT~

B KHWXWblX
Mara=
cnpaaxw
06 WsnaHnax
B
Opraxu3aquff
O~WZAUH~HH~IX

HaxnG.

w arew~cmax
BO BC~X pationax
pupa.
KH~CKHOM nmra3me
wnw nmuwre
no anpecy:
CeKqm
no npo~axe
u3AaiiuR,
Hero-Fioprc
unu XCeHesa.

COMO

CONSEdUIR

PUBLICACIONES

HAlKHFi

KynUTb

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes de1 mundo. Cons&e
a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations.

New

York

00300

83-60801-May

1984-2.200
