UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1998/8
25 March 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3866th meeting of the Security Council, held on 25 March 1998, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The question
concerning Haiti", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council recalls its resolution 1141 (1997) of
28 November 1997 and welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti (MIPONUH) of
20 February 1998 (S/1998/144).
"The Security Council commends the achievements of the SecretaryGeneral's Representative in Haiti, the United Nations staff, and the
MIPONUH civilian police officers in Haiti. It notes with appreciation the
important contributions made by the United Nations Development Programme
and the International Civilian Mission in Haiti (MICIVIH).
"The Security Council welcomes the progress made by the Haitian people
towards the establishment of a durable democratic and constitutional
system. It also welcomes the sustained improvement in security and
stability in Haiti. The Security Council agrees with the Secretary-General
in his assessment of the Haitian National Police (HNP) as expressed in his
recent report (S/1998/144). It also welcomes the significant progress made
by the HNP as mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General and
expresses confidence that MIPONUH's activities will continue to build on
the achievements of previous United Nations missions in Haiti and to
further the professional development of the HNP. The Security Council
expresses the hope that HNP achievements will be matched by progress in
other areas, including the development of a functioning judicial system,
and in this regard, recognizes the importance of judicial reform.
"The Security Council reaffirms that further assistance to the Haitian
National Police, should it be needed, should be provided with the full
support of the international community through United Nations specialized
agencies and programmes, and through international and regional
organizations and by interested Member States.

98-08032 (E)

250398

/...

S/PRST/1998/8
English
Page 2

"The Security Council reaffirms also that the people and Government of
Haiti bear the ultimate responsibility for national reconciliation, the
maintenance of a secure and stable environment, the administration of
justice, and the reconstruction of their country. It emphasizes the
importance of Haiti’s continuing to settle its contentious issues
peacefully and democratically. It expresses the view that a prompt
solution of these issues in Haiti will facilitate economic development and
the provision of international assistance. It fully supports the
Secretary-General's appeal to Haitian authorities and political leaders to
resolve Haiti's political impasse so the country can move forward and
welcomes current efforts undertaken to this end.
"The Security Council stresses that it is of the utmost importance
that the next parliamentary and local elections in Haiti be conducted in a
free, fair and transparent manner in order to allow the broadest possible
voter participation, consistent with Haitian law. It notes that a
substantial effort will be required to ensure the success of these vitally
important elections. The Security Council looks forward to the steps taken
by the Government of Haiti in this regard and urges the international
community to be ready to provide electoral assistance as may be requested.
"The Security Council recognizes that economic rehabilitation and
reconstruction constitute the major tasks facing the Haitian Government and
people and stresses that a sustained commitment by the international
community and the international financial institutions, as well as the
relevant United Nations bodies, to assist and support the economic, social
and institutional development in Haiti is indispensable for long-term
sustainable development in the country. It commends the efforts of those
organizations and countries currently involved in meeting these needs and
encourages them to coordinate their activities.
"The Security Council will remain seized of this matter."

-----
