UNITED NATIONS / NATIONS UNIES

.SECURITY .COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
FOURTH YEAR

27
··0.

47Ath MEETING: 10 MAY 1949
N·
..,....--424~eme-SEAN--C-E: -10M-AI----19-49--~

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS
·QUATRIEME ANNEE

LAKE SUCCESS, NEW YORK

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES

Four hundred and twenty-fow.-th meeting

Quatre cent vingt-quatrieme seance
Pagls

Pag.

1. Provisional agenda
2. Statements by the representatives of
Argentina and Canada and by the President. . . . • . • . . • . . • • . • • . • • . . . . . • • . • • .
3. Adoption of the agenda
4. Appointment of a Governor of the Free
Territory of Trieste (continued) ••.•.
5. Communication from the President ••.

1
1
2
2
10

1. Ordre du jour provisoire •..••.••.••.
2. Decla!C',tions faites par le:; representants
de l'A"-entine, du Canada et par le
Preside.ri.t . . . • • . • . . . • . . . . . • . . . . . • • .
3. Adoption de l'ordre du jour. •• •• .••••
4. Designation d'un Gouvemeur du Territoire libre de Trieste (suite) ••....••••
S. Communication du President ••. . . . . . .

Relevant documents not reproduced in full in the texts of the lTleetings
of the Security Council are published in monthly supplements to the Official
Records.
All United Natio~M documents are designated by symbols, i.e., capital
letters combined with figures, Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference
to a United Nations document.
Les documents pertinents qui ne sont pas reproduits in extenso dans le
texte des seances du Conseil de securite sont publies dans des supplements
mensuels aux Proces-verbaux officiels.
Les documents des Nations Unies portent tous une cote, qui se compose
de lettres maluscules et de chiffres. La simple mention d'une cote dans
un texte sig1tifie q'llil s'agit d'un document des Nations Unies.

1
1
2
2
10

NATIONS UNIES

UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES-VERBAUX OF"FICIELS
QUAT~m ANNEE
No 27

FOURTH YEAR

No. 27

FOURTH MEETING

QUATRE CEl'4"T VlNGT-QUATRIEME
SEANCE

Held at. Lake Success, New York,
on Tuesday,lO May 1949, at 5 p.nt.

Tenue a Lake Success, New-York,
le mardi 10 mai 1949, a 17 heures;

President: Mr. J. CHAUVEL (France).

President: M. J. CHAUVEL (France).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, France, Norway, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom, United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba, Egypte,
France, N orvege, Republique socialiste sovietique
d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

1. Provisional agenda (S/Agenda 424)

1. Ordre da jour provisoire
(SI Agenda 424)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Appointment of a Governor of the Free Territory of Trieste.

1. Adoption de l'ordre CU jour.
2. Designation d'un Gouvcrneur du Territoire
libre de Trieste.

FOUR HUNDRED AND TWENTY-

2. Statements by the repregentatives of 2. Declarations faites par les representants de I'Argentine, dn Canada et
Argentina and Canada and by the
par le President
President
THE PRESIDENT (translated front French):
The T""1lresentative of Argentina' has asked to
speak before the provisional agenda is considered.

Le PRESIDENT: Le representant de l'Argentine
ayant exprime le desir de prendre la parole avant'
l'examen de l'ordre du lour provisoire, je la lui
donne.

Mr. ARCE (Argentina) (translated from
M: ARCE (Argentine) (tradttit de Z'espagnoZ) :
Span-ish) : Before turning to the questions which Avant d'aborder les questions que le CODseil doit
the Security Council is called upon to consider etudier aujourd'hui ~ et comme je me trouve
today, and since I feel it is appropriate for me _ en mesure de parler de cette affaire du fait, que
-to speak of this matter because I have :!iot per- - je n'y ai pas personnellement pris part - qu'il me
sonally been connected with it, I wish to remind soit permis de rappeler au Conseil, qui se reunit
the Council at this meeting, the first held since pour la prenierefois' depuis la' publication de
the Four Power agreement to lift the blockade l'accord intervenu entre les _quatre grandes Puisof Berlin_ was announced, of the importance of sances en vue de leve. leblocu.. de Berlin, l'im,L'1e work of the non-permanent members of the portance des effortsentrepris it fads par les
Council in Paris and of the co-operation which membres non permanents du Consellainsi que
theyqbtained from the western Powers and from la cooperation qu!ils ont re<.;ue desPuissances
theSov5et Union, 'by virtue of which it was occidentales et de I'Unio11 sovietique" grace it
almost possible to reach a solution.
quoi il a presque etepossibied'arr:iver
une
sclution.
'.
. .While it -is true that a solution was not reached, . I1 est exact qu'on n'a pas abouti it une solution;
It cannot be· denied that the, moral influence of mais il est indiscutable que la tentative des memthe st~ps taken by the non-permanent members bres non· permanents du Conseil ainsi que la colof thIS Council, .with the coliaboratiun 1 have laboration que J'ai rappelee ont en une portee
mentioned, was of· great importance in the eyes morale considerable sur l'opinion' mondiale.. Il
of world public opinion. For my part I consider me semble que cette tentative a eu aussi del'ini-

a

h

a.

that it was an important factor in the achieve- portance parce qu'eUe a permis d'aboutir une
ment of the happy solution which has been an- beureuse solution: en effet, l'Union sovietique et
nounced, now that the Soviet Union and the three les trois Puissances que l'on qualifie generalePowers uS1.lally referred to as the western Powers, ment d'occidentales: les Etats-Unis, le Royaumenamely the United States, the United Kingdom Uni et la France, ont fait savoir que la situation
and France have made it known that the Berlin de Berlin allait etre regIee et que leurs Ministres
situation is about to be settled, and that direct des Affaires etrangeres aUaient, tres prochaine~
negotiations between the four Foreign Ministers ment, entamer des negociations directes.
cOncerned win be initiated shortiy.
J'ai tenua souligner a cette occasion - tno.
On this occasion I, who frequently criticize the
ineffectiveness of the work Qf the Security Coun- qui critique si souvent le Conseil de securite pour
. cit, wish to stress the moral importance of the le peu d'effiC"cl.cite de ses travaux -l'importance
measures taken in this question by the six non- morale qu'a eu, dans cc cas, l'initiative prise par"
permanent members, in collaboration with the les six membres non permanents avec la collaboration des membres permanents du ConseiI.
permanent members of the Council.
THE PRESIDENT (trathrlated from French):
I feel certain that my colleagues would wish to
join me in paying tribute to the efforts exerted
by the former President of the Coun~l, Mr.
Bramuglia. These efforts, tnade with the understanding of the permanent and non-permanent
members' of tlie Council, opened up the possibility
which we later realized and which has led us to
the,solutioit'which gives us such great satisfaction
today,
.
General MeNAUGHTON (Canada): As one of
the non-permanent members of the Security
Council to whom reference has been made in this
connexion, I should' just like to express our appreciation for what the President has said, and also
to take advantage of this oc<:asion' to say what
a privilege and what a satisfaction' it was to us
to serve, at that time, under the' distinguished
leadership of Mr. Bramuglia of Argentina.

Le PRESIDENT: Je tiens pGar assure que mes
collegues se joindronta moi pC'" " rendre hommage a l'utilite des effortsdth)ioyes par l'ancien
President du Conseil, M. Bramuglia. Ces efforts,
poursuivis avec le concom's des membres non
permanents et permanents du Conseil, ont ouvert
la voie dans laquelle nous nous sommes par la
suite engages et qui nous a amenes a la solution
dout nous nous rejouissons aujourd'hui.

3. Adoption of the agenda

3. Adoption de l'ordre du jOlW

Le general MeN .UGHTON (Canada) (traduit
de l' ang1ais): En tant que membre non permanent du Conseil de securite, un de ces' membres
non permanents qui viennent d'etre mentionnes, je
voudrais remercier le President pour les paroles
qu'il vient de prononcer et saisir aussi cette occasion pour dire que ce fut pour moi un privilege
et un plaisir de sieger alors sous la presidence
eminente de M. Bramuglia.

The agenda was adopted.

L' ordre du jour est adopte.

4. Appointment of. a Governor of the . 4. Designation .d'nn Gouverneur
Free Territory of Trieste (continued) , du Territoire Iibre de Triesie (,uite),
Le PrtESIDENT: 'Le point -2 .de notre ordre du
. THE PRESIDENT (translated from . French) :
As point 2 was placed on our agenda at t~e request jour ayant ete inscrit a la. demande de l'Union
of the representative of the Union of Soviet des Republiques socialistes sovietiques, je donnt~
, Socialist Republics, I shall call upon him to speak. la parole au representant de ce pays.
M. MALIK (Union des Republiqnes socialistes
Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated/rom Russian) : The USSR dele- sovietiques) (traduit du russe) : La delegation de
gation considers that it is too long-:-more'than a l'URSS .estime que le Conseil de securite est
month now-since the Security Council last met. reste trop longtemps - plus d'ull mois e~ effet
This" is contrary to the Charter, particularly to - sans se reunir. Celaest contraire a la Chaite,
that Article 'which states that the Security Coun- .et notamment a celui de ses Articles qui prevoit
cilshall function continuously; it. is .equally con- que le Conseil doit sieger en permanence; cela
trary. to the rules of procedure of the Security esteontraire egalement au reglement interieur
Council. In view of the fact that the question of ' du ConseiI de securite. Etant donne que la nomithe appointment of a Governor for the Free Terri- nation d'un gouverneur pour le Territo~re libre
tory of Trieste is an important one, and has great de Trieste est une question importante etqu'elle
international. politicaL significance, the USSR a une grande portee internationale, la delegation
delegation thought it expedient to ask the Presi- de l'URSS a juge utile de prier le President du
dent of the Security Council [S/1251] to call a Conseil de securite [S/1251] de convoquer celui.
meeting for the consideration of that question. ci pour examiner ce probleme.
Les discussions qui ont eu lieu a.. ce sujet au
The discusr;ion o£thisquestion in the Security
Council [411th and 412th meetings] h:as shown Conseil de securite [411emeet 412eme sean'ces]
that the Governments of the United States, the ont montre que les Gouvernements <les EtatsUnited Kingdom and France . are bent on openly Unis, du Royaume-Uniet de .1aFrance sont en
violating the TreCity of Peace with Italy, are try- train de .violer ouvertement le Traitede paix
ing to. bring about a revision,of that Treaty and, avec l'Italie, err cherchant a le f:tite reviser et en'
in ~ontraYention thereof, ·to ·unite Trieste· with s'efforc;ant d~ rattacher Trieste a l'Italie, contraiItaly. The . representatives of. those.' three 'Stat~s rement al1X· dispositions '1u Traite. Les delegato the Security Council are doing their best to tions de ces trois paysau Conseil de securite font
pr~vent the', adoption of a unanimous" decision tout leu! 'possible pour empecher ·ce· dernier de
.

~~""'-'.':"~_~;_""""",-

.

..•. ~:", __ .~ __ .~~.",,_~~_._, .,;_.~
........ ""'"c........L~~"'---'--'_.,""_,_'.~.
__"....._•.• '•.._-..._.• ~,.~_ •._..... _.

It is common knowledge that the Treaty of
Peace with Italy imposes upon the Security
Council certain international obligations, and bestows upon it certain functions, as follows:

prendre une decision concertee sur la nomination
d'un gouverneur pOUl Trieste. Ces trois pays
enfreignent non seulement le Tr~lte de pttix avec
l' Ualie, mais aussi les decisions concertees qui
ont ete prises par le Conseil des Ministres des
Affaires etrangeres au sujet du Territcire libre
de Trieste.
'
On sait que le Traite de paix avec l'Italie impose au Conseii de securite certaines reSponsabilites d'ordre international et lui confie certaines
fonctions qui consistent notamment:

1. To appoint a Governor for the Free Territory of Trieste i

1. A designer un g'Ouverneur pour le Territoire libre de Trieste;

2. To assure the integrity and independence
of the Territory, and the observance of the Territory's Statute, adopted by the twenty-one States
of Peace with Italy at
silmatories
to the Treatv
b
•
the Paris Peace Conference i

2. A veiller cl. l'independance et cl. l'integrite
territoriale de Trieste, tout en respectant le Statut
adopte l-0ur ce Territoire par les vingt et un Etats
qui ont signe le Traite de paix avec l'Italie cl. la
Conference de Paris;

in the Security Council on the qu~stion of th(l
appointment of a Govl,;i"tlor for Tneste. T!lose
three States are bent on violating both the Treaty
of Peace with Italy and the unanimous decisions
of the Council of Foreign Ministers on the question of the Free Territory of Trieste.

3'. To protect basic human rights, and to en3. A proteger les droits fondamentaux de
sure the maintenance of public order and security l'homme et cl. assurer l'ordre et ·la securite dans
le Territoire libre de Trieste.
in the Free Territory of Trieste.
These are the important and responsible func- I Telles sont les fonctions importantes et lourdes
tions incumbent upon the Security Council under de responsabilitcs que le Traite de paix a'Vec l'Itathe Treaty of Peace with Italy. The aforemen- lie confie au Conseil de securite. On sait, en efIet,
tiol"jd provisions regarding the Free Territory of que les dispositions relatives au Territoire libre
T~1~ste were, as we know, included in the Treaty de Trieste que je viens de mentionner ont ete
vI Peace with Italy in accordance with the deincorporees au Trait6 de paix, conformement a
cision taken by the Council of Foreign Ministers la resolution adoptee par le Conseil des Ministres
on 12 December 1946 at the session in New York. des Affaires etrangeres, le 12 decembre 1946, a
That decision reads as follows:
New-York. Cette resolution disait notamment:
"The representatives of the Union of Soviet
"Les representants de l'Union des Republiques
Socialist Republics, the United States of America, socialistes sovietiques, des Etats-Unis d'Amethe United Kingdom and France, convened on rique, du Royaume-Uni et de la France, qui se
12 December 1946 at New York as a Council of sont reunis a New-York le 12 decembre 1949 en
Foreign Ministers, have agreed that their Govern- Couseil des Ministres des Affaires etrangeres, sont
ments shall take all the necessary measures to convenus que leurs Gouvernements prendraient
ensure the earliest possible appointment of a toutes les mesures necessaires pour assurer, dans
Governor for the Free Territory of Trieste in le plus bref delai, la. designation d'un gouveraccordance ~th the provisions of the draft neur pour le Territoire libre de Trieste, et ce
permanent statute,. in order ~o ~nsure his apRoi~t- dans les conditions prevues par le.projet de statut
ment by the Secunty CounCIl snnultaneously WIth permanent, afin que cette nomInation ait lieu
the entry into force of the Treaty of Peace with, en meme temps que l'entree·en viguettr du Traite
Italy:'
de paix avec l'Italie."
The provisions of the Treaty of Peace with
Les clauses du Traite de paix avec l'Italie et
Italy and the decisions of the Council of Foreign les decisions du Conseil des Ministres des AffaiMini,sters, leave no 40ubt whatsoever that the res etrangeres indiquent clairement que le Conseil
Security Council is bound to fulfil its functions desecurite est tenu de s'acquitter des fonct:ons"
of appointing .a Governor for Trieste and of dont il a ete charge en ce qui concerne la nomina~nsuring the establis~ment of a democratic regime tion d'un gouverneur pour Trieste et qu'll doit
In the Free Territory.
assurer la creation d'un regime democratique.
dans le Territoire libre. ..
.
un
On
sait
que
le
Traite
de
paix
avec
I'Italie
est
As everyone knows, the Treaty of. Peace with
Italy is a multilateral international agreement, traite multilateral qui impose des obligations
which 'imposes definite· obligau~}!'~s upon the strictes au Conseil de securite. Et cependam,·!es
Security Council. Nevertheless, the United States, Etats-Unis, le Royaume-Uni et la France cher..;
the. United Kingdom and France are trying to chent a faire annuler celles des clauses .dece
reyisf. those. provisions of the· Treaty of Peace Tciite quipbrtent sur le Territoire Iibre de
WIth Italy which concern the Free Territory of Trieste. Ces pays veulent en eff.2t que ces clauses,
~rieste. They want those provisions of the Treaty, qui ont pOl1rtant ete signees par vingt et un· Eta:ts,
sI~ned by twenty-one States,· to .be revised at the soient annuleespar la volonte de quelque trois
WIsh of. three or four Governments. The hollow- ou quatre Gouvernements. Ces pretentions sOnt
ness of these claims is so obvious thatit is un- si peu fondees qu'll est inutile de s~y etendre da··
necessary to dwell on the matter in detail, vantage. En effet, .on en a suffisamment parte
~specially as enough has already been said about
auxprececlentes seances du Conseil de securite,
It at previous meetings of the· Security Council, air. 1'0n a fait la lumiere sur lesrhanceuvresde
"YheD: the matlceuvres of the Governments of these ces pays qui cherchent cl. se derober aux oblithree States ·to. repudiate the fulfilment of the gations qu'its avaient assumees aux temes du
obligations assumed by·them under the Treaty of Traite de paix avec FItalie.
Peace with Italy, were clearly exposed.

The Treaty of Peace with Italy retains its full
force, and none of the States .signatories to that
Trflaty has the right to refuse to fulfil it. That
is true of an the articles of the Treaty, including
the articles relating to the Free Territory of
Trieste and the appointment of a Governor for
that Territory'.
The ruling circles in the United States and
the United Kingdom, which are bent on carrying
out an aggressive policy and forming militarist
and aggressive groups, are doing their utmost to
attract as many ~tates as possible into these blocs.
Flirting with Italy for this purpose, in April
1948, on the eve of the Italian elections, they
undertook a manreuvre which resulted in a proposal to' the Government of the USSR that a
conference be convened for the purpose of revising the Treaty of Peace with Italy and handing
uver Trieste to that country. That is 'A-hy the
United States and the United Kingdom, in their
endeavours to draw Italy into their militarist and
aggressive bloc, are sabotaging in every way the
appointment of a Governor for Trieste by the
Security Council, as provided for in the Treaty
of Peace with Italy and in the decision of the
Council of Foreign Ministers.
Relying upon Italy's weakness, the AngloAmericans are making plans to turn Trieste into
a permanent base for their armed forces in the
Balkans, under cover of the fiction of formally
handing it over to Italy. This mock transfer is
also needed by the United States, the United
Kingdom and France to cover up the unseemly
trading which is taking place amongst these three
States on the question of the former Itali~
colonies. They need a 3creen to conceal t~eIr
avaricious intentions in regard to the Itahan
colonies. By making a gesture of a so-called
transfer of Trieste to Italy, the United Kingdom
and France are trying to facilitate the acquisition
of considerable parts of the former Italian
colonies ill Africa. and the United States, by
opposing the estabLhm~nt ?f int~r.national.t:usteeship over those colomes, IS devIsmg avartCIOus
schemes to extend its influence and hegemony
over all the former Italian colonies by bringing
them .into the notorious Marshall Plan, as Mr.
Dulles, a member of the United States delegation,
recently stated in the Political Committee of the
General Assembly.l

Ce Traite de paix est toujours en vigueur, et
aucun des Etats signataires n'a le droit de le
violer. Cela s'appliqu~ a toutes ses clauses, et notamment a celles qui portent sur le Territoire libre
de Trieste et sur la nomination d'un gouverneur
pour ce Territoire.
Les milieux dirigeants des Etats"Unis et du
Royaume-Uni, qui se sont mis a pratiquer une
politique d'agression et a creer des blocs militaires
a tendances bellicistes, cherchent par tous les
moyens a entrainer dans ces blocs le plus grand
nombre possible de pays. En s'efforc;ant de gagner
les sympathies de l'Italie, ils ont entrepris, des
avril 1948, c'est-a-dire it la veille des elections
italiennes, une manreuvre qui consistait a proposer au Gouvernement de l'URSS la convocation d'une conference, afin de reviser le Traite
de paix avec l'Italie et de transferer a ce pays le
Territoire de Trieste. C'est precisement parce
qu'ils veulent entrainer I'Italie dans leur bloc
milit-ase &. tendances agressives, que les EtatsUnis et le Royaume-Uni cherchent a empecher
par tous moyens le Conseil de securite de nommer un gouverneur pour Trieste, alors que cette
nomination est prevue par le Tro..:.6 de paix avec
I'Italie et par une resolution du Conseil des
Ministres d.es Affaires etrangeres.
Tablant sur la faiblesse de l'Italie, les auteurs
du plan anglo-americain esperent transformer
Trieste en une base permanc::nte de leurs forces
militaires dans les Balkans, grace a un transfert
fictif de souverainete a I'Italie. D'autre part, les
Etats-Unis, le Royaume-Uni et la France ont
besoin de ce transfert fictif pour camoufler le
marchandage peu elegant auque1 ils se sont livres
it propos des anciennes colonies italiennes. lIs g'en
servent, en dIet, pour dissimuler les velleites
agressives qu'ils nourrissent a l'egard de ces colonies. En offrant a I'Italie le "transfert" de Trieste,
le Royaume-Uni et la France cherchent en realite
it s'emparer plus facilement d'une grancJe partie
des colonies italiennes en Afrique. Quant aux
Etats-Unis, its s'opposent it l'institution d'un regime international de tutelle sur ces colonies
parce qu'its esperent soumettre toutes les colonies
italiennes it leur influence et it leur domination
en etendant it ces territoires le fameux Plan
Marshall, ainsi que l'a declare recemment M. Dulles, membre de la delegation des Etats-Unis a
la PretniereCommission de l'Assemblee generale1 •

A la suite de l'examen de la question des coloAs a result of the discussion of the question of
the Italian colonies in the General Assembly,2 the .nies2 italiennes qui ont eu lieu a l'Assemblee geneexistence of such an ~.greement on the Italian rale , tout homme honriete et dote de bon sens
colonies among the United States, the United a pu se rendre compte qu'il existait une entente
Kingdom arid France has become obvious to all entre les Etats-Unis, le Royaume-Uni et la France
honest and sensible persons. It is well known how au sujet de ces colonies. Etpourtant, les propaoften Anglo-Americanpropaganda, by falsifying gandistes anglo-americains, qui s'attachent a dethe real state of affairs, tries to lay the blame former la realite, cherchent bien souvent a reon the USSR, alleging that the position taken jeter .les accusations sur l'URSS en affirmant
by the USSR is preventing; unan.imous decisions que l'attitude adoptee par cette derniere empeche
on a ntimber of problems, mc1udmg the problem tcute decision concertee SU1' un certain nombre
de problemes, et notamment sur la question des
of the Italian colunies.
colo:Jies italienrtes.
L'examen de cette question a l'AssembIeegeneThe consideration of the. question of the Italian
colonies by the General Assembly has unmasked, ralea revele les veritables intentions de ces
1 See Official Rec()¥ds of the third session of the
General Assembly, Part !I, First Committee, 248th

meeting.
. ~Ibicl., 238th to 257th and 264th meetings.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux de la troisieme session de
l'Assemblee ge.nerale, deuxieme partie, Premiere Commission, 248eme seance.
.
~ Ibid., 238eme 11 257eme et a6geme seances.

these propagandists of the Goebbels school, the
majority of whom are simply trying to transfer
the blame from the guilty to the innocent. The
General Assembly's discussion of the que.stion has
now made it quite clear to the whole world that
the impossibility of reaching w.animous decisions
on a number of post-war problems, including the
problem of the Italian colonies, is due to the
position taken by the United States. the United
Kingdom and France, a position which has nothing in common either with the observance of the
Peace Treaties or with the interests of the United
Nations.
Every objective and honest person can easily
see for himself that, if the problem of the Italian
colonies has not yet been solved, it is not the fault
of the USSR, which has stood and continues to
5tand for the strict and uncompromising observance of international obligations under peace
treaties and international agreements, but of the
United States, the United Kingdom and France.
It is clear to everyone that the impnssibility'
of reaching unanimous decisions on ~11 these
questions is not due to the attitude of the USSR,
but to the violation by the three Powers of the
peace treaties and of the international agreements
concluded at Teheran, Yalta and Potsdam, and
to the aggressive strivings of the ruling circles in
the United States and the United Kingdom to
achieve world mastery.
.
That is how matters actually stand. It in no
way corresponds to what Anglo-American propagandists would have us believe in their attempt
to cover up the policy of the United States and
the United Kingdom, which are bent on violating
the peace treaties both in regard to the question
of the Italian colonies and in regard to that of the
Free .Territory of Trieste..
By preventing a unanimous decision from
being reached on the appointment of a Governor
for the Free Territory of Trieste, the United
States and the United Kingdom also aim at frustrating the establishment of democratic organs of
government and at preventing the establishment
of the democratic regime for the Free Territory
provided for in the Treaty of Peace with Italy.
They are also trying to drag out indefinitely the
occupation of that Territory by Angio-American
troops.
.

propagandistes du genre d«: Goebbels qui cllerchent tout simplement a blanchir les coupables
et a accuser les innocents. Au cours de ce'l debats,
le monde entier a pu se rendre compte que seule
l'attitude adoptee par les Etats-Unis, le RoyaumeUni et la France, attitude qui n'a rien a voir avec
la mise en application des Traites de paix, ni
avec lesinteret& de l'Organisaticn des Nations
Unies, empeche toute decision concertee sur un
certain nombre de -problemes d'apres-guerre, et
notamment sur la question des colonies itaHennes.

In return, they not only demand the observance
of the peace treaties concluded with the countries
of the peoples' democracies, but are even trying
to ta~e advantage of various provisions of those
trea~les to try to interfere flagrantly in the internal
affaIrs of these countries.. They are trying through
every sort of slander and' calumny, to accuse
then;J. of alleged violations of the peace treaties.
This was very clearly demonstrated by the
representatives of the United States and the
United Kingdom· during the second part of the
third session of the General Assembly,S when the

Tout homme honnete et impartial peut se rendre
compte que, si le probleme des colonies italiennes
n'a pas encore ete resolu, la faute en incombe aux
Etats-Unis, au Royaume-Uni et a la France, et
non a l'Union sovietique qui a toujours preconise le respect strict et rigoureux des obligations
qui decoulent des traites de paix et des accords
internationaux.
Tout le monde sait que, s'il est devenu impossible d'aboutir a. une decision concertee sur toutes
ces questions, ce n'est pas &. c.aUse de l'attitude de
l'URS'S, mais bien parce que ces trois Puissances
ont viole les Traites de paix et les accords de
Teheran, de Yalta et de Potsdam et parce que les
milieux dirigeants des Etats-Unis et du RoyaumeUni cherchent a. assouvir lettfsvelleites agressives
et a. dominer le monde.
.
Telle est bien la realite. Elle ne correspond nullement a ce que veulent nous faire croire les propagandistes anglo-americains qui s'efforcent de
dissimuler la politique veritable des Etats-Unis
et du RO)"'dttme-Uni, politique qui consiste a violer
les Traites de paix, tant en ce qui concerne les
colonies italiennes qu'en ce qui concerne le Territoire libre de Trieste.
D'autre part, en empechant la prised'une decision concertee sur la nomination d'un gouverneur pour le Territoire libre de Trieste, les EtatsUnis et le Royaume-Uni cherchent a entraver
la creation d'organes de gouvernement democratiques et a. empecher la creation du regime democratique prevu pour ce Territoire par le Traite
de paix avec l'Italie. Enfin, ces deux Puissances
s'efforcent de prolonger pour une duree indeterminee l'occupation de ce Territoire par les forces
anglo-americaines.
Ainsi donc, les milieux dirigeants des EtatsUnis et du Royaume-Uni poursuivent leur politique d'agression, n'hesitent pas a violer d'une
fa~on flagrante et brutale les engagements que
ces pays ont contractes aux termes du Traite de
paix avec l'Italie.
En revanche, its eX;igent l'observation des
Traites de paix conc1us avec les pays de la democratie populaire, ets~efforcent tneme d'utiliser ·les
dispositions de ces Traites afin d'intervenir brutalement dans les ~.ffaires interi.eures de ces pays.
!Is essaient, au moyen de toutes sortes decalomnies et de mensonges, de les accUser depretendues
violations des Traites de paix.
Cela est apparu d'une fa~on particulierement
nette a la deuxieme partie de la troisieme session
de l'Assemblee generaleS, lorsque les Gotlvernementset lesdelegations des Etats":Unis et du

• See Official Records of the third session of the
General Asse1!"bly, Part 11, 189th, 19Oth, 201st to203rd
plenary meetlngs, and Ad Hoc Politi(:al Commivtee,
.34th to 41st meetings.

• Voir les Documents officiels de la troisiemesessiotl
de l'Assemblee. generale, Deuzieme Partie, 18geme.
190eme, 201eme a 203eme seances plel1ierese!; Comnnssion iPolitique speciale, 34emea la 41eme seances.

Thus, the ruling circles in the United States
and the United Kingdom, in accordance with their
aggressive policy, do not hesitate to enter upon a
cottrse of open and flagrant violation of their
obligations under the Treaty of Peace with Italy.

6
Governments of those countries, in their defence Royaume-Uni, prenant sous leur protection des
of political criminals in Bulgaria and Hungary, gens qui, en Bulgarie et en Hongrie, avaient
tried to accuse those countries of alleged violations commis des crimes politiques ou de droit comof the peace treaties. I need only to refer to the mun, ont accuse ces pays d'avoir viole les Traites
statements of the representatives of the Unite1 de paix. It suffit de citer a ce propos les declaStates and the United Kingdom at the third rations que les representants des Etats-Unis et
session of the General Assembly during the dis- du Royaume-Uni ont faites a la troisieme session
cussion of the question of the Bulgarian and de l'Assemblee generale, lorsque celle-ci a exa..lline
Hungarian criminals and traitors, who were sen- la question des traitres et des criminels bulgares
tenced by the peoples' courts of BUlgaria and et hongrois, condamnes par les tribunaux popuHungary and whom the Governments of the laires de leurs pays respectifs, et lorsque les
United States and the United Kingdom are try- Gouvernements des Etats-Unis et du Royaumeing to defend. Thus, for instance, Mr. Cohen, Uni ont essaye de prendre la de£ense de ces crithe representative or the United States, stated minels. C'est ainsi que M. Cohen, representant
that, as a signatory to the peace treaties, the des Etats-Unis, a declare4 qu'en signant les TraiUnited States had assumed responsibilities to- tes de paix les Etats-Unis ont assume, a l'egard
wards Bulgaria and Hungary from which it could de la Bulgarie et de la Hongrie, une responsanot withdraw.4
biHte dont its ne s~uraient se departir.
Le representant du Royaume-Uni a, lui aU3si,
The United Kingdom representative also had a
great deal to say about his country's obligations parte longuement des engagements que son pays
under the peace treaties, and tried to justify avait contractes aux termes des Traites de paix
Anglo-:American interference in the internal affairs et a essaye, en citant l'article 2 des Traites de
of Bulgaria and Hungary by referring to article 2 paix avec la Bulgarie et la Hongrie, de justifier6 ,
'of the peace treaties with those countries. 6
l'intervention des Etats-Unis et du RoyaumeUni dans les affaires interieures de ces pays.
Telle est 1'attitude hypocrite que les milieux
Such is the hypocritical Anglo-American attitude on the question of the observance of peace anglo-americains ont adoptee en ce qui concerne
treaties. On the one hand, the United States and la mise en application des Traites de paix. D'une
the United Kingdom demand the strict fulfilment part, les Etats-Unis et le Royaume-Uni exigent
of peace treaty obligations by the countries of une observation scrupuleuse des engagements
the peoples' democracies, but, on the other, they assumes en vertu des Traites de paix par les pays
are bent on openly violating the obligations arising de la democratie populaire, d'autre part its violent
ouvertement les engagements qui resultent du
O;lt of the Treaty of Peace with Italy.
Traite de paix avec l'Italie.
It va sans dire qu'on pe saurait approuver cette
Of course, it is impossible to agree with such
an arbitrary inconsistent approach to the fulfil- attitude arbitraire et illll Jique en ce qui concerne
ment of obligations under the peace treaties. The la mise en application des Traites de paix. Ces
peace treaties remain fully in force, and no State derniers demeurent pleinement en vigueur et ausignatory to them. is entitled to refuse to carry cun Etat signataire n'a le droit de se soustraire
them out.
a leur execution.
Le Gouvernement de l'URSS insiste sur l'exeThe Government of the USSR insists upon
strict and uncompromising implementation of all cution stricte et rigoureuse de toutes 'les disposithe provisions of the 'f.reaty of Peace with Italy; tions du Traite de paix avec 1'Italie, y compris
including the provisions concerning the Free celles qui se. rapportent au Territoire libre de
Territory. of Trieste and the appointment of a Trieste, et notamment a la nomination d'un. gouGovernor for that Territory.
verneur pour ce Territoire. .
A la Conference de la paix de Paris, les repre. At the Paris Peace Conference, the representatives of the Soviet Union pointed out'that the sentants de 1'Union sovietique ont deja indique
Free Territory of Trieste could not be considered qU'on ne saurait considerer le Territoire libre de
as a colony or a semi-colony, and also that it Triestecomme un territoire colonial ou semicould not be considered as a military base for colonial, ou comme une base militaire a la dispoany of the Powers. The representatives of the sition de telle ou telle puissance. Les representants
USSR emphasized that Trieste must not 'be del'URSS ont souligoe qu'il n'est pas permis de
turned into a kind of new base for armed forces transfOrmer Trieste en une nouvelle base de
in the Balkans, for thCl.t would- not be compatible forces armees aux portes lies Balkans, car cela ne
either with the interests .of the population of correspond ni aux interets des pqpulations de
Trieste or with the interests of the United Nations. Trieste, ni aceux des Nations Unies. A Paris,
The USSR delegation to the Paris Peace Con- lorsde la Conference de la paix, la delegation de
ference insisted that a really democratic regime l'U;RSS a insiste pour qu'un regime veritablement
sh<?uld -be established in ~e ?!ree Territory Of democratique fut institue sur le Territoire libre
Tneste and that the orgaDlzatlon of government de Trieste et pour que le pouvoir a Trieste fat
in Trieste should be based on democratic pdn- fonde sur des principes democratiques.
clples.
Comme on le sait, le Traite de paix avec l'Italie
. It is well known that the Treaty of Peace with
Italy provides for the establishment of a united prevoit l'institution d'un regime democratique
democratic . regime .throughout the Territory of unifie sur l'ensemble du Territoire de Trieste. 11
Trieste. .It is obvious that only the fulfilment of est evident' que seule l' ~xecution .de toutes les
,'See Official Records of the third session of. the
. General Assembly, Part Il, Ad Hoc Political Committee,
39th meeting.
'
"Ibid., 36th meeting.
"-'--'~ ..'.-'--------';;-------~-~

'Voir lesDocuments officiels de la troisiemesession
de l'Assemblee generale, deusieme partie, Commission i
politique speciale, 3geme seance.'
.
"Ibid., 36eme seance.

I

Tout cela montre combien peu fondee est la
these des Etats-Unis et du Royaume-Uni d'apres
laquelle seul le transfe rt du Territoire libre de
Trieste sous la souverainete de l'Italie permettrait
d'assurer a. la population du Territo ire les droits
essentiels de l'homme et preserverait l'intt~grite
territoriale de Trieste.
Jusqu'a. ces derniers temps, les representants des
Etats-Unis, du Royaume~Uni et de la France ont
cherche a. retarder toute decision sur la nomination
d'un gouverneur pour Trieste, en affirm ant que
les quatre Puissances etaient incapables de se
mettre d'accord sur aucune candidature unique.
Mais l'on sait que, le 17 fevrier 1949 [411eme
seance], la delegation de l'URSS a declare que
son Gouvernement etait pret a. accepter la candidature de M. Fluckiger au poste de gouverneur
dt1 Territoire libre de Trieste. Il est devenu clair
que les representants des Etats-Unis, du RoyaumeUni et de la France ne pouvaient avoir de raison
serieuse de faire trainer en longueur la designation d'un gouverneur, puisque la candidature. de
M. Fluckiger avait ete presentee par le RoyaumeDni et ne soulevait aucune objection de la part
des Etats-Unis et de la France.
Neanmoins, les representants des Etats-Unis,
du Royaume-Uni et de la France se sont mis a.
imaginer divers autres pretextes pour retarder
la solution du probleme de la nomination d'un
gouverneur pour le Territoire libre de Trieste.
J'ai deja fait observer, lors de seances precedentes du Conseil de securite, que ces pretextes
etaient denues de fondement et je ne crois donc
pas qu'il soit necessaire de m'y etendre davantage.
En effet, la gelegation de l'URS S a declare a.
plusieurs occasions que, en adoptant cette attitude
a. l'egard de la nomination d'un gouverneur pour
le Territoire libre de Trieste, les representants
des Etats-Unis, du Royaume-Uni et de la France
cherchent simplement a. se derober aux obligations
que ces Etats ont assumes en vertu du Traite de
paix avec l'Italie, a. empecher le Conseil de securite de designer legouv erneur du Territoire libre
de Trieste et de s'acquitter ainsi des responsabilites d'ordre international que lui impose le Traite
avec 1'1talie, enfin a. pousser le Conseil a. violer ce
Traite.
.Le Gouvernement de l'Union sovietique.ne saurait accepter une telle attitude et insiste sur .la
mise en reuvre exacte et rigoureuse de toutes les
dispositions du Traite de· paix avec l'Italie, y
compris celles qui ont trait a. Trieste,
Etant donne que les membres duCot !§eild e
securite ont eu le temps necessaire pour ex~iner
la proposition de. ladeIe gation de l'URS S en
date du 17 fevrier 1949 (S/126O) concernant
,la nomination de M.Flu ckiger au poste de 'gou-

.....
8
Trieste (S/1260)1 the USSR delegation. believes
that they have considered the substance of that
proposal and can now .give their views or. it1 after
which it can be put to the vote.

verneur du Territoire libre de Trieste, la delegation de FUnion sovietique pense qu'ils ont etudie cette proposition quant au fond et peuvent
desormais emettre leu!' opinion a son sujet, apres
quoi cette proposition pourra etre mise aux voix.

Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypt): ~tn connexion
with what the representative of the USSR said
at the beginning of his statement1 I should like
merely to mention that1 in my capacity as President of the Security Council during the month of
April, I was in constant touch with the members
of the Council, and neither the representative of
the Soviet Union nor any other representative
asked that a meeting be held. It was clear to me
that our common understanding was that no
meeting would be held.

Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypte) (traduit de
l'anglais) : Ayant assume la presidence du "':onseil
de securite pendant le mois d'avril, je desire simplement mentionner, a propos de ce que le representant d~ l'URSS a dit au debut de son intervention, que j'ai ete en liaison constante avecles
membres du Conseil et que ni le representant de
FUnion sovietique, ni aucun autre representant,
n'a demande que le Conseil soit convoque. A mon
avis1 it etait clairement entendu entre nous que
le Conseil ne siegerait pas.

The representative of the Soviet Union said
that we have gone counter to the Charter. No
matter how many times I examine the Charter1 I
cannot see against what Article we have transgressed. The Charter state::; that the Security
Council shall function continuouslY1 but I imagine
that no one assumes that we sit here day and
night. Unless there is a call for a meeting,. we do
not meet. All the members of the Council were
here and ready to meet in the event that any
matter requiring discussion arose.
•

Le representant de FUnion sovietique a di.t que
nous avions viole les dispositions de la Charte.
rai beau examiner la Charte1 je ne vois pas queI
Article nous avons enfreint. La Charte stipule
que le Conseil de securite exercera ses fonctions
en permanence, mais fimagine que personne ne
s1a ttend a ce que nous siegions nuit et jour. Le
Conseil ne se reunit que sur convocation. Tous
les membres du Conseil etaient sur place et prets
a se reunir au cas ou une question quelconque
~xigerait examen.

The representative of the Soviet Union also
mentioned our rules of procedure. I should
simply like to say that, if my memory is correct1
this is at least the fourth time the Security
Council has not met for a period lasting more
than a fortnight. It happened once1 I think, in
conn(;}don with the Council's meetings in London.
I admit that that was before the adoption of
rule 1 of the rules of procedure. But there have
been at least two further precedents which took
place after the adoption of that rule1 in connexion
with the Council's meetings in Paris last year.

Le representant de FUnion sovietique a. mentionne ega1ement le reglement interieur du Conseil.
Si mes souvenirs sont exacts, c'est au moins la
quatrieme fois que plus de quinze jours s'ecoulent
sans que le Conseil de securite se reunisse. Cela
s'est produit une fois lorsque le Conseil siegeait
a Londres. It est vrai qu'a cette epoque l'article
premier du reglement inb~rieur n'avait pas encore
ete adopte. Le cas s'est eependant presentea
deux 'autres reprises au moins apres l'adoption
de cet artic1e1 lorsque le Conseil siegeait a Paris
l'annee derniere.
Puis-je ajouter que nous sommes tous cons';'
cients de l'importance des precedents dans lesitravaux du Conseil. Je ne desire pas entrer dans les
details et1 a eette heure avancee, retenir.trop
longtemps les membres du ConseiI. J e voudrais
toutefois faire observer au representant de
l'Union sovietique qu'il connait certainement plusieurs cas dans lesquels nouS nous S011l.'nes reellement fondes sur des precedents, alors qu'il
s1agissait non seulement d1importantes questions
de procedure, mais aussi de questions de fond.
J'estime done que l'observation du representant
de l'Union sovietique n'est pas exacte.

Might I add that we are all conscious of the
importance of precedents in our work. I do not
want to go into detail and take up too much of
the Council's time at this late hour, but our colleague from the Soviet Union ha:s seen several
cases, involving not only very important matters
of procedure, but substantive matters as well,
when precedent has been taken as a good and
concrete basis. Therefore, I think the remark of
our colleague from the Soviet Union is not
/correct.
./

THE PRESIDENT (translated' from French):
For my. part I. shall simply add that as soon as
the representative of the Soviet Union asked for
the Security Council to be convened, it was done,
which, incidentally, is quite normal.

Le ERESIDENT: Je me bornerai a ajouter, pour
ma part, que1 des que le representant de l'Union
sovietique' a demande la reunion du Conseil, it
l'a obtenue, ce qui etait d'ailleurs tout a faif
normal.

Mr. TARASENKO (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (translated from Russian) : We have
to note once again that the Governments of the
United Kingdom, the United States and France
are stubbornly av.oiding a decision on the problem
of the appointment of a Governor for' the Free
Territory of Trieste and are thus preventing 'the
implementation of the relevant article or the
Treaty of PeCJce 'with Italy. These Governments
are holding up the' Security Council's decision
on this question by the refusal of their delegations
to discuss ~he question it}. the Security Council.

M. TARASSENKO (Republique sociaIiste sovietique d'Ukraine) (traduit du russe) : It convient
de remarquer une fois de plus que les Gouvernements du Royaume-Uni,des Etats-Unis et de
la France se refusent obstinement a regler la
question de la Msignation.d1un gouverneur pour
le Territoire .Iibre de Trieste et empechent ainsi
la mise en ceuvre de l'artic1e pertinent du Traite
de paix avec l'ItaIie. Ces Gouvernements empechent le Conseil de securite de prendre une decision en la matiere en se refusant a examiner la
qqestion au. Consei!.

.

9
Auparavant, il sernblait que le desaccord sur
Disagreements on the nomination for the post
caudidatures au poste de gouverneur ait ete
of Governor formerly served as pretexts for P?st- les
du retard que subissait la designation
cause
la
poning the decision on the question of the appolOt- d'un Gouverneur pour le Territoire libre de
ment of a Governor for th~ Free Territo ry of
. Mais une fois que le Gouvernement sovieTrieste. However, after the Government of the Triesteeut donne son accord cl la c~l.l:ididature pretique
d
USSR had agreed to the n?mination put forwar
le Royaume-Uni, on a declare qu'il ne
bv the United Kingdom, 1t was stated that the sentee par
d'unc affaire de candid atl1re. mais
pas
it
difficulty did not lie in any particular nomination, s'agissa
nements des Etats-U nis et
but in the fact that the Governments of the du fait que les Gouver
t d'une fat;on generale
refusen
United States and the United. Kingdom refused du Royaume-Uni
probleme de Trieste,
du
n
solutio
la
ager
d'envis
ent
altogether to take the path towards the settlem
les dispositions du Traite
of the problem of Trieste, that is to say, the c'est-cl-dire d'appliquer Les Gouvernements des
l'Italie.
path indicated in the provisions of the Treaty de paix avec
et de la France se
of Peace with Italy. The Governments of the Etats-Unis, du Royaume-Uni
nt le Traite de
raleme
United States, the United Kingdom and France sont mis cl violer unilate
ainsi qu'il n'y
tre
demon
ont
et
l'Italie
have taken the path of unilateral violation of the paix avec
les accords .
et
traites
les
que
e
garanti
proved
aucune
a
thus
have
and
Treaty of Peace with Italy,
res un
conside
pas.
soient
that there can no longer be any certainty that signes ou cl signer ne
ils
lequel
sur
papier
le
pas
valant
ne
been
comme
jour
agreements and trea!ies w~ich have alread~
not
w1ll
future,
ecrits.
the
sont
111
slgned
be
signed, or may
henceforward be <:onsidered as not worth the
paper on which they are written.
Un nouvel element est ainsi introdu it dans les
This introduces a r..ew element into international
s internationales. On cree une atmosphere
relation
in
created
relations. An atmosphere has been
et les accords internawhich iriternational treaties and agreements will dans laquelle les traites
es ni executes, tant
respect
ni
seront
ne
neither be respected nor implemented, . if the tionaux
Etats-U nis, du
des
s
nement
Gouver
les
que
United
the
States,
Governments of the United
eront cl croire
persist
France
la
de
Kingdom and France continue to hold the view Royaume-Uni et
esparti es
certain
ou
accords
ces
traites,
e
ces
separat
que
any
that these treaties or agreements, or
leur sont .
ils
lorsqu'
que
lient
les
ne
accords
only
ces
de
them
upon
binding
.are
,
provisions thereof
cas, ils
autres
.les
taus
dans
que,
alors
when they are advantageous to them, and that, profitables
ces
Da.ns
nt.
raleme
unilate
violes
d.
etre
t
violate
peuven
rally
unilate
be
in all other cases, they can
inters
relation
les
dans
If that is so, there will be introduced into inter- conditions, on introduirait
e anarnational relations practices of independent anarch- nationales des pratiques d'independanc
De
bono
de
amener
rien
t
Such
peuven
ne
results.
qui
good
chique
to
lead
ism which cannot
isation
l'Organ
aider
t
a practice cannot assist the United Nations in telles pratiques ne peuven
des Nations Unies cl s'acquitter des taches qui
carrying out the tasks committed to it.
lui sont confiees.
En consequence, la deIega tionde la RSS
For this reason ,the delegation of the Ukrainian
United
the
ine insiste pour que les delegations des
of
d'Ukra
SSR insists that the delegations
should
nis, du Royaume-Uni et de la France
France
Etats-U
and
m
Kingdo
United
States, the
soluabandonnent leur politique qui consiste cl saboter
put an end to their policy of sabotaging the
a
of
tment
la designation d'un gouverneur pour le Terriappoin
the
of
tion of the question
Conseil de
Govenlor for the Free Territo ry of Trieste, and toire libre de Trieste et pour que le
memenf
co~for
e
problem
ce
settle
enfin
finally
regIe
e
securit
that the Security Council should
l'Italie.
avec
paix
de
Traite
ons
du
provisi
itions
the
-dispos
wit.lI
aux
nce
accorda
in
n
this questio
.
'of the Treaty of Peace with Italy.
Le PRESID ENT: Quelque autre representant
THE PRESID ENT (translated from French ):
e-t.,.i1la parole? En l'absence d'orateur, je
demand
none,
are
there
As
Are there any more speakers?
iongenerale est close. Je
I declare the general discussion \dosed. I shall considere que la discuss
le projet. de resolution
voix
aux
mettre
vais
0}
now put to the vote the draft resolution (S/126
1949, par le represubmitted by the representative of the Union of (5'/1260) soumis, lel7 fevrier
iques socialistes
Republ
des
l'Union
de
Soviet Socialist Republics on 17 Februa ry 1949. sentant
sovietiques.
M. Hoa (Secretaire general adjoint charge du
Mr. Haa (Assistant Secretary-General in
resocharge of the Department of Trusteeship) (trans- Depar temen tde la tutelle ): Le projet de
suit:
subion
comme
lit
resolut
se
lution
lated from French ): The draft
mitted by the representative of the USSR on
.
17 February 1949 reads as follows:
((Le Conseil de securite,
"The Security Council,
((Cmnpte tenu des dispositions de l'artic1e 21
"Taking into conSideration art.ic1e 21 of the
the
for
ng
providi
Italy,
with
Traite de paiJ( avec l'Italie portan t constitution
Peace
du
of·
Treaty
du Territoire libre de Trieste ;
establishment of, a Free Territo ry of Trieste ;
"Compte tenu de la decisiori du Conseil des
"Taking into consideration the decision of the
ber
Decem
·12
dated
rs,
es des Affaires etrang eresen date du
Minisfe
Ministr
n
Foreig
Council of
the
12 decembre 1946 relative cl la designation d'un
1946, on the appointment of a Governor for
;
Trieste
gouverneur du Territo ire libre de Trieste ;
Free Territory of
"Comp tetenw des dispositions, de l'article 11
"Taking into consideration the' provisions of
de l'annexe VI audit Traite, concernant cette·
, article 11 of annex VI to the said Treaty ;
meme question;

I

10
"Decide de designer comme gouvernellr du Ter"Resolves to appoint Colonel Fluckiger as
ritoire libre de Trieste, M.Fluckiger:'
Governor of the Free Territory of Trieste."
A vote was taken by show of hands, as foliows:
Il est procedemt vote a main levee.
.. In favour: Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Votent pour: Republique socialiste sovietique
.d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques socialistes soUnion of Soviet Socialist Republics.
vietiques.
Abstaining: Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
S'abstiennent: Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba,
Egypt, France, Norway, United Kingdom, United Egypte, France, Norvege, Royaume-Uni, EtatsStates of America.
.
Unis d'Amerique.
The result of the vote was 2 in favour, none
Il y a 2 voix pour et 9 abstentiorns.
against,. and 9 abstentions.
The draft resolution was not adopted, having
N'ayant pas obtent/< le vote affirmati, de sept
failed to obtain the affirmative votes of seven membres, le projet de resoltttion n~est pa'S adopte.
members.

5. Communication from the President

5. Communication du Preeident

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Before adjourning the meeting, I should like to
draw the Council's attention to a letter on the
question of Hyderahad [S/1317] which the
Minister for Foreign, Affairs of Pakistan has
addressed to thePresiclentof the Security Council.
Does any member. of the Council wish to speak
on this· matter?

Le PRESIDENT : Avant de nous separer, je souhaiterais attirer l'attention du Conseil sur une
lettre adressee par le Ministredes Affaires etrangeres, du Pakistan. au President du Conseil de
securite [S/1317], a. propos de l'affaire du Haiderabad. L'un des membres du Conseil a-t-il une
observation a faire au sujet de cette note?

Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypte) (traduit de
Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypt): I understand
that the Foreign· Minister of Pakistan, who is l'anglcds): Je crois savoir que le Mi.''1istre des
now in the United States, is desirous of making Affaires etrangeres du Pakistan qui est en ce
a statement before the Security Council on the moment auxEtats-Unis serait desireux, avant de
question Qf Hyderabad pefor~ he returns to his regagner son pays, de' faire une declaration devant
country. With this and other considerations in .le Conseil de seeurite, au sujet de la question du
mind, it. might be suitabiefor a meeting to be Haiderabad. Tenant compte de ce fait ainsi que
scheduled for thatpurpose,and, if the Security d'autres considerations, il eonviendrait peut-etre
Council agrees~ for the lJllestion of Hyderabad to de convoquer a. eet effet une reunion du Conseil
be retained on the agendao£ the Security Council de seeuriteet, si le Conseil est d'accord, de mainuntil it is completely disposed of.
tenir la question du Haiderabad a.l'ordre du jour
tant qu'elle n'aura pas .ete entierement i"eglee.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Le PRESIDENT: Quelqu'un desire-t-il presenter
Does any member· wish to speak on this.subject? une observation a. ce sujet?
I think we should follow our Egyptian col..
11 semble que !lOUS devions donner suit~ a la
league's·suggestion. As we are not sure when the suggestion faite par le representant de l'Egypte.
General Assembly's work will end; the best course Comme nous ne sommespas certains de la. date
would be for me to keep in touch with each a. laquellefiniront les travaux de I'Assemblee
member of the Council, as well .as with the generale, la meilleure solution serait que je me
Minister for .Foreign Affairs of Pakistan, with a tienne en contact avec chacun de vous, ainsi
view to setting a dateconvenrent to all immedi- qu'avec le Ministre des Maires etrangeres· du
ately after the end of the General Assembly.
Pakistan,pour ,fixer, aussitot apres· la fin des
travauxde l'AssembIee, une date qui convienne'
a tous.
The" meeting rose at.6.!JlJ p.m..

La seance est levee a18 h. 50.

SALeS AGENTS OF THE UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATION
DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIS
ARGENTINA-ARGENTINe
Editorial Sudamericana S.A.
.A1sina 500
BUENOS AmEs

AUSTRALlA-AUSTRALlE

FINI.AND-FINLANDE
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa
2, Keskuskatu
!h;LsINKI

FRANCE

H. A. Goddard Pty. Ltd.
255a George Street
SYDNEY, N. S. W.

Editions A. Pedone

la, rue Soufllot
PARIS, Ve

BELGIUM-BELGIQUE
Agence et Messageries de la
Presse, S. A.
14-22 rue du Persi!
BRUXELLES

BOLlVIA-BOLlVIE
Lihreda Cientifica y Literaria
Avenida 16 de Julio, 216
Casilla 972
LA PAZ

CANADA
The Ryerson Press
299 Queen Street West
TORONTO

PIIu-PIROU

Libroria intemacional del P

S.A. -

cawIa 1411
LmA
PHILlPPINU
D. P. Perez Co.

132 Riverside
SAN JUAN, RIzAr.

GREECE-GRECE
"Eleftheroudakis"
Lihrairie intemationale
Place de la Constitution
ATHENES

POLAND-POLOGNE
Spotdzielna Wydawnicza
"Czytelnik"

38 Poznanaka
WARSZAWA

GUATEMALA
Jose Gouhaud
Gouhaud & Cia. Ltda.
Sucesor
5a Av. Sur No. 6 y 9a C. P.
GUATEMALA.

HAITI

SWEDEN-SUEDE

A.-B. C. E. Fri~s Kungl.
HofbokhandeI
Fredsgatan 2
STOCKHOLM

SWITZERLAND-SUISSE
Lihrairie Payo!: S. A.
LAUSANNE, GENEVE, VAWEY,
MONTREUX, N£UCHATEL,
BERNE, BASEL
Hans lUlunhardt
Kirchp,l.lsse 17
ZURICH I

Max Bouchereau
Lihrairie "A la Caravelle"
Boite postale Ill-B
i"OR~ r-AU-PRINCE

CHILE-CHill
Edmundo Pizarro
Merced 846
SANTIAGO

ICELAND-ISLANDE

CHINA-CHINE
The Commercial Press Ltd.
211 Renan R(l~d
SHANGHAI

Bokaverzlun Sigfusar Eymundsonnar
Austurstreti 18

SYRIA-SYRIE

REYKJAVIIC.

Lihrerfa Latina Ltda.
Apartado Aereo 4011
BOGOTA.

COSTA RICA-CaSTA·RICA
Trejos Hermanos
Apartado 1313
SAN JosE

Lihrairie universelle
DAMas

INDIA-INDE
Oxford Book & Stationery Company
Scindia House
NEW DELHI

COLOMBIA-COLOMBIE

TURKEY-TURQUIE
Lihrairie Hachette
469 Istiklal Caddesi
BEYOGLU-IsTANBUL

IRAN
F"l1gahe Piade:tow
131 Shah Avenue
TEHERA.L~

UNION OF SOUTH AFRICAUNION SUDaAfRICAINE
Central News Agency
Commissioner & Rissik Ets. '
JOHANNESBURG and at CAPETO
and DURBAN

"IRAQ-IRAK

CUBA

Mackenzie & Mackenzie
The Bookshop
BAGHDAD

La Casa BeIgn
Rene de Smedt
O'Reilly 455
LA IlABANA

LEBANON-LlBAN
Librame universelle
BEYROUTH

CZECHOSLOVAKIATCHECOSLOVAQUIE

UNITED KINGDOMROYAUME·UNI

H. M. Stationery Office
P. O. Box 569
LONDON, S.E. 1
and at H.M.S.O. Shops in
LONDON, EDINBURGH, MANCHEST
CARDIFF, BELFAST, BIRMINGHAM
and BRISTOL

LUX!MBOURG
Lihrairie J. Schummel'

F. Topic_
Narodni Trlda 9
PRAHA I

Place Guillaume
LUXEMBOuRG

DENMARK':"-'DANEMARK
EdnarMunk~gaaro

NETHERLANDS-:-PAYS·BAS
N~ V. MilItinuS Nijhoff

Nj<$rregade6
Kj<$BENHAVN

DOMINICAN REPUBLICREPUBLlQUE DOtJllNICAlNE
Lihrerfa Dominicana
CalleMe!Lcedes No. 49
Apartaflo 656
CIUDAD TRUJILLO

Lange Voorhout 9
's-GRAVENHAGE

United Nations Association of
New Zealand
P. 0, 1011, G,P.O.
WELLlNGTON

Mufioz Hermanos yGia.
Nuevede Oct11bre 703
Casilla 10-24
(;UAYAQUlL

NICARAGbA-

EGYPT-EGYPT!:
Lihrairie"La Renais$ance d'Egypte"
9 Sh. Adly· Pasha
CAIRO
ETHI~PIA-ETHIOPIE

Agence ethiopienne.de puhlicite
P. O. Box a
ADDIS•.AB~A

UNITED STATES OF AMERIC
ETATS·UNIS D'AM':RIQUE
International Documents Servilce
Columbia University Press
2960 Broadway
NEW YORK 27, N. Y.

NEW ZEALANDNOUVELLE.ZELANDI:
Gordon & Gotch, Ltd.
Waring Tt.ar Street
Wr.._LINGTON

EClIADOR--EQUATEUR

II

Ramiro Ramirez V.
Agencia de Puhlic2ciones
l\!.4,NAGUA, D. N.

NORWAY-NORVEGEJohan Grundt 'ranum Forlag

Kr. Augustgt.7A
OSLO

URUGUAY
Oficina de Representaci6n de
Editoriales
Av. 18 de Julio 1333 Esc. 1 ~,
MONTEVIDEO

VENEZUELA
Escritoria Perez MachCido
Conde a Pifiango 11

J

Yi1~i;:GORA~J•.

,E

BEOGRAD

A

r

Printed in the t!,SJ\..

..

r

[

Price in thel]nited states: 10 cents

oz· 3. . .11

I

July 19t9-..:~,900 j
d dtt

. ·df
