200

production of and trafficking in drugs. in consultation with
and incorporating the experience of the Fund:
6. Invites intcmational financing institutions to consider giving financia! support to activitics in producing
countrics with a view to stopping the cultivation and production of illicit drugs, and calls upon Member Statcs to
encourage regional financing institutions to support such
projects;
7. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations and programmcs of the United Nations system to
identify special drug control activities in their respective
fields and to accord higher priority to drug control activities in their programme budgets;
8. Requcsts the Secrctary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fortieth session. through the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and the Economic and Social
Council, on the drug control activities carried out by the
specialized agencies and other organizations and programmes concerned. pursuant to the present resolution;
9. A/so requcsts the Secretary-General to take the necessary steps to improve the co-ordination of drug control
activities within the United Nations system and among
Member States, the specialized agencies and programmes
and other international and regional organs and organizations involved in drug control activities, with due consideration for the respective jurisdietions of those hodics, so
as to avoid duplication of efforts in this field;
10. Furthcr rcquests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its fortieth session on measures to
improve co-operation and co-ordination of drug control
activities within the United Nations system. in the light of
the intergovernmental review of drug control to be undertaken by the Committee for Programme and Coordination at its twenty-fifth session.
/00/h plcnary meeting
16 Decemhcr I 983

38/94.

Question of enforced or involuntary disappearances

The General Assemhly.
Recalling its resolution 33/ l 73 of 20 December 1978.
entitled "Disappeared persons". and its resolution 37/180
of 17 December 1982 on the question of enforced or involuntary disappearances,
Bcaring in mind Commission on Human Rights resolution 1983/20 of 22 February 1983, 9 ' in which the Commission decided to extend for one year the term of the
mandate of the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances, and Economic and Social Council
decision 1983/141 of 27 May 1983, in which thc Council
approved the Commission's decision.
Convinced that the action taken, in consultation with thc
Governments concerned, to promote the implementation
of the provisions of General Assembly resolution 33/ 173
and other United Nations resolutions concerning the
plight of missing or disappeared persons should be continued,
Expressing its cmotion at the anguish and sorrow of thc
families concerned, who should know the fate of thcir relatives,
l. Welcomes the decision of the Commission on
Human Rights to extend for one year the tcrm ofthe mandate of the Working Group on Enforced or lnvoluntary
9S See Officia! RC/'ord, orthc l,cono1111c ami Soual C·011w1/. /V83. Su¡,¡,/,·
111c11t No

3 (F/1983113 and Corr.lL chap. XXVII. ,ect A

Disappcaranccs. a\ laid down in Commission resolution
llJX3120:

.'. /;'xprc.1scs 1t1 ll/J[)recial!on to the Working Group for
thc work it has done and to those Governments that havc
co-operated with I t:
,. Ca/Is upon the Commission on Human Rights to
continue to studv this qucstion as a matter of priority and
to takc any step it may deem necessary to the pursuit of
thc task of thc Working Group when it considers thc
report to be subm 1tted by the Group at its fortieth session;
4. .-lpprnls to ali Ciovernmcnts to provide thc Working
Group and the Commission on Human Rights with the
full co-operation warranted by their strictly humanitarian
objectivcs and thcir working methods based on discretion;
S. Rcnnl's its rcqucsl to the Secretary-General to cont111ue to providc thc Working Group with ali neccssarv
assistancc.
/OOth plcnar,· meeting
/6 Decemhcr 1983

38/95.

Assistance to student refugees in southern
Africa

/'he General .1.1 ,cmf,/L
Rccalling its rcsolution 371177 of 17 December 1982, in
which it, intcr afia. rcquested the Sccretary-Gcneral, in cooperation with thc United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees. to rnntinue to organize and implcment an
eflecti ve programme of cducational and other appropriate
assistance for student refugces from Namibia and South
Africa who had taken asylum in Botswana, Lesotho, Swa11land and Zambia.
flaring considcrcd thc report of thc Secretary-General %
rnntaining the rcview by the High Commissioner ofassistance programmes for student refugees from South Africa
and Namibia,
llíoting with apprcclatwn that sorne of the projects recommended in the rcport on assistance to student refugees
in southern Afnca have been successfully completed,
Not/1/g with conccrn the continued influx into Botswana.
Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia of student refugces from
South Africa, as well as from Namibia.
Conrinccd that the discriminatory policics and repress,vc measurcs being applied in South Africa and Namibia
will lead to a furthcr cxodus of student refugces from those
countries,
Conscious of thc burden placed on the limited ti.nancial,
material and administrative resources ofthe host countrics
bv thc incrcasing num bcr of student refugees,
.tppreciat111g thc efforts ofthe host countries to deal with
their student rcfugce populations. with thc assistance of
thc international rnmmunity.
L /,'ndorscs the assessments and recommcndations
contained in the rcport of the Secretary-General and commcnds him and the lJnited Nations High Commissioncr
for Refugecs for their efforts to mobilize resourccs and
organize the programme of assistance for student rcfugecs
in thc host countries of southern Africa:
"l
Hxpresscs 1/s apprcciation to the Governments of
Botswana, Lesotho. Swaziland and Zambia for granting
asylum and making educational and other facilities available to the student refugees. in spitc of thc pressure which
thc continuing in flux of those rcfugces cxerts on facilities
111 thcir countric,

\ l.

3. A/so expresses its apprccwlion to the Govemments
of Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia for the cooperation which they have extended to the SecretaryGeneral and to the High Commissioner on mattcr\ conceming the welfare of those refugccs:
4. Notes with appr<'Ciation thc financia] and material
support provided for the studcnt refugccs by Membcr
States, the Office of thc Unitcd Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, other bodics of the U nitcd Nations
system and intergovemmental and non-governmental
organizations;
5. Requests the Sccretary-(jcncral. in co-operation
with the High Commissioner, to continue to organize and
implement an effective programmc of cducational and
other appropriate assistancc for 5tudcnt refugccs from
Namibia and South Africa who havc taken asylum in Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia:
6. Urges ali Member States and intcrgovcrnmcntal and
non-govemmental organizations to continuc contributing
generously to the assistancc programmcs for student refugees, through financia] support of thc regular programmcs
ofthe High Commissioner. ofthc projects identified in thc
report of the Secretary-General and of the projects and
programmes, including unfunded projccts, which will be
submitted to the Second lntcmational Confercncc on
Assistance to Refugees in Africa, to be held at Gcneva in
July 1984:
7. A/so urges ali Member States and ali intcrgovernmental and non-govcmmental organizations to assist thc
countries of asylum materially and othcrwisc to cnablc
them to continue to discharge thcir humanitarian obligations towards refugees:
8. Appeals to the Office of the Unitcd Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. the United Nations Dcvelopment Programme and the United Nations EducationaL
Scientific and Cultural Organization. as well as other international and non-govemmental organizations. to continue
providing humanitarian and development assistancc to
expedite the settlement of student refugees from South
Africa who have been granted asylum in Botswana.
Lesotho. Swaziland and Zambia:
9. Calls upon ali agencies and programmes of the
United Nations system to continue co-operating with the
Secretary-General and the High Commissioner in the
implementation of humanitarian programmes of assistance for the student refugees in southern Africa:
10. Requests the High Commissioner, in eo-operation
with the Secretary-General, to continue to keep the mattcr
under review, to apprise the Economic and Social Council,
at its second regular session of 1984, ofthc current status of
the programmes and to report to the General Assembly at
its thirty-ninth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
100th plcnar_1' meeting
16 Dcccmhcr 1983

38/96.

Summary or arbitrary executions

The General Assemhly.
Recalling the provisions of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 97 which states that every human bcing
has the right to life, libcrty and security of person and that
everyone is entitled in ful] equality to a fair and public
hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal.
9 7 Resolu!Ion 217 A (111).
98Resolution 2200 A (XXII. annex.

201

Resolutions adopted on the reports of lhe Third Commitke

/lal'1ng regard to thc provisions of the lnternational
Covenant on Civil ami Political Rights. 4 ~ which states
that every human heing has the inhercnt right to lile. that
this right shall bC" protectcd by law and that no one shall he
arbitrarily deprived of !11s lile.
Rccal!ing a/so its resolution 341175 of 17 DC"cemher
1979. in which it reaffirmed that mass and tlagrant violations of human rights are of special concern to the United
Nations and urged the ( 'ommission on Human Rights to
take timcly and effectivc action in existing ami future cases
of mass and ílagrant violations of human rights.
Rccalling fimhcr its resolution 36/22 of 9 Novcmher
1981. in which it condemned the practice of summary ami
arbitrary executions, and its resolution 371182 of 17
Decemhcr 1982.
J)eep/r a/armed at the occurrcnce ()11 a large scale of
summary or arbitrary executions. including extra-legal
executions,
Reca/!ing resolution 1982 '13 of 7 Scptemher 1982. of
the Suh-Commission on Prevention of Diseriminatio11 and
Protection of Minorities 44 in which the Sub-Commission
recommended that effcctivc measures should be adoptcd
to preven! the occurrcnce of summary or arhitrary executions,
( ·onmzccd of the need for appropriatc action to combat
and C"ventually eliminate this practice. which rcpresents a
flagran! violation of thc most fundamental human right.
thc right to lite.
1. !! e/comes Economic and Social ( ·ouncil resolution
1982 35 of 7 Mav 1982, in which the Council decided to
appoint for one year a special rapporteur to examine the
questions related to summary or arhitrary executions and
to submit to the Commission on Human Rights. at its
thirty-ninth session. a rnmprehensive report on the occurrence and extent of thc practice of sueh cxecutions.
together with bis conclusio11s ami rccommendations:
')
lakes note of Economic and Social Council rcsolution 1983/36 of 26 Mav 1983. in which the Council
decided to continuc the· mandate of the Special Rapporteur. Mr. S. A. Wako, for another year and decidcd that
the Commission on Human Rights should consider the
question of summary or arbitrary exccutions as a matter or
high priority at its fortieth session:
J. , l¡1peals to ali Governmcnts to co-opcrate with and
assist the Special Rapporteur of the Commission 011
Human Rights in the preparation of his rcport:
4. Rcquests the Secretary-Ge11eral to provide ali necessary assistance to the Special Rapporteur so that he rnay
cffectivcly carry out hi~ mandate:
5. .-lgain requests the Sccretary-General to conti11ue to
use tris best endeavours in cases where the mínimum standard of legal safeguards provided for in articles 6, 14 and
15 of the lnternational Cove11ant on Civil and Political
Rights appear not to be respected:
h. Requests thc Commission 011 Human Rights at its
fortieth session. on thC' basis of the report of the Special
Rapporteur to be prepared in conformity with Eco11omic
and Social Couneil rcsolutions 1982135 and 1983/36. to
make recomrnendations conccrning appropriate action to
comhat and eventually elimi11ate the practice of summary
or arbitrary executions
100th p/cnun· ml'Ct/1/g
16 f)ffcmhcr 1983
9"See l:CN.4,l'!X.14-t·:C,..\Suh.~ l4X.'4\ ami Corr.l. ,·hap
'.-il'L'l

:\

'\XI.
