S/PV.7212

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7212th meeting

Thursday, 26 June 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. De Antueno
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Llanos
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Manzi
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2139 (2014) (S/2014/427)

14-44401 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1444401*

S/PV.7212

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

with Jordan. Around 350 families lived in the camp.
Dozens of people, including women and children, were
killed.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council
resolution 2139 (2014) (S/2014/427)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Valerie
Amos, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2014/427, which contains the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2139 (2014).
I now give the floor to Ms. Amos.
Ms. Amos: This is the fourth briefing to the
Council since the adoption of resolution 2139 (2014)
on humanitarian access issues in Syria. The resolution
demands action by parties to the conflict in a number
of areas, including ceasing attacks against civilians and
doing everything in their power to facilitate rapid, safe
and unhindered humanitarian access to people in need
of assistance. With its adoption, we had all hoped for a
significant improvement in the situation on the ground.
However, I again regret to inform the Council that
violence and attacks on civilians by all parties to the
conflict and human rights abuses continue unabated,
with devastating consequences for those affected.
There have been numerous examples of targeted
or indiscriminate attacks on civilians in densely
populated areas, in violation of the most fundamental
principles of international humanitarian law. The
failure to respect and protect the lives of civilians was,
for example, apparent on the morning of 18 June, when
barrel bombs were dropped on a camp for displaced
people in Al-Shajara in southern Syria, near the border

2/6

26/06/2014

Countless others have lost their lives or been
injured as the conflict continues to rage in other parts
of country, including in the governorates of Aleppo,
Hama, Idlib, Dar’a, Rural Damascus and Deir ez-Zor.
This morning in Aleppo, at least 17 civilians were
reportedly killed and more than 30 injured by barrel
bombs dropped near Halawaniyeh Square. Also this
morning, at least 15 civilians were killed by aerial
strikes targeting numerous neighborhoods in ArRaqqa, including an educational facility and a library.
On 7 June, 10 people were killed and 55 others were
injured when a car bomb went off in Homs city.
Some 241,000 people continue to live under
siege conditions, unable to leave their communities,
and we are unable to get in to deliver much needed
humanitarianumanitarian assistance. Since my last
briefing to the Council, only 2,467 people — or 1 per
cent of those living in besieged areas — have received
much-needed food assistance. This level of obstruction
is inhuman and goes against the basic commitment to
human dignity and rights that United Nations Member
States agreed to in Article 1 of the United Nations
Charter, which reads in part:
“The purposes of the United Nations are ...
to achieve international cooperation in solving
international problems of an economic, social,
cultural, or humanitarian character, and in
promoting and encouraging respect for human
rights and for fundamental freedoms for all.”
On 21 June, a truce in Yarmouk was agreed between
the parties. The agreement foresees the surrender of
weapons by non-State armed groups, the withdrawal
of foreign fighters, the return of Palestinian refugees,
the restoration of basic services and the provision of
humanitarian assistance. The United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) was not part of the truce agreement and
has not been assigned a monitoring role. UNRWA is
seeking the support of all parties to ensure it is granted
unhindered access, as it has been unable to enter the
camp to deliver assistance since early June.
In recent weeks, attacks on civilian infrastructure
by armed opposition groups have increased, resulting
in significant damage or disruption to water, sewage
and electricity networks in the cities of Aleppo, Idlib

14-44401

26/06/2014

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7212

and Deir ez-Zor. In Aleppo city, as many as 1 million
people remain without safe drinking water after one
such attack. In Deir ez-Zor, ongoing fighting, with
the deliberate denial of access into the governorate by
various opposition groups, has made it increasingly
difficult for humanitarian organizations to bring
life-saving relief supplies to the area. Over the course
of the past two weeks, more than 40,000 people have
been displaced to eastern Deir ez-Zor city.

large backlog of deliveries. Food assistance fell by nearly
1 million in May and has yet to be restored to previous
levels, with only 50 per cent of planned food assistance
dispatched in June. On 9 June, the Government
announced additional requirements involving the
submission of monthly distribution plans and weekly
loading plans. In addition, the Government introduced
new procedures for the delivery of assistance to hardto-reach locations through United Nations hubs.

Once again, I remind the Council that targeting
or indiscriminately attacking vulnerable civilians
constitutes a war crime. There can be no justification
for such action. Deliberately obstructing humanitarian
access and depriving civilians of access to services
essential to their survival is unlawful and inhumane.

The new procedures require three levels of approval,
undermine previous agreements and have caused
two successive months of decline in aid deliveries. I
cannot describe to the Council the frustration felt by
experienced aid workers who have to spend endless
hours trying to get agreement for aid deliveries as
people’s lives hang in the balance. The focus of the
Government of Syria remains on controlling the work of
the United Nations and its partners. Our focus remains
on the people who so desperately need our help.

In 2011, I told the Council that 1 million people in
Syria needed humanitarian assistance. That figure now
stands at 10.8 million, 1.5 million more than there were
just six months ago. The number of people in need in
hard-to-reach areas now stands at 4.7 million, which
represents an increase of 1.2 million since resolution
2139 (2014) was adopted in February.
United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organization (NGO) partners continue their efforts to
meet urgent humanitarian needs. Staff have deployed
to difficult and dangerous locations to engage in
negotiations to secure access and to deliver muchneeded aid. Many have been killed, injured, detained
or taken hostage. Nearly 60 aid workers have lost
their lives in the course of their work so far. Countless
hours have been spent negotiating and facilitating
convoy movements, in compliance with complicated
and onerous administrative procedures. Despite all
these efforts, four years into this war we are unable
to sustainably reach nearly half of those identified as
being in the direst need.
Insecurity and active conflict play a role in
preventing humanitarian access to many locations.
However arbitrary restrictions and obstructions,
including bureaucratic procedures imposed by the
Government, limit or obstruct where, to whom and
how often we deliver aid. Some opposition groups have
also attacked, threatened and refused to cooperate with
humanitarian workers.
In April, the Government of Syria introduced new
truck-sealing procedures intended to streamline and
ensure safe passage of regular aid deliveries. This new
mechanism was poorly implemented and resulted in a

Despite repeated calls for the free passage of all
medicines and surgical equipment in aid convoys, certain
items continue to be excluded or removed, depriving
tens of thousands of people each month of their basic
right to life-saving medical assistance. The Government
continues to prohibit the inclusion of medical supplies
in shipments intended for opposition-held areas. This
deliberate denial of essential medicine and medical
equipment undermines the very basis of humanitarian
action.
The ability of international non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) to operate in Syria also
remains severely constrained due to bureaucratic and
operational constraints. A proposed amendment to the
existing memorandum of understanding, regulating the
work of NGOs and aimed at reducing restrictions, was
submitted to the Syrian Government on 26 February. It
remains unanswered. Effective humanitarian assistance
cannot be delivered without NGOs, which remain an
essential partner in the aid effort.
The United Nations and its partners remain
committed and prepared to scale up operations and
provide life-saving assistance to men, women and
children in need throughout the country, despite the
challenging and dangerous operational environment
on the ground. Nearly 3.3 million people received
food assistance from the World Food Programme and
partners in May; more than 16 million people were
assisted with clean drinking water through the provision
of chlorination tablets by UNICEF and partners;

14-444013/6

S/PV.7212

The situation in the Middle East

around 2.9 million children were vaccinated against
polio in the latest round; 2.3 million people received
critically needed non-food items from the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and its partners; and 4 million people received medical
assistance by the World Health Organization and
partners in the first five months of 2014.
However, needs continue to grow and are outpacing
our response efforts. We are still unable to provide
regular and sustained assistance to 4.7 million people in
hard-to-reach areas. The Council has demanded that the
parties to the conflict allow and facilitate humanitarian
access across conflict-lines and across borders.
Resolution 2139 (2014) is clear and unequivocal on
this point. We need a scale-up in cross-line and crossborder deliveries to meet growing needs on the ground.
Approximately 1.3 million people could be reached via
border crossings we have requested with Turkey, Jordan
and Iraq. In previous reports to the Council, I proposed
the facilitation of cross-border deliveries through the
establishment of neutral monitors.
I emphasize once again the urgency we face.
Thousands of people continue to lose their lives every
month. In the continued absence of a political solution
to the crisis, humanitarian workers will continue to do
everything they can, but we recognize that we cannot
do it alone. We look to the Council to help us ensure
that the parties to the conflict abide by their obligations
under international law. Some 10.8 million women,
men and children depend on that support.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Ms. Amos
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I should like to congratulate
you, Sir, on the Russian presidency of the Council
this month. I thank you and the members of your team
for convening many important meetings under your
presidency. I also thank you for convening this meeting
and allowing us to participate in it.
The briefing provided by the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator reminds me of a well-known verse
concerning a man at sea, shackled to his vessel and
unable to move, who is warned not to get wet. UnderSecretary-General Amos presented a partial account

4/6

26/06/2014

of the humanitarian situation in Syria, on which I will
brief the Council myself.
This meeting affords us an important opportunity
to inform the members of the Council and of the United
Nations as a whole on the reality of the humanitarian
situation in Syria in all its dimensions, as well as the
serious falsehoods and gaps contained in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2014/427) on the implementation
of resolution 2139 (2014) . In order to avoid irritating
certain representatives present in the Chamber by
referring to particular scandals, I shall confine myself
to referring to certain parts of the report itself.
Paragraph 3 of the report refers to the ongoing
fighting between so-called “armed opposition
groups and extremist forces”. Paragraph 7 states that
“[i]nfighting between opposition groups also
intensified, as the Islamic State in Iraq and Al-Sham
(ISIS) gained ground in the east”. Paragraph 12 refers
to “armed opposition groups, including Ahrar Al-Sham
and Jabhat Al-Nusra”.
As a matter of fact, it is scandalous that an official
report issued on behalf of the Secretary-General refers
to certain organizations, classified by the Security
Council as terrorist groups, as “armed opposition
groups” in Syria — Jabhat Al-Nusra and other terrorist
groups. This is not an unintended oversight. In fact,
the Secretary-General’s Spokesperson has used the
same language, despite our having dispatched, in vain,
numerous official correspondences emphasizing the
impropriety of using such language.
We would like to ask the Under-Secretary-General
why her report does not refer to the actual names of those
terrorist groups, which are affiliated with Al-Qaida.
She has classified them as “armed opposition” and
“extremist” groups. For example, the report labels the
terrorist group Jabhat Al-Nusra “armed opposition”,
meaning that it is not part of the extremist groups. In
the opinion of Ms. Amos, what exactly constitutes an
extremist group?
The report cites new exaggerated numbers
regarding people in need in Syria, as compared to
previous figures. The number of those in need is said
to have increased, rising suddenly to 10.8 million — an
increase of 1.5 million. The number of people in need
residing in areas that are difficult to reach is said to
amount to 4.7 million — an increast of 1.2 million.
The report does not mention how they arrived at those
inflated numbers.

14-44401

26/06/2014

The situation in the Middle East

My Government has lodged a complaint with
the United Nations Resident Representative in Syria
with regard to the perfunctory way in which some
senior United Nations officials have arrived at the
inaccurate and undocumented statistics concerning
the humanitarian situation and people in need in
Syria, as well as about the dishonest dissemination of
that information by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) in Damascus just as
deliberations are taking place to adopt a new resolution
on the humanitarian situation.
The drafters of the report have gone beyond their
mandate in mentioning the presidential elections in
Syria, which have nothing to do with resolution 2139
(2014). They are a sovereign, constitutional right and do
not run counter to the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex). To the contrary, the elections are in line with
that document: to preserve Syria’s constitutional
institutions. That is a main element of the communiqué.
Another strange paradox in the report is evidenced
in the following statement:
“The United Nations remains unable to provide
a verified assessment of the presence and activity
of non-Syrian fighters on a nationwide scale.”
(S/2014/427, para. 9)
Despite my Government’s hundreds of official letters
to the Secretary-General and the Security Council and
the open official Western statements about documented
numbers of so-called “foreign fighters” in Syria, the
Secretary-General and OCHA continue to be unable to
verify the veracity of the situation.
In addition to all that, we are also surprised that
the report ignores the fact that the main reason for the
emergence and worsening of the humanitarian situation
is rooted in the rise and escalation of terrorism in Syria.
Terrorist armed groups have targeted safe civilian
areas, pushing out the population and destroying
infrastructure and institutions. Addressing the
humanitarian crisis in certain areas in Syria cannot be
carried out just by providing assistance.
Those who drafted the report would have done
better to ascribe responsibility to the States supporting
terrorism in Syria, including Israel, Qatar, Turkey and
Saudi Arabia, instead of questioning the presence of
foreign fighters and the effectiveness of the steps taken
by our Government to address humanitarian needs.

S/PV.7212

Among the other paradoxes in the report is its
ignorance of the imposition by certain States of illegal,
unliteral and coercive measures against our people,
which has directly impacted living conditions. It is
therefore necessary to point out the dangerous impact
of the sanctions, which serves to expose the double
standards on the part of some senior Secretariat officials
in addressing the humanitarian situation in my country.
Some States claiming to care for the Syrian people
have chosen throw enormous amounts of money at
buying weapons for the terrorists in Syria, rather than
devoting those resources to the 2014 humanitarian
appeal — which is funded at just 29 per cent. A
headline in yesterday’s The New York Times reads,
“After Opening Way to Rebels, Turkey Is Paying a
Heavy Price”. Yet the Secretary-General and Ms. Amos
have no proof that there are foreign fighters in Syria.
The Syrian Government provides 75 per cent of
the humanitarian assistance in Syria. The Government
has taken a number of steps to enable the United
Nations to expand its activities, including developing
a new implementation mechanism to organize relief
assistance convoys in a way that can provide assistance
to our people as soon as possible, establishing a branch
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees in the governorate of Al-Suwayda to
cover the southern region, as well as facilitating United
Nations access to many areas throughout most parts
of the country, including the governorate surrounding
Damascus, as well as Aleppo and Dar’a.
A report by the World Food Programme states
that many improvements have been made in seriously
troubled areas. Ms. Amos stated that millions of
people had received assistance, that children had been
immunized and that food had arrived. She did not
say how all of that happened. Did it happen without
the assistance of the Syrian Government? We have
continued to accede to the demands of the international
community to deliver assistance from Syria’s borders
with Iraq, Lebanon, Turkey and Jordan, in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 46/182. It is clear that
her report ignores the obstacles the Turkish authorities
have created to allowing humanitarian assistance to
enter Syria through the border crossing at Nusaybin
while using the same crossing to let terrorists through.
My Government is committed to its responsibility
to alleviate our people’s humanitarian burdens, and we
are ready to take whatever measures are necessary to

14-444015/6

S/PV.7212

The situation in the Middle East

achieve that, as long as they comply with our national
laws and our sovereignty. In that regard, we would like
to welcome positive involvement by the United Nations,
by which I mean its involvement in a way that mitigates
the humanitarian situation in Syria. We categorically
reject some States’ use of the machinery of the United
Nations in order to implement narrow political agendas
that run counter to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, just as we reject the
efforts of some States to manipulate the Organization
to target certain countries. The invasions of Iraq, Libya
and some other States were allowed to go through
very smoothly, and there are some who have found it
easy to interfere with the Organization. The United
Nations belongs to its Member States, and we are one
of its founding States. The United Nations is not part
of the private sector, to be exploited by the powerful
and influential in order to achieve domination and
bloodshed.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.

6/6

26/06/2014

Since this is the last meeting of the Council for the
month of June 2014, before inviting Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion
on the subject, on behalf of the delegation of the
Russian Federation I would like to express our sincere
appreciation to the members of the Council, especially
my colleagues the Permanent Representatives, their
staffs and the Secretariat of the Council, for all the
support they have given us.
It has been a very busy month, and we succeeded
in reaching consensus on a number of important issues
within our purview. We could not have done it alone
or without the hard work, support and constructive
contributions of every delegation and the representatives
of the Secretariat, as well the interpreters, translators,
meeting services staff and sound engineers. As we
wind up our presidency, on behalf of the whole Council
I wish the delegation of Rwanda success in its work
presiding over the Council in July.
The meeting rose at 10.35 a.m.

14-44401
