A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/78
11 January 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 65
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Committee (A/49/702)]
49/78.

The risk of nuclear proliferation in the
Middle East

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the relevant United Nations resolutions,
Taking note of the relevant resolutions adopted by the General
Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency, the latest of which is
GC(XXXVIII)/RES/21 of 23 September 1994, 1/ and noting the danger of nuclear
proliferation, especially in areas of tension,
Cognizant that the proliferation of nuclear weapons in the region of the
Middle East would pose a serious threat to international peace and security,
Aware of the importance that all nuclear facilities in the region be
placed under full-scope safeguards of the International Atomic Energy Agency,
Encouraged by the recent positive developments in the Middle East peace
process, which would be further strengthened by States of the region
undertaking practical confidence-building measures in order to consolidate the
non-proliferation regime,

1/
See International Atomic Energy Agency, Resolutions and Other
Decisions
of
the
General
Conference,
Thirty-eighth
Regular
Session,
19-23 September 1994 (GC(XXXVIII)/RES/DEC/(1994)).
95-76057
/...

A/RES/49/78
Page 2

1.
Calls upon Israel and all other States of the region that are not
yet party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 2/ not
to develop, produce, test or otherwise acquire nuclear weapons, to renounce
possession of nuclear weapons and to accede to the Treaty;
2.
Calls upon the States of the region that have not done so to place
all their nuclear facilities under full-scope safeguards of the International
Atomic Energy Agency as an important confidence-building measure among all
States of the region and as a step towards enhancing peace and security;
3.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly
at its fiftieth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
4.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fiftieth
session an item entitled "The risk of nuclear proliferation in the Middle
East".
90th plenary meeting
15 December 1994

2/

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
