S/2020/1282

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 December 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 23 December 2020 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 2531 (2020) on the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA), by which the Council requested me, addressing perspectives from all
relevant actors, including my Special Representative for Mali, in consultation with
the Force Commander, to provide the Council with a letter focused on: (a) information
on progress in Mission operations, to include security challenges, implementation of
the adaptation plan as well as an update on discussions in the Instance de Coordination
au Mali; (b) information on performance and rotations of uniformed personnel,
including information on undeclared caveats and their impact on the Mission; and
(c) an update on the integrated strategic framework and related transition plan, as well
as a possible exit strategy for the Mission on the basis of improved security and
political conditions and of progress in the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali.
Progress in Mission operations
As outlined in my recent reports (S/2020/952 and S/2020/1281), the Mission
has further increased its operational tempo and adopted a more coordinated “whole
of Mission” approach to the challenging and evolving security environment owing to
important progress in the implementation of the adaptation plan, as well as enhanced
integrated planning. Nonetheless, persistent equipment shortfalls, notably of air assets
and surgical teams in support of the Mobile Task Force of the Mission, continue to
pose significant operational challenges that have an impact on the ability of the
Mission to respond rapidly and in a flexible manner.
In central Mali, MINUSMA conducted Operation Mongoose, a key component
of its adaptation plan and of its efforts to operationalize the Mobile Task Force
concept with a view to protecting civilians who are out of reach of the current
deployments of the Mission. On 23 October 2020, Operation Mongoose entered a new
phase with the rapid deployment on short notice of troops to Douentza Cercle, Mopti
Region, in response to emerging threats to the local populations and in support of the
Malian Defence and Security Forces. This operation allowed MINUSMA to practice
its increased mobility and ability to respond rapidly. It involved the mobilization of
air and land units, including special forces and a helicopter unit from two different
military sectors.
The Mission has made further strides to adopt a more proactive posture to
protect civilians. Enhanced integrated planning with civilian pillars and the United
Nations country team enabled the Mission to strengthen its efforts to protect civilians

20-17530 (E)

291220

*2017530*

S/2020/1282

in high-risk areas, including Bandiagara, Koro and Bankass Cercles, using temporary
operating bases, as part of Operation Buffalo. MINUSMA established seven
additional temporary bases during the reporting period, while complementing those
physical protection measures with mediation and reconciliation initiatives led by its
civilian components. In Koro Cercle, Mopti Region, the integrated civil-military
approach of the Mission and the extended presence of temporary operating bases
facilitated civilian reconciliation initiatives by providing the time, security and access
needed to yield results.
The support provided by MINUSMA to local partners in areas hosting locally led intercommunity dialogues, which contributed to a reduction of civilian casualties,
restored freedom of movement for all communities and enabled some resumption of
economic activity. In Ogossogou village, Mopti Region, a MINUSMA temporary
operating base supported the facilitation of the first meeting between the Dogon and
Fulani communities in two years, marking an important and positive step since two
massacres against civilians were committed there. The base of the Mission in the area
also made it possible for peacekeepers to assist wounded passengers from a bus that
had been attacked nearby while travelling between the towns of Bandiagara and
Bankass.
There was a notable improvement in the coordination between MINUSMA and
the Malian Defence and Security Forces, in particular in central Mali. The military
component of the Mission conducted several coordinated operations with Malian
forces to protect civilians, while the MINUSMA police inc reased the number of joint
patrols with Malian security forces in central Mali. Operation Cobra, conducted in
October 2020, using the temporary operating base in Timiniri commune,
demonstrated an unprecedented level of coordination between MINUSMA forces a nd
police, as well as with the Malian Defence and Security Forces. The operation resulted
in eight arrests and the seizure of improvised explosive device materials.
In northern Mali, MINUSMA continued to enhance its efforts to protect
civilians. In Timbuktu Region, in coordination with the Malian Defence and Security
Forces, the Mission launched a series of initiatives in this regard as part of Operation
Winner. Making use of this improved coordination and to ensure resource efficiencies,
the Mission maintained its focus on areas with a minimal presence of national armed
forces, including in Gao Region, where Operation Seka has contributed to securing
the Gao-Labbézanga axis. In Kidal Region, as part of its integrated Operation
Amouken, the uniformed and civilian components of the Mission reached isolated
villages, where their work included the implementation of confidence -building quick
impact projects, which contributed to easing tensions related to resource management
and access.
In Goundam, Diré and Niafunke Cercles in Timbuktu Region, where the
presence of local security forces is limited and radical groups have disrupted daily
life for civilians, the MINUSMA police launched a series of community -oriented
policing initiatives with the Malian security forces, providing a measure of protection.
Similar initiatives are underway in Mopti Region.
In Ménaka, the Mission continued to support the Ménaka Without Weapons
initiative, which is aimed at providing a secure environment in the city – a model that
could be replicated elsewhere in northern Mali – through coordinated efforts by the
Malian Defence and Security Forces, signatory armed groups and MINUSMA. The
Mission supports the establishment of checkpoints in strategic locations, participates
in coordinated patrols and provides vehicles to support the deployment of Malian
security forces. This initiative has contributed to a reduction in attacks against
civilians.

2/6

20-17530

S/2020/1282

Implementation of the adaptation plan
Despite the restrictions imposed on account of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, MINUSMA has continued to implement its adaptation plan
while adjusting its timeline. During the period under review, the Mission completed
most of the movements and consolidation of contingents launched earlier in 2020,
including the relocation of a mechanized infantry company and base defence unit
from Timbuktu to Mopti. However, there were delays in the expansion of the camp of
the Mission in Mopti, initially planned to be completed by April 2021. The Mopti
base is critical for the implementation of the adaptation plan, as it is expected to
become a major launching pad in efforts to support the stabilization and restoration
of State authority in the centre of the country and protect civilians. Those delays will,
in turn, delay the planned deployment of additional troops and the full implementation
of the adaptation plan.
In Gao, an unmanned aircraft system became operational in October 2020. The
expansion of the base in Gao consists of multiple components in different phases of
completion.
Structures to facilitate the deployment of the Quick Reaction Force of the
Mission, the long-range reconnaissance patrol and the first forward command post –
a key element of Operation Mongoose – are expected to be completed by the end of
the year, with other aspects going into 2021.
Coordination of security presences
The Instance de Coordination au Mali remained an effective forum to coordinate
the activities of the Malian Defence and Security Forces, the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel, the French forces, the European Union training mission in Mali
and MINUSMA. Additional initiatives have helped to improve its operational
effectiveness: in between quarterly meetings of the Instance de Coordination au Mali,
monthly operational coordination meetings serve as a steering committee during
which the issues validated at the quarterly meetings are discussed, with a monitoring
cell, chaired by the Malian armed forces, providing oversight. These meetings at
different levels have improved decision-making on lines of action and, most
importantly, facilitated the implementation of decisions taken, within the framework
of the respective mandates of international forces.
At the quarterly meeting held on 5 November 2020, p articipants agreed on three
road maps outlining a clear distribution of responsibilities among international
security presences, in support to the Malian Defence and Security Forces, including
redeployment and training needs.
Mission performance
Despite restrictions due to the COVID-19 pandemic and a major political crisis
culminating in a coup d’état on 18 August 2020, MINUSMA has continued to ensure
mandate implementation and continuity of operations, while swiftly adjusting to the
new realities on the ground. In that context, MINUSMA has played a central role in
preventing a further deterioration of the political situation and supporting an inclusive
transition. The Mission also continues to assist the parties to the Peace Agreement
with overcoming differences through dialogue, to make progress towards its full
implementation, and to maintain its critical support to the authorities in their efforts
to protect civilians in the centre of the country.
MINUSMA continued to take steps to improve the performance of its uniformed
personnel and address shortfalls, with a particular focus on mandate implementation
and the safety and security of its personnel. This includes further measures to enhance
20-17530

3/6

S/2020/1282

the security of United Nations peacekeepers during operation s as well as in camps.
Ongoing explosive threat mitigation training and mentoring have contributed to the
timely detection of an increasing number of improvised explosive devices. In July
2020, within the framework of Operation Toolbox, MINUSMA undertook a series of
comprehensive measures to support convoy threat mitigation efforts on all major
MINUSMA convoy routes.
However, some units still lack the appropriate jammers and mine-protected
vehicles required to prevent casualties in northern and central Mal i. I reiterate my call
to all Member States to honour their commitments under the Action for Peacekeeping
framework and to step up their efforts to ensure that peacekeepers receive the
equipment and training necessary to implement their mandate effectively in one of
the most challenging United Nations operations. The MINUSMA force currently has
562 armoured vehicles: 483 (86 per cent) are used daily, 33 (6 per cent) are
undergoing maintenance and 46 (8 per cent) are not serviceable and need to be
replaced urgently owing to improvised explosive device blasts or other issues that
have left them beyond the ability of the Mission to repair.
Evaluations of the force and police components of the Mission
In March 2020, MINUSMA suspended the performance evaluat ion of its
military units owing to the COVID-19 pandemic. Evaluations resumed in November
2020 and are being finalized. During the reporting period, the force of the Mission
updated its evaluation methodology to ensure that it aligns better with the operat ional
environment and enhances its focus on leadership, operational readiness and task
performance.
The MINUSMA police component continued to implement the systematic
performance evaluation system instituted in June 2019. Since July 2020, 17 formed
police units have been evaluated and found to be performing satisfactorily. The
criteria for measuring their performance included their ability to engage with
communities and their understanding of the mandate and protection of civilians, as
well as command and control. Challenges identified included the need to increase the
number of mine-protected vehicles and to replace damaged ones. Units were also
recommended to further improve their language capacity, enhance force protection
and increase safety and security measures, including on patrols.
Performance evaluations were conducted on a quarterly basis and highlighted
improvements and steps taken by units and police-contributing countries over the past
months. Performance improvement plans continue to be implem ented by all units.
Since my previous letter (S/2020/481), no instances of undeclared caveats by
troop-contributing countries have been recorded.
Challenges
The coup d’état of 18 August and the ensuing institutional uncertainty had the
potential to add significant challenges to the operations of the Mission on the ground.
Ultimately, MINUSMA maintained effective coordination with the Malian
Defence and Security Forces during that period, allowing for the acceleration of its
operations to protect civilians in central and northern Mali. The sanctions imposed by
the Economic Community of West African States after the coup and lifted on
6 October 2020 had a limited impact on the operations of the Mis sion. They were in
part mitigated by remedial measures undertaken by the Mission, such as an air bridge
with neighbouring countries to facilitate staff travel, including of individual officers,
and collaboration with Member States to ensure the supply of e ssential goods.

4/6

20-17530

S/2020/1282

MINUSMA reinforced its COVID-19 mitigation measures to minimize the
impact on operations. A COVID-19 Task Force established in March 2020 continued
its coordination efforts to ensure preventive measures and an integrated approach with
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes. Uniformed components established
a COVID-19 Task Group and a monitoring unit to monitor compliance with
COVID-19 protection and prevention guidelines, including the 14-day quarantine
period. Eighty-nine cases were reported among the forces during the troop rotations.
MINUSMA has also taken steps to improve the availability of COVID-19 testing kits,
and it received three testing laboratories in October 2020.
Equipment shortfalls continued to hamper the performance of MINUSMA.
Rotary wing aircrafts, which are key enablers, are in short supply, following the recent
repatriation of a unit. As a result, the use of the helicopter fleet by the military
component of the Mission is limited to 25 per cent, having a significa nt impact on its
mobility and ability to respond to emerging threats against civilians in a rapid and
flexible manner. The Secretariat continues to work with troop - and policecontributing countries to address that essential gap in order to enhance oper ational
mobility and make full use of the Mission adaptation plan.
Improvised explosive devices have a heavy impact on the civilian population
and remain the main threat to MINUSMA, especially on main supply roads and
against logistic convoys. Since July 2020, 98 improvised explosive devices have been
used in Mali, including 39 against MINUSMA (19 were collected and neutralized by
MINUSMA and 20 detonated). While international forces continue to encounter
improvised explosive devices in central and northern Mali, recent attacks in
previously unaffected regions may indicate a deterioration of the security situation in
areas of the south. The Mission remains focused on enhancing measures to improve
the safety of its personnel.
Troop rotations
On 1 July 2020, deployments and rotations of uniformed personnel
progressively resumed, after their suspension in March as a result of the COVID -19
pandemic.
MINUSMA continued to implement quarantine measures before and after the
deployments. In late August 2020, rotations of contingents and individual uniformed
personnel from the region were partially affected by the travel restrictions imposed
as part of the ECOWAS sanctions following the coup d’état of 18 August in Bamako.
The deployments, rotations and repatriations of personnel resumed following the
lifting of the sanctions in October.
Implementation of the integrated strategic framework and transition plan
The Mission continues to use the integrated strategic framework for increased
coordination and complementarity between the Mission and the United Nations
country team. It serves as a tool to leverage comparative advantages and delineation
of responsibilities, as well as for the progressive transition of MINUSMA
responsibilities. In line with the directive of the Secretary-General on transition
planning of February 2019, the transition calendar was developed in February 2020
and a capacity mapping of national and international stakeholders is envisaged. Terms
of reference have also been developed for an exercise that will identify technical and
operational gaps and capacities of the United Nations system and national
stakeholders in Mali, with a view to progressively transferring MINUSMA -related
responsibilities to those essential partners. The planned gender- and human rightssensitive conflict analyses have been delayed owing to COVID -19 pandemic

20-17530

5/6

S/2020/1282

restrictions, and it is envisaged to conduct them in early 2021 in parallel to, and in
support of, the capacity-mapping exercise.
Comprehensive performance assessment
MINUSMA continued to roll out the Comprehensive Performance Assessment
System. For the second consecutive year, MINUSMA used that System to inform the
development of the 2021/22 budget report, streamlining its framework with a focus
on having a greater impact in support of more effective alignment of resources and
mandate delivery, while considering the evolving political and security challenges in
Mali. In November 2020, MINUSMA conducted its first performance assessment,
bringing together Mission components and pillars in an integrated exercise to collect
data, analyse progress towards mandate delivery and propose recommendations for
consideration by the senior leadership.
Planning and the road map towards a long-term exit strategy for the Mission
In accordance with resolution 2531 (2020), MINUSMA has begun to work on
the development of a long-term road map assessing the continued challenges to peace
and security in Mali to ensure a phased, coordinated and deliberate transition of
security responsibilities, opening the way for a possible exit strategy for the Mission
when the conditions are met, without jeopardizing the stability of Mali and the region.
Taking into account the new realities on the ground and the complex challenges
that Mali faces, a sequenced approach is envisaged with a set of realistic, relevant and
clearly measurable benchmarks and conditions for the 18-month transition period,
which is expected to culminate in national elections.
In keeping with its mandate and building on the national action plan,
MINUSMA, in coordination with the country team, will focus its efforts during a first
phase on: (a) the political process and institutional reform; (b) protection and se curity
support; (c) the national elections; (d) the restoration and extension of State authority;
(e) the rule of law and the fight against impunity; and (f) socioeconomic recovery.
The second phase of the long-term road map will focus on major outstanding
challenges to be addressed following the transition period and the required capacities
to allow MINUSMA to start planning for a phased and coordinated transition of
security responsibilities as well as a transfer of responsibilities to the United Nations
country team and national stakeholders, based on capacity mapping.
The third phase will be developed at a later stage and will consist of a possible
exit strategy for the Mission that envisages a progressive withdrawal, when conditions
are met, without jeopardizing the stability of Mali and the region.
As outlined in my previous letter, the role of MINUSMA in Mali remains
critical, notably as the country implements its political transition and advances in the
implementation of the Peace Agreement and the stabilization of central Mali.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

6/6

20-17530
