S/2018/900

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 October 2018
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on women and peace
and security*
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to the presidential statement dated
26 October 2010 (S/PRST/2010/22), in which the Security Council requested annual
reports on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and resolution 2122 (2013),
and called for updates on progress, challenges and gaps across all areas of the women
and peace and security agenda. While highlighting notable achievements and trends
over the past year, the report provides an account of the continued weak delivery on
key commitments and draws attention to areas of stagnation or regression. The report
shows that significant challenges persist with regard to the meaningful participation
of women in conflict resolution. We continue to witness devastating failures to respect
international human rights and humanitarian law across conflicts, particularly with
regard to grave violations of women’s human rights. In many settings, justice,
recourse and reparation remain out of reach. Women and girls also remain unable to
access essential services and livelihood opportunities, placing them at increased risk
and threatening the short- and long-term resilience of communities. These
developments, and the increasing threats against women’s human rights defenders,
fundamentally undermine global efforts to prevent conflict and sustain peace.
2.
In 2020, the United Nations, Member States, regional organizations and civil
society will mark the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
The lead-up to this milestone, and the anniversary itself, provide important
opportunities to highlight and appraise progress and revise strategies to deliver results
ahead of and beyond 2020. Based upon my commitment last year (see S/2017/861)
and in preparation for 2020, the present report features a special focus on the
meaningful participation and representation of women in peace processes and the
implementation of peace agreements. Details are provided on trends, good practices
and challenges in this area, and recommendations offered to address the continued
underrepresentation of women in efforts aimed at resolving conflict. The report then
provides updates and progress across indicators for women, peace and sec urity;
recommendations of the three 2015 peace and security reviews, including the global
study on the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000); 1 and the
implementation of resolution 2242 (2015).
__________________

* The present report was submitted after final verification with the relevant entities.
1
Radhika Coomaraswamy, Preventing Conflict, Transforming Justice, Securing the Peace: A
Global Study on the Implementation of United Nations Security Council resolution 1325 (United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), 2015).

18-16827 (E)

181018

*1816827*

S/2018/900

3.
The report is based on data and analysis provided by entities of the United
Nations system, including peace operations and country teams; inputs from Member
States, regional organizations and civil society; and analysis of other globally
recognized data sources.

II. Follow-up to the three peace and security reviews
4.
Over the past year, the international community continued to face a world where
violence, inequality and injustice prevent peace. More countries were experiencing
some form of violent conflict than at any time in the previous 30 years. 2 For the fifth
year in a row, wars, violence and persecution drove forced displacement worldwide
to a new high: 68.5 million people displaced at the end of 2017. 3
5.
Even in those places where impressive strides towards peace have included
correspondingly impressive efforts and investments in gender equality, new and
gender-specific spikes in violence have occurred, facilitated by the erosion of
governance, security and social support systems, and by the diversion both of finances
and of political and media attention. In Colombia, for example, where the 2016 peace
agreement and its follow-up provide inspiration through strong language on gender
equality and the engagement of women’s civil society organizations, threats against
and killings of human rights defenders have since increased, 4 as have the number of
new armed groups and incidents of femicide. At the same time, frozen and protracted
crises and conflicts continue to require our sustained focus and commitment. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, for example, where ongoing and complex
humanitarian and peace and security crises continue, aid from the Development
Assistance Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD) to promote gender equality was only $8 per capita. 5 The United
Nations has also documented more than 800 cases of conflict -related sexual violence
in 2017: a 56 per cent increase from 2016 (see S/2018/250).
6.
I remain concerned about lack of progress across the most fundamental
commitments to peace and security, human rights and gender equality. Sustainable
approaches to the challenges highlighted throughout the present report will require
our creativity and long-term commitment to move beyond one-off project-based
approaches to women, peace and security to achieve system-level and structural
changes. As a preface to the report, I highlight four ke y areas, which I have prioritized
and will continue to prioritize.

A.

Women, peace and security for prevention and peace
7.
My prioritization of prevention includes placing gender equality and the
meaningful participation of women at the centre of all efforts to prevent conflict and
sustain peace. Research continues to demonstrate a direct relationship between gender
equality and resilience to and prevention of conflict (see S/2017/861, para. 1). Not
only can violence against women serve as an early warning sign for violence, 6 but it

__________________

United Nations and World Bank, Pathways for Peace: Inclusive Approaches to Preventing
Violent Conflict (Washington, D.C., World Bank, 2018), p. 12.
3
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Global Trends: Forced
Displacement in 2017 (Geneva, 2018).
4
In Colombia, as at August 2018, 14 women’s human rights defenders had been killed; 3 of the
victims were from the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex community.
5
OECD Development Assistance Committee, data for 2012–2013.
6
Thomas Graham Jr. and others, “Putting women in their place”, Baker Center Journal of Applied
Public Policy, vol. I, No. I (2007); and United Nations and World Bank, Pathways for Peace,
p. 116.
2

2/34

18-16827

S/2018/900

can also indicate likelihood of compliance with broader international legal
obligations, with higher levels of violence against women correlated to lower
compliance. 7 In addition, countries with low human rights standards, including with
regard to gender equality, are more likely to have militarized and violent inter -State
disputes. 8
8.
Close to two decades of implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda has generated a wealth of policies and programming options that directly
contribute to the prevention of conflict and crisis. At this stage, however, these efforts
require increased, innovative and sustained political support and financing. They also
require implementation of relevant recommendations of the 2015 peace and security
reviews. I am confident that, if Member States and the United Nations can rise to the
task and truly implement commitments related to women, peace and security, there is
an enormous potential for peace.

B.

Gender parity in peace and security
9.
Representation of women in peace and security efforts is one essential
measurement of commitments related to women, peace and security, particularly the
representation and meaningful participation of women in peace operations. One year
ago, I launched my system-wide gender parity strategy, with a specific emphasis on
peace operations. It is in these settings where the representation of women is lowest,
the rate of change is slowest and the potential impacts on our effectiveness and
credibility remain critical. I am pleased to report progress at the most senior levels. 9
This year, we achieved gender parity in my Senior Management Group 10 and among
our Resident Coordinators. These gains have been mad e while simultaneously
challenging perceptions of women’s traditional roles. In March 2018, I appointed the
first woman to head the Department of Political Affairs and, as at September 2018,
women comprised 41 per cent of heads and deputy heads of missions led or co-led by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Political Affairs.
At the D-2 level, the number of women increased from 17 to 24 per cent in the past
year.
10. I am committed to addressing the limited progress on the appo intment of women
to mediation-related and good offices functions. I have recently appointed women as
my Special Envoy on Myanmar, the United Nations Representative to the Geneva
International Discussions and the temporary special consultant on Cyprus. This
progress demonstrates that women leaders are available, and that better representation
of women can be achieved quickly through genuine commitment and political will.
11. Nevertheless, the reality in our peace operations is that the number of women at
all levels has stagnated, and is at risk of decreasing in the coming years through the
imminent downsizing of several missions. In the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan, as at December 2017, for example, women comprised only 32 per
cent of international staff, 38 per cent of United Nations Volunteers, 11 per cent of
National Professional Officers and 7 per cent of Local level staff (see A/72/888S/2018/539, para. 54). In response, the Mission has taken special measures to address
barriers faced by national female staff by reducing the prerequisite entry -level years

__________________

Valerie Hudson and others, Sex and World Peace (New York, Columbia University Press, 2012);
and United Nations and World Bank, Pathways for Peace, p. 116.
8
Siân Herbert, “Links between gender-based violence and outbreaks of violent conflict”
(Birmingham, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, University of Birmingham
Governance and Social Development Research Center, 2014).
9
See www.un.org/gender.
10
At present, 26 of the 45 members are women.
7

18-16827

3/34

S/2018/900

of experience for the past three years. I welcome such actions. In line with the
challenges being faced, I have requested my senior leadership to immediately form a
working group on emergency measures for the implementation of the gender parity
strategy in peace operations. This is an emergency that affects the credibility and
effectiveness of the United Nations and requires decisi ve action. I hope to count on
the support of our Member States as we tackle this challenge.
12. Peacekeeping operations and uniformed personnel remain the most visible
representatives of the United Nations, working directly with communities each day.
While there has been an increase in the number of women deployed as contingent
commanders and several missions now have female police and military peacekeeper
networks, and military and police gender advisers, overall numbers remain
persistently and unacceptably low, with the representation of women among military
troops and police officers at 4 and 10 per cent, respectively, as at December 2017. As
at July 2018, 3 of 16 (19 per cent) police components 11 were headed by women and
there was only one woman military Force Commander. 12 Targeted efforts, such as the
course led by United Nations Police for female senior police officers aimed at
increasing the participation of female police leadership in United Nations
peacekeeping operations and special political missions, as well as the training course
for female military officers led by the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), continue to serve as important
mechanisms to improve these figures. I welcome the innovative leaders hip of the
Elsie Initiative of the Government of Canada to accelerate our efforts with regard to
the meaningful participation of women in peace operations, including through
incentivizing greater numbers of deployments in line with Security Council resolut ion
2242 (2015). The United Nations looks forward to partnering on this initiative,
including through the newly established multi-partner trust fund.
13. An important pipeline for senior positions, as well as impact on the
implementation of commitments related to women, peace and security, is the presence
of women in national administrations. I call on Member States to provide gender balanced lists of nominated candidates for senior posts and address barr iers to the
participation of women in elected and appointed posts at the national level. In April
2018, only 40 out of 193 (22.5 per cent) of permanent representatives of Member
States to the United Nations in New York were women. Out of the 15 Security Co uncil
seats, three (Poland, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
the United States of America) were filled by female ambassadors.
14. Achieving gender parity also requires efforts that go beyond the numbers to
transform professional and institutional cultures of discrimination and gender bias in
all its forms, including institutionalized policies and practices and individual
conscious and unconscious bias. 13 We must be holistic and act upon evidence 14 to
address the most glaring practices of exclusion, along with those practices which
quietly undermine women who hold positions at all levels and contribute to conditions
conducive to sexual harassment, sexual exploitation and abuse, and other abuses of
authority. I am confident that, through comprehensive approaches to gender parity,
clear directives for all senior leaders and staff to act as champions of gender equality,
and the corresponding changes to mainstreaming a gender perspective outlined below,
the United Nations will be better positioned to support Member States in achieving
its commitments related to women, peace and security, and will transform the
entrenched gendered power relations and institutional culture of the Organization.
__________________

African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei and United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus.
12
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization.
13
United Nations system-wide strategy on gender parity (2017), pp. 4, 10, 19 and 25.
14
Ibid., p. 4.
11

4/34

18-16827

S/2018/900

C.

Ending sexual exploitation, abuse, and sexual harassment
15. I remain committed to ending all forms of sexual exploitation and abuse within
the Organization. An overview of measures taken by the Organization, and data on
allegations and investigations, are available in my latest report on speci al measures
for protection from sexual exploitation and abuse ( A/72/751 and A/72/751/Corr.1). In
2017, 62 allegations were reported against personnel deployed in 10 peacekeeping
missions and one political mission. 15 In addition, 75 allegations were reported by
personnel deployed by other United Nations entities, and one reported allegation
concerned a personnel member of a non-United Nations international force operating
under a Security Council mandate.
16. I, together with my Special Coordinator on Improving the United Nations
Response to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse, the Victims’ Rights Advocate and
Member States, will continue to act on multiple levels, by taking all appropriate
measures to prevent and respond to sexual exploitation and abuse and uphold victims ’
rights. To foster a safe and inclusive work environment, I have also made addressing
sexual harassment a priority and, together with my senior managers, made a
commitment to a zero tolerance approach to sexual harassment. 16
17. I call on Member States to support our efforts to address root causes and risk
factors, including action to end cultures of impunity, abuse of power and gender
inequality. I also reiterate my call to Member States for prompt deployment of
national investigative officers with appropriate expertise to address allegations,
ensure that investigations meet international standards, agree to joint investigations
with the United Nations, prosecute alleged perpetrators where there is credible
evidence and sanction perpetrators in accordance with the gravity of the offence. I
further call on Member States to ensure the security, dignity and well -being of victims
and to provide them reparations.

D.

Mainstreaming a gender perspective in peace and security
18. Analysis undertaken in conflict-affected settings that lacks a gender lens is
partial and can result in flawed analysis and planning, which can have a detrimental
and long-term impact on the whole of society. Mainstreaming a gender perspective
into all policies and programmes in the United Nations system is a longstanding
commitment of the Organization and requires United Nations entities to ensure that
all planned actions include tailored assessments of implications for women and girls.
It ensures that women and girls are not only equal beneficiaries of the work of the
United Nations, but also equal partners. Gender-responsive analysis requires us to
question and unmask unequal power dynamics that underline the realities of the
experiences of women and girls and the gender-specific nature of the various forms
of discrimination, violence and abuse.
19. Since last year, the United Nations has strengthened its work to provide joined up analysis of conflict and crisis situations to inform strategic planning instruments,
and I have continued to require gender perspectives in discussions of my Executive
Committee. During the reporting period, through the leadership of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and UN-Women, a joint initiative on gender-responsive
conflict analysis in transitioning contexts was piloted. In the three pilot projects
undertaken in the first half of 2018 — in Haiti, Liberia and Darfur — all participating
United Nations entities operating across the spectrum of peace operations engaged in

__________________
15
16

18-16827

For the details of each allegation, see https://conduct.unmissions.org.
Note to correspondents on the recent Chief Executives Board’s session (New York, 4 May 2018).
5/34

S/2018/900

common analysis aimed at identifying planning options and strategic outcomes for
transitions, drawdowns and related benchmarks. Initial findings confirm that the
Organization’s capacity for gender-responsive conflict analysis has been inconsistent
and weak. Key lessons learned included, firstly, the need to ensure that priorities
related to gender equality and women, peace and security are built into the overall
conflict analysis processes and not run as a stand-alone or parallel process and,
secondly, that the quality of these processes directly depends on the level of inclusion
and engagement of various partners and beneficiaries, including women ’s
organizations and representatives.
20. A recent example of ongoing gender-sensitive conflict analysis by the United
Nations, undertaken through the peacekeeping mission in the Central African
Republic, exposed a wide range of issues related to the human rights and
empowerment of women that will impede sustainable peace, including political
marginalization as a root cause, risks of homelessness for women whose husbands
have left them or were killed during conflict, rejection of claims by widows with
regard to the inheritance of land, growing numbers of female-headed households and
the importance of women’s organizations as mediation actors at the community level.
21. The effective delivery of the Organization’s peace and security mandates
requires investment in dedicated senior-level technical support and necessary gender
expertise across the system. As part of my own commitment, within the Executive
Office of the Secretary-General, I entrusted my Senior Adviser on Policy with guiding
our efforts related to gender and the women and peace and se curity agenda. I am
concerned by continued cuts and downgrading of already limited gender posts
dedicated to providing such expertise and advisory services, including in mission
settings and fragile contexts, and would ask my senior leadership to similarly
prioritize this type of expertise.
22. To support the Organization’s efforts to promote gender equality in peace
operations, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Field
Support and the Department of Political Affairs continue to wo rk towards improved
availability of gender advisers and experts. This includes gender units at headquarters
and field missions, and a gender focal point network of staff across the entities who
take on part-time responsibilities related to gender and to wo men, peace and security.
In 2017, the Department of Political Affairs had a total of 25 gender advisers deployed
to 12 field missions or offices of special envoys. 17 Of these, four (16 per cent) were
at the senior level (P-5 and above), seven were at the P-4 level (28 per cent) and more
than half (56 per cent) were at the P-3 level or below. 18 For the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, 9 out of 15 peacekeeping missions have gender units,
although only four include senior gender advisers as per the recomme ndation of the
2015 peace and security reviews. Additionally, there are 53 gender advisers and
officers in these units. There are also 12 police gender and sexual and gender -based
violence advisers, 18 military gender and protection advisers, two United Na tions
Police specialized teams focusing on sexual and gender-based violence deployed in
Haiti and South Sudan, and 21 women’s protection advisers deployed in seven
mission settings (see S/2018/250, para. 4).
23. Beyond peace operations, various members of United Nations country teams
and, particularly, UN-Women, continued to provide dedicated support for the
__________________

In the present report, information has been reported only for special political missions with a
minimum staff capacity of 10 professional-level staff. Out of 17 missions, three did not have
full-time gender advisers in 2017: the Office of the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia
and the Office of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Cyprus.
18
Four staff members at the P-3 level, three at the P-2 level and seven at the P-1 or G level.
17

6/34

18-16827

S/2018/900

implementation of commitments related to women, peace and security. UN -Women
maintained a country presence in a total of 82 countries, including 28 conflict and
post-conflict countries, 19 and continued to implement a range of peace, security and
humanitarian initiatives in 65 countries.
24. Our analyses must also go beyond the drivers of conflict to include the drivers
of peace and stability. Inclusive and gender-responsive conflict and peace analysis
should play an essential role in identifying existing national and local capacities and
roles for inclusive public policy, peacebuilding, development, and peace and security
arrangements, and help to create the foundations for stability and durable peace.
Building on the pilot initiative, I encourage minimum requirements for the United
Nations system to consistently put into practice high-quality, context-specific and
inclusive political and conflict analyses that put gender priorities at the centre. I
encourage all entities to join this pilot effort and to integrate quality gender analysis
into their own efforts in this area as a minimum requirement in all phases of planning
and implementation.

III. Women’s leadership and meaningful participation in
conflict resolution
25. Women remain underrepresented and unrepresented in efforts to negotiate
peaceful political resolutions to conflict, including in process es designed to create
entry points or mitigate the impact of conflict. Although women continue to play
instrumental roles in all efforts to resolve conflict, including humanitarian access
agreements, ceasefires and corresponding efforts related to development, their
successes often go unrecognized and their work largely does not result in access to
subsequent political processes. Between 1990 and 2017, women constituted only
2 per cent of mediators, 8 per cent of negotiators and 5 per cent of witne sses and
signatories in all major peace processes. 20 This poor level of representation, progress
in women’s leadership and meaningful participation in peace processes, along with
corresponding challenges in measuring how women contribute their experience an d
ideas and assert influence amid consistently male-dominated processes, has been
consistently raised since the 2015 reviews and the findings of the global study. 21
26. The present section highlights how the United Nations, Member States, regional
organizations and civil society can work together to improve the representation and
meaningful participation of women. This entails (a) acknowledging the changing
nature of our efforts to resolve conflict and the need for inclusive approaches to
conflict resolution and prevention; (b) addressing persistent barriers to the meaningful
participation of women, including institutionalized discrimination and gender bias,
and lack of recognition for the full human rights of women; (c) remedying inadequate
delivery from the United Nations with regard to mainstreaming the human rights of
women and gender perspectives across all areas of work; (d) recognizing the expertise
of women as mediators; and (e) including gender-sensitive provisions in peace
agreements and tangible modalities and mechanisms for the implementation of peace
__________________

For the present report, this includes agenda items of which the Security Council is currently
seized and which were considered by the Council at a formal m eeting during the period from
1 January 2017 to 31 December 2017, countries with peacekeeping or special political mission s
in 2017 and countries that received programmatic funds from t he Peacebuilding Fund in 2017.
20
Council on Foreign Relations, “Women’s participation in peace processes”.
21
Coomaraswamy, Preventing Conflict; and Thania Paffenholz and others, Making Women
Count — Not Just Counting Women: Assessing Women’s Inclusion and Influence on Peace
Negotiations (Geneva Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies and
UN-Women, 2016).
19

18-16827

7/34

S/2018/900

agreements that include the meaningful participation of women, including young
women, 22 in their design, monitoring and implementation.
27. It is my hope that the present section spurs serious delibera tion and actions
among relevant stakeholders to directly support civil society and to advance gender
equality and the influential participation of women in peace processes and conflict
resolution. It is informed by the discussions of an expert group of mor e than 50
diverse experts and practitioners 23 convened by UN-Women in May 2018. Their
deliberations and recommendations were informed by experiences and practices in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Colombia, Georgia, Kenya, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal,
the Philippines, South Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Uganda, Yemen and
Kosovo. 24
28. We have reached a point where approaches and strategies focused only on the
traditional idea of “the peace table” are insufficient. Peace processes often stall or
advance only to the level of mechanisms aimed at conflict management. Today’s
conflicts are also increasingly regionalized, and often asymmetrical, with some
responses emphasizing counter-terrorism operations and processes and lacking
emphasis on international human rights and humanitarian law standards (see
A/72/495). While ongoing processes aimed at resolving conflict include peace
processes, they also include humanitarian access agreements, such as those negotiated
in the Syrian Arab Republic; ceasefires, such as those negotiated in Yemen;
development plans, such as the United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel; 25 and
measures occurring in counter-terrorism spaces, such as “screening”, 26 prosecution,
and rehabilitation and reintegration, as in the Lake Chad Basin. The United Nations
and Member States must approach these diverse mechanisms and processes prepared
to address the full and distinct scope of enabling and constraining factors related to
the meaningful participation of women as described throughout the present section,
including by mainstreaming a gender perspective.
29. Women have an equal right to participate in all efforts to prevent and resolve
conflict. Beyond this, their meaningful participation has concrete impacts on
outcomes. The term “meaningful” in the context of the right of women to participation
is intended to challenge superficial efforts to include women without genuinely
extending them the opportunity to influence outcomes. In some cases, this has taken
the form of parallel processes or advisory bodies that are unable to contribute to main
processes and outcomes. To be clear, however, as recently highlighted by Mossarat
Qadeem, co-founder of PAIMAN Alumni Trust, in her briefing to the Security
Council, the exclusion of women is not about culture; it is about power. The
meaningful participation of women is often prevented on this basis. 27
30. I am concerned, although unsurprised, that the May 2018 expert group meeting
identified the following as prime barriers to the participation of women:
__________________

UN-Women, “Young women in peace and security: at the intersecti on of the YPS and WPS
agendas” (New York, 2017).
23
UN-Women, Women’s Meaningful Participation in Negotiating Peace and the Implementation of
Peace Agreements: Report of the Expert Group Meeting, report of the meeting convened by
UN-Women in New York on 16 and 17 May 2018. Available at www.unwomen.org/en/digitallibrary/publications/2018/10/egm-report-womens-meaningful-participation-in-negotiatingpeace#view.
24
References to Kosovo shall be understood to be in the context of resolution 1244 (1999).
25
United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel: working together for a prosperous and peaceful Sahel
(May 2018). Available at https://unowas.unmissions.org/sites/default/files/english_summary_
report.pdf.
26
See Security Council resolution 2396 (2017).
27
See http://webtv.un.org/meetings-events/security-council/watch/part-1-mediation-and-settlementof-disputes-security-council-8334th-meeting/5828414277001/?term=.
22

8/34

18-16827

S/2018/900

institutionalized gender bias and discrimination, continued and high prevalence of
sexual and gender-based violence, lack of economic, social and cultural rights for
women, low levels of political participation of women prior to conflict, and the
continuing levels of poverty, food insecurity, disparity and deprivation experienced
by women and girls.
31. If we are to progress, we must begin with the human rights of women and those
systems which prevent their fulfilment. Even if diverse and inclusive representation
of women is accepted during negotiation, it may not result in successes with regard
to gender equality. In those cases in which gender equality advocates, including
women and men, can achieve inclusion and implementation of transformative women’s
rights and gender equality agendas, such outcomes can often face significant resistance
and backlash from parties to conflict, international actors and community members.
32. I would encourage Member States to support an equal footing for women within
local, national and regional peace processes. This includes requiring and advocating
for processes to include meaningful and influential roles for women ’s civil society
organizations and core, decision-shaping and decision-making roles for women with
the same access and at the same level as men; platforms and mechanisms dedicated
to addressing the full scope of the human rights of women and girls and gender
equality, specifically as it is linked to prevention; and inclusion of gend er expertise
and gender-responsive analysis from the start. Investment in capacity-building of both
women and men, particularly gate-keepers and those in positions of decision-making,
in preparatory processes and inclusive process design is essential.
33. It is also critical that we end the frequent practice of bringing women into
processes late or, too often, as tokens. I encourage creative and practical steps to
eliminate barriers, such as travel expenses and the need for childcare, mobility and
translation. This includes through the establishment of rapid -response funding
mechanisms, with capacities to approve requests on short notice, thereby empowering
women to seize critical opportunities in peace processes and related events. In
Myanmar, the women’s participation fund established by the United States Agency
for International Development with the global development firm DAI is one such
example.
34. Women must be part of pre-negotiation processes if they are to influence and
inform the entirety of such processes. In addition, improved linkages, information
flows and feedback mechanisms are needed between various mediation tracks to
ensure that decisions made are inclusive and rooted in realities on the ground. In many
processes, the mobilization of women and mediation efforts at the local level have
contributed to reigniting talks, prevented escalation of violence and facilitated the
provision of assistance to those in need. For instance, in the Central African Republic
and Mali, women successfully contributed to negotiating between armed actors to halt
the escalation of intercommunal tensions; in Pakistan, Sri Lanka and Yemen, women
have facilitated ceasefires, humanitarian access and peace talks. In the Syrian Arab
Republic, women have successfully negotiated local ceasefires, mediated the creation
of civilian safe zones and coordinated humanitarian and relief initiatives. In Yemen,
women play a critical and active role in processes for the resolution of tribal disputes,
leveraging the strong history of female participation in certain aspects of Yemeni
tribal systems. 28 Yet, formal recognition of these efforts and the participation of
women in formal peace processes remain limited. 29
__________________

Hanan Tabbara and Garrett Rubin, “Women on the frontlines of conflict resolution and
negotiation: community voices from Syria, Iraq and Yemen”, discussion paper (New York,
UN-Women, 2018).
29
UN-Women, “Syrian women’s peace efforts: crucial yet unrecognized”, 5 September 2018.
Available at http://arabstates.unwomen.org/en/news/stories/2018/9/syrian-women-peace-efforts.
28

18-16827

9/34

S/2018/900

35. With the strength of the women and peace and security agenda growing, there
has been progress in efforts to integrate gender perspectives and promote the
meaningful participation and representation of women in the work of the United
Nations on conflict prevention, conflict resolution and sustaining peace. The
obligations for the Organization to “walk the talk” are high, and, I, in collaboration
with Member States, will continue to promote the representation and meaningful
participation of women across mediation efforts, including on mediation teams and
in leadership positions.
36. In 2017, requests for technical gender expertise were received and such
expertise was provided in three out of four mediation processes in which the United
Nations was involved as lead or co-lead mediator, 30 and women were included in all
United Nations teams supporting mediation efforts. After a drop in 2016,
consultations with women’s civil society organizations were again ensured in all
processes supported during 2017. This included regular consultations between the
Special Envoy for Syria and women’s civil society leaders through the Syrian
Women’s Advisory Board and groups in the context of the Civil Society Support
Room. It also included consultations with the Technical Committee on Gender
Equality in Cyprus and consultations with the Working Gr oup on Women, Youth,
Peace and Security in West Africa and the Sahel.
37. In addition, since 2010, the Department of Political Affairs has produced
guidance 31 and delivered training to translate commitments on gender and mediation
into practical action. Over 200 people from the United Nations Secretariat, regional
organizations, Member States and civil society have now participated in the annual
United Nations high-level seminar on gender and inclusive mediation processes 32 and
over 300 staff from headquarters and special political missions have been trained on
the implementation of the Department’s commitments related to women, peace and
security. All United Nations lead mediators and staff supporting peace processes are
strongly encouraged to use strategies and tools to design inclusive and gendersensitive mediation strategies, to advocate for the meaningful participation of women
and the inclusion of gender-sensitive provisions within all thematic areas of peace
agreements. The Organization will continue to review the impact of training sessions
held and guidance developed to ensure that it is contributing to meaningful change.
38. Peacekeeping missions also supported a range of processes. In the Central
African Republic, for instance, the mission worked with women on local peace
agreements such as that between the 3R rebel group and the self-defence force in
Bambari and Bouar and supported the establishment of mediation cells comprised of
30 per cent women. Such localized efforts continue to build a base for the engagement
of women in national peace and reconciliation processes, including the African
Initiative led by the African Union. In Darfur, consultations with women were
supported to inform inclusive solutions to implementing the Darfur-wide internal
dialogue and consultation, which now includes 30 per cent women. In South Sudan,
the mission, women in politics, members of the women’s caucus and civil society
organizations jointly mobilized to discuss the participation of women in peace and
political processes on the eve of phase II of the high-level revitalization processes.
__________________

Geneva international discussions and discussions on Cyprus and on the Syrian Arab Republic.
The United Nations also provided extensive technical expertise, including on gender, to the
South Sudan process led by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, and to a number
of other processes in which the United Nations was not the lead or co-lead.
31
United Nations, “Guidance on gender and inclusive mediation strategies ” (Nairobi, 2017); and
“Guidance for mediators: addressing conflict-related sexual violence in ceasefire and peace
agreements” (New York, 2012).
32
In 2017, the seminar was co-organized with the Crisis Management Centre in Finland and the
International Peace Research Institute, Oslo, Centre on Gender, Peace and Security.
30

10/34

18-16827

S/2018/900

As a result, the group adopted a joint communiqué, which was used as a key reference
among the delegates who joined in the High-Level Revitalization Forum in Addis
Ababa and included advocacy for an increase in the ratio of women to men in peace
and political processes to 50:50. In Kosovo, community dialogues led by women
through the Mitrovica women’s trust-building initiative have been significant in
sustaining peace.
39. Since my previous report, networks of women mediators (see S/2017/861,
para. 17) have continued to evolve and connect across regions as a direct response to
ongoing blockages of the meaningful participation of women and t heir influence in
all aspects of peace processes. These networks form part of a new movement aimed
at enhancing the influence of women throughout the duration of peace processes, from
conflict analysis to preventive diplomacy, and to peacemaking and post -conflict
peacebuilding and reconciliation.
40. In March 2018, representatives from several regional networks met in Oslo with
other leading mediation actors with the aim of improving coordination and mutual
support. Three members of my High-level Advisory Board on Mediation also
attended. The meeting emphasized the need for stronger linkages between women -led
mediation at the grass-roots and local levels and processes at the national and global
levels. It resulted in the creation of a contact group with rep resentatives from each
regional network. Individual networks, such as FemWise -Africa, have made progress
in operationalization and are actively contributing to regional peacemaking efforts.
41. These networks are linked to growing global recognition of the need to go
beyond approaches aimed only at “stopping the guns” towards processes that can help
foster positive peace, a concept that includes accountable and inclusive governance,
security from physical harm and full enjoyment of other inviolable human r ights.
Strong, open lines of communication between mediation networks and government
institutions, including those involved in peace and security processes, must be built.
While such networks serve an important purpose, they should not become a parallel
structure for women or entrench marginalization. Nor should they be focused only on
the capacity-building of women, but rather on continued joint action and improved
capacity of peace and security processes to be inclusive and responsive for all.
Gender-sensitive peace agreements and their implementation
42. Gender-sensitive language in peace agreements is essential for all issues and
can set the foundation for gender inclusion during the peacebuilding phase, in
political life and representation, and in rehabilitation and development processes. It
can also support accountability for gender-based human rights violations, including
sexual violence. The inclusion of gender-responsive provisions in peace agreements
is still not consistent, however. Data show significant fluctuations over time, along
with a continued downward trend since 2015, with only 3 out of 11 agreements signed
in 2017 (27 per cent) containing such provisions (see figure I). 33 In addition, only
7 per cent of agreements signed between 2000 and 2016 refer to specific modalities
for the implementation of gender provisions. 34 Last year, the process led by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development for South Sudan resulted in the
Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities, Protection of Civilians and Humanitarian
__________________

The Department of Political Affairs has tracked the inclusion of gender issues in partial and
comprehensive national-level peace agreements since 2010, and figures have been reported to the
Security Council in my annual reports on women, peace and security. The Department of Political
Affairs defines ceasefire or peace agreements as contracts signed by two parties to a conflict,
intending to end or significantly transform violent conflict so that it may be addressed more
constructively. Information on peace agreements is available at http://peacemaker.un.org.
34
Christine Bell and Kevin McNicholl, “Implementation of gender provisions in peace agreements:
an overview of the PA-X database” (forthcoming).
33

18-16827

11/34

S/2018/900

Access, which contained provisions linked to the participation, rights and protection
of women and girls.
Figure I
Number of peace agreements signed, with and without gender provisions, 2010–2017

Agreements with gender-sensitive provisions

43. While the fluctuations in percentages can be explained by the relatively small
sample of agreements per year, tracking these trends and the language in agreements
provides insight into factors that both enable and constrain such inclusion. For
instance, in cases where direct investments were made in an inclusive process, with
channels established for the meaningful participation and representation of women
and technical gender expertise made available and used, these corresponded to more
detailed provisions in agreements across issues covered. Research shows that
comprehensive agreements concluded towards the end of a process are more likely to
contain strong and substantive gender provisions. 35 Continued tracking and analysis
of the components of peace agreements helps expand the reperto ire of good practice
and approaches to draw on for future agreements in support of inclusive and
sustainable peace. The growth in open-source databases is facilitating comparative
analysis, contributing to clearer decision-making and practice. 36
44. The current downward trend in gender provisions, and the varying quality of
existing ones, should justify a redoubling of efforts to promote gender-inclusive
processes and agreements. This requires, among other things, increased investment,
promotion of the direct representation of women in negotiations and striving for
gender-balanced mediation teams with members who are well versed in obligations
related to gender equality and women, peace and security. It also requires access to
technical thematic gender expertise on related issues and the establishment of
contributing advisory bodies or gender commissions, along with channels for direct
consultations with women’s civil society organizations and affected communities.
45. A peace process does not end once a peace deal is signed or a national dialogue
process is completed; it is often merely the beginning. This is even more so for women
__________________

Katrina Lee-Koo and Jacqui True, “Toward inclusive peace: mapping gender-sensitive peace
agreements 2000–2016” (Monash University, April 2018).
36
UN-Women, Women’s Meaningful Participation in Negotiating Peace and the Implementation of
Peace Agreements (see footnote 23).
35

12/34

18-16827

S/2018/900

and girls, whose experience of elevated levels of violence and insecurity often
continues well beyond any formal end of a conflict. To date, little attention has been
paid to gendered provisions in monitoring arrangements and modalities for the
implementation of peace agreements. Even less attention has been paid to the
inclusion and meaningful participation of women.
46. An analysis of 1,500 peace and political agreements adopted between 2000 and
2016 (140 processes) showed that only 25 agreements mentioned the role of the
engagement of women in implementation. 37 Evidence continues to demonstrate that
the inclusion of such provisions and the participation of women in peace processes
directly relates to improved outcomes with regard to gender equality and to
implementation of peace agreements, and also results in longer-lasting agreements. 38
In Guinea-Bissau, the Women’s Facilitation Group contributed to efforts that
prevented the escalation of political tensions. As a direct result of these advocacy
efforts, the President of Guinea-Bissau held bilateral talks with the speaker of
parliament, the Prime Minister, the President of the Sup reme Court of Justice, and the
leaders of the African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cabo Verde and the
Party for Social Renewal (see S/2017/695 and S/2018/771), contributing to the
eventual breakthrough in the political impasse in the country in June 2018. I call on
Member States and the United Nations system to ensure that the voices and
experiences of women are included across processes, including throug h support and
engagement with civil society, and to create an enabling environment for their
participation. This includes committing to such collaboration on a consistent basis
and taking steps to remove practical and structural barriers to their participa tion as
outlined throughout the present report.
47. I am encouraged by growing research and the documentation of good practice
in this area. In Colombia, for instance, through the Barometer Initiative of the Kroc
Institute for International Peace Studies, innovative data collection approaches
employing “everyday peace indicators” support ongoing monitoring and verification
of compliance by the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) and the
Government of Colombia. Regular briefs are released to hold p arties to the conflict
accountable to the public and to the international community, and data are collected
using a range of sources, including text messages, consultations and interviews.
Monitoring of the provisions of peace agreements, coupled with prop er funding for
such activities, has ensured and can continue to ensure that all provisions, including
gender-specific or gender-related provisions, are implemented. Without
implementation, the most well-formulated provisions have no power. I encourage
Member States to support and fund these efforts, including through the monitoring of
the implementation of gender-related provisions in peace agreements; the
consideration of temporary special measures, 39 such as gender quotas; and the use of
clear methods for the engagement of civil society across implementation mechanisms.

__________________

For a detailed review of the methodology, see Peace Agreement Database project, Definitions.
For the purposes of that database, peace agreements are defined as “formal, publicly available
documents, produced after discussion with conflict protagonists and mutually agreed to by some
or all of them, addressing conflict with a view to ending it”.
38
Coomaraswamy, Preventing Conflict, p. 41; for further information see, Jana Krause, Werner
Krause and Piia Bränfors, “Women’s participation in peace negotiations and the durability of
peace”, International Interactions, vol. 44, No. 6 (2018); and Christine Bell, “Text and context:
evaluating peace agreements for their ‘gender perspective’” (New York, Political Settlements
Research Programme and UN-Women, 2015).
39
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, general recommendation
No. 25 (2004) on temporary special measures.
37

18-16827

13/34

S/2018/900

IV. Regional and national strategies
48. Member States hold the primary responsibility for advancement of the women
and peace and security agenda. As such, the Women, Peace and Securit y Focal Points
Network has great potential to generate much-needed political support to guide
strategic and joint action and solidify results for 2020. It is an essential forum for
developing partnerships, sharing good practice, supporting implementation a t the
national and regional levels, and innovating to promote sustained and predictable
funding for women, peace and security. In its second year, the Network, currently
chaired by Germany, with Spain and Namibia as members of the leadership troika,
and with UN-Women serving as the secretariat, now includes 83 Member States and
regional organizations. At the capital-level meeting held in April in Berlin, members
offered concrete recommendations on participation and representation, accountability
and advocacy and the building of alliances to advance the agenda (see A/72/926S/2018/669). They also voiced concerns about shrinking spaces for civil society and
increasing security risks for defenders of the human rights of women.
49. I note the historic significance of the next annual capital-level meeting to be
held in Windhoek in 2019, as Namibia becomes chair of the Focal Points Network.
The Windhoek Declaration on the tenth anniversary of the United Nations Transitio n
Assistance Group and the Namibia Plan of Action on Mainstreaming a Gender
Perspective in Multidimensional Peace Operations, adopted in May 2000, marked a
critical step towards the adoption of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) under
the Presidency of Namibia of the Council. I call on all members of the Network to
use this moment to champion the full implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda in words and deeds at the global, regional and, most importantly,
national level. The United Nations stands ready to support these efforts.
50. Since my previous report, eight 40 additional Member States adopted national
action plans on women, peace and security, bringing the total number of countri es or
territories with these plans as at September 2018 to 77. 41 Continued work is needed
on the monitoring, reporting, evaluation and budgeting of national strategies and
plans. Only 18 action plans had an allocated budget at adoption, yet 51 current plans
(66 per cent) have monitoring frameworks with progress indicators. As demonstrated
by several Member States, including Jordan and Mali, the use of costing, budgeting
and monitoring and evaluation frameworks can be a productive component of
planning and accountability. Mali now has, for example, dedicated technical expertise
to support the national action plan monitoring and steering committees, which have
reportedly increased plan implementation.
51. Efforts by Member States and civil society to localize i mplementation
continued, with new processes initiated in Afghanistan, Nigeria, the Republic of
Moldova and Ukraine. Localization initiatives supported by the Global Network of
Women Peacebuilders (see S/2017/861, para. 71) are yielding results. In Nepal and
the Philippines, local plans in combination with sustained advocacy from local
__________________
40
41

14/34

Albania, Angola, Cameroon, Guatemala, Jordan, Montenegro, Republic of Moldova and Tunisia.
Afghanistan, Albania, Angola, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bo snia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, Côte
d'Ivoire, Croatia, Czechia, Democratic Republic of Congo, Denmark, El Salvador, Estonia,
Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Liberia, Lithuania,
Mali, Montenegro, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Paraguay, Philippines, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Rwanda, Senegal,
Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Kingdom, United States, State of Palestine and Kosovo.
18-16827

S/2018/900

women’s organizations contributed to an increase in the number of women running
in local elections. In Uganda, the plans resulted in better response to and prevention
of sexual and gender-based violence in local districts.
52. National human rights institutions are a critical link in the chain of
accountability for violations of the human rights of women and prevention. As at
31 July 2018, of the 39 countries and territories reviewed for the present report, 42 23
had national human rights institutions accredited with A or B status, and five had an
ombudsperson institution. Fourteen of those bodies had specific units, departments or
committees dealing with issues relating to the rights of women and gender equality.
53. As at August 2018, 11 regional frameworks on women, peace and security 43 had
been adopted, including regional action plans. In May 2018, the African Union
adopted a continental results framework for standardized monitoring and reporting
on women, peace and security by African Member States. The African Women
Leaders Network began establishing national chapters in the Central African
Republic, Côte d’Ivoire and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to deepen the
impact and scope of the Network on the linkages between the meaningful
participation of women in politics and peace and security efforts. I encourage regional
organizations to strengthen and advance these efforts, inc luding through gender parity
strategies and actions to address the meaningful participation of women.

V. Gender equality for just, peaceful and inclusive societies
54. The present section provides updates across intersecting areas related to women,
peace and security, including access to education and health services in emergencies,
sexual and gender-based violence, economic recovery, disarmament, the prevention
and countering of violent extremism and counter-terrorism, governance and rule of
law and access to justice.

A.

Promoting gender equality and the empowerment of women and
girls in humanitarian action, including guaranteeing access to
essential services
55. Women and girls continue to experience significant and distinct barriers in
access to education, physical and mental health care and services, including sexual
and reproductive and HIV-related services, and maternal care in conflict-affected and
humanitarian settings. In 2018, approximately 136 million people will need
humanitarian assistance and protection, a figure that includes an estimated 5 million
pregnant women, young women and girls and 34 million who are of reproductive
age. 44 In many of these settings, more girls than boys are denied access to education.
The out-of-school rate for girls of primary school age is one-and-a-half times that for
boys, including in Côte d’Ivoire, Sri Lanka and Yemen. Nevertheless, only 2.7 per
cent of humanitarian funding is devoted to education in emergencies. 45 Barriers to

__________________

Council on Foreign Relations, “Women’s participation in peace processes”.
Southern African Development Community, East African Community, Economic Community of
West African States, European Union, North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Pacific Islands Forum,
African Union, International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, League of Arab States and Intergovernmental Authority on
Development.
44
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), “Humanitarian action: 2018 overview” (New York,
2018). Available at www.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub-pdf/UNFPA_HumanitAction_18_
20180124_ONLINE.pdf.
45
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, “Aid to education is stagnating
and not going to countries most in need”, policy paper No. 31, May 2017.
42
43

18-16827

15/34

S/2018/900

access are linked not only to collapsed and lacking health systems and services,
economic dependence and experiences of violence during crises, but also to limited
power over their own sexual and reproductive lives and gender inequality and
discrimination that predates the conflict or crisis. The figures stand in direct
opposition to the commitments of Member States to enhance quality of services and
leave no one behind, which are specifically tied to progress on Sustainable
Development Goals 3, 4, 5 and 16.
56. Data continue to show disturbing health gaps, including maternal mortality
rates, which are almost twice as high in conflict and post -conflict countries as they
are globally. 46 Of the 830 women and adolescent girls who die every day from causes
related to pregnancy and childbirth, 507 die in countries that are considered fragile
because of conflict or disaster — about three fifths of all maternal deaths worldwide. 47
Early, forced and child marriage has also escalated in a number of conflict and
humanitarian settings, often in response to conditions in which families and
communities negatively cope with financial burdens or safety issues, or to preserve
family honour. 48 In Yemen, child marriage rates rose to 66 per cent of girls marrying
under the age of 18 in 2017; in governorates with high numbers of internally displaced
persons, 44 per cent of marriages involved girls under the age of 15. 49
57. During the reporting period, the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA)
provided life-saving emergency sexual reproductive health services to 10.8 million
people in 53 countries, using the minimum initial service package 50 for reproductive
health. The demands for sexual reproductive health expertise from UNFPA have
increased despite a shortage in funds ($90 million in 2017), which cover only 20 per
cent of current needs. In addition, in 2017 UNFPA provided sexual and reproductive
health services to 1.5 million adolescents in 36 countries in humanitarian contexts
and trained 20,815 youth facilitators, peers and volunteers in sexual and reprodu ctive
health issues and in addressing gender-based violence in 47 countries. 51
58. I reiterate previous recommendations on the delivery of child - and adolescentfriendly, non-discriminatory holistic health-care and other services, including sexual
and reproductive health care, particularly access to safe services for the termination
of pregnancies and mental health and psychosocial support, which should be
delivered in accordance with international human rights law. I continue to
acknowledge the leadership of the Netherlands and the United Kingdom in
prioritizing sexual and reproductive health and rights in humanitarian crises and call
on other Member States to contribute to these efforts.

B.

Sexual and gender-based violence: a principal obstacle to inclusive
and durable peace
59. As highlighted in section II, evidence continues to link gender inequality and
gender-based violence to a society’s greater vulnerability to civil war and inter-State

__________________

According to data provided by the World Health Organization, the global maternal morality ratio
stood at 216 maternal deaths per 100,00 live births in 2015. In conflict and post -conflict
countries, the maternal mortality ratio is 1.6 times the global ratio.
47
State of World Population 2015: Shelter from the Storm (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.15.III.H.1), foreword.
48
See S/2018/250; see also Girls Not Brides, “Child marriage in humanitarian settings”, thematic
brief, August 2018. Available at www.girlsnotbrides.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/Childmarriage-in-humanitarian-settings.pdf.
49
Data provided by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
50
Available at http://iawg.net/minimum-initial-service-package.
51
UNFPA, “Humanitarian action: 2018 overview”.
46

16/34

18-16827

S/2018/900

war, and more severe forms of violence in conflict. 52 In addition, research has found
a significant relationship between political violence and intimate partner violence in
the aftermath of conflict. 53 We must begin to pay greater attention to the continuum
of violence against women, including young women, and girls and the full scope of
gender-related targeting and harms in conflict, including against women and girls
with disabilities, as well as gender-based violence against men and boys. This
includes assessing and addressing violent masculinities and the gender-specific
impacts of harms, such as battle deaths, torture, arbitrary detention, disappearances
and extrajudicial killings.
60. In my latest report on conflict-related sexual violence, I brought to the Council’s
attention 19 situations of concern and an updated list of 47 parties to conflict that
were credibly suspected of having committed or instigated patterns of rape and other
forms of sexual violence in situations of conflict. The report highlights that the
preponderance of victims were politically and economically marginalized women and
girls (see S/2018/250, para. 11) and that the emerging trends of concern included, for
example, use of sexual violence by parties to conflict to attack and alter the collectiv e
identity of persecuted groups and control land and resources. Patterns identified in
previous reports, including trafficking, 54 continue to prevail and crimes continue to
be committed with impunity. In several settings, survivors still await justice for
crimes committed over a decade ago, and stigma continues to have gender-specific
impacts on survivors, as well as children conceived through rape. I call on all relevant
stakeholders to implement the country-specific and overarching recommendations put
forward in the report.
61. Women’s human rights defenders; women political leaders, journalists, justice
actors and security sector personnel; young women activists; and civil society leaders
continue to be targeted at alarming rates, often for challenging th e root causes of
conflict, such as corruption, governance deficits, access to land or resources and
traditional notions of family and gender roles in their societies. This includes those
who are or are perceived to be lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender or intersex, or those
who advocate for their rights. As a sobering reminder, more than half of the women
honoured in the annual tribute of the Association for Women in Development for 2017
had been murdered because of their work in conflict-affected countries, including
Colombia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Syrian Arab Republic and
Yemen. 55 I continue to call for dedicated protection mechanisms informed by those
under threat, including women who face intersecting discrimination based on race,
ethnicity, ability, sexual orientation and gender identity, economic status and other
factors.
62. Efforts by UNFPA, the United Nations Children’s Fund and others to
institutionalize interventions initiated in an emergency are encouraging. In Ukraine,
for example, shelter services and safe spaces for women, initiated as part of the
humanitarian response, are now being transformed into a larger crisis centre which is
to be handed over to and managed by the local government, reflecting a new
__________________

United Nations and World Bank, Pathways for Peace.
See, for example, Monica McWilliams and Jessica Doyle, “Violent conflict, political settlement
and intimate partner violence: lessons from Northern Ireland” (Edinburgh, United Kingdom,
Political Settlements Research Programme, 2017); and Jocelyn Kelly, “Intimate partner violence
and conflict: understanding the links between political violence and personal violence ”, cited as
a background paper for United Nations and World Bank, Pathways for Peace.
54
Global Report on Trafficking in Persons 2016 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.16.IV.6).
55
Nana Darkoa Sekyiamah, Lejla Medanhodzic and Liz Ford, “Remembering women killed
fighting for human rights in 2017”, The Guardian, 29 November 2017; and Association for
Women’s Rights in Development, “Remembering: a tribute to women’s human rights defenders
who are no longer with us”.
52
53

18-16827

17/34

S/2018/900

continuum approach to programming. In addition, the establishment of one -stop
centres offering holistic assistance packages for survivors has continued to prove
effective in conflict-affected areas, including in Mali and the State of Palestine. I
recognize efforts by all actors forming part of the Call to Action on Protection from
Gender-based Violence in Emergencies to strengthen accountability, collective action
and locally driven programming, as well as the leadership of UNFPA in its
coordination of the global-level gender-based violence area of responsibility. I
encourage all relevant entities to continue working with Member States to further
strengthen prevention of gender-based violence, risk mitigation and response.

C.

Economic recovery and access for women to resources
63. For women, lack of access to assets and productive resources renders them
vulnerable to poverty and violence and prevents them from realizing their rights,
including their rights to health, education, employment and participation in conflict
recovery and peacebuilding efforts. Addressing issues relating to economic
empowerment during conflict and post-conflict phases is a prevention strategy,
because disputes over access to economic resources is one of the most prevalent
drivers of conflict. In conflict-affected and non-conflict countries, women’s rights to
and the level of access for women to land ownership is extremely low, due to
customary and statutory law, with women accounting for only 11.5 per cent of
landholders in conflict-affected countries and 13.4 per cent in non-conflict
countries. 56 Women are also less likely than men to be engaged in paid employment.
64. Gender inequality in access for women to resources and the marginalization of
women, young women and girls is not simply caused by the presence of conflict and
unrest, but, as noted in my previous report on the subject, is also a reflection of the
prioritization of large-scale investment in post-conflict economies on infrastructure,
extractive industries and commercial agriculture and the relegation of women to
small-scale and local initiatives (S/2016/861, para. 50). The average percentage of
monetary equivalent benefits received by women and girls through early recovery
programmes has dropped to 38 per cent, 57 notwithstanding the increase by the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) of the monetary benefits received by
women and girls from temporary employment in the context of such programmes in
13 countries 58 to an estimated $183 million in 2017, an increase of 144 per cent from
the previous year. Such programmes are essential, given the high correlation between
access for women to livelihoods and overall household and community welfare. 59 I
encourage other United Nations entities to adopt that indicator in order to expand the
evidence base and better assess the evolution of gender disparities in access to
resources, including with regard to natural resources, climate change and peace, as
recently undertaken by UN-Women, the United Nations Environment Programme,
UNDP and the Peacebuilding Support Office.

__________________

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), “Gender and land statistics”,
Gender and Land Rights database. Available at www.fao.org/gender-landrights-database/datamap/statistics/en. Conflict aggregate based on 15 countries with available data. Non -conflict
aggregate based on 89 countries.
57
Compared with 47 per cent in 2016, 46 per cent in 2015 and 38 per cent in 2014. The 9 per cent
decrease in 2017 compared with the previous year is explained by the increased weight of the
programme in Yemen, which is now ten times what it was before and where the indicator reaches
30 per cent, a relatively good performance for that country. When Yemen is excluded from the
dataset, the indicator reached 50 per cent.
58
Burundi, Central African Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq, Jordan, Mali,
Mauritania, Pakistan, South Sudan, Sudan, Uganda, Ukraine and Yemen.
59
UN-Women, “Women working for recovery: the impact of female employment on family and
community welfare after conflict” (New York, 2012).
56

18/34

18-16827

S/2018/900

65. Women’s right to equal participation in the economy and the rights that create
the preconditions for such equal participation, including to land ownership,
inheritance and work, must be prioritized. It is critical for Member States to integrate
a gender perspective into development and financing frameworks and actions, in
accordance with the commitments made in the context of the Sustainable
Development Goals, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda and the women and peace and
security agenda. To do so, building and strengthening capacity to understand and
analyse the intersecting political, social and economic factors conducive to inequality
and conflict will be essential. Many of the challenges that I highlighted in my previous
report, including in relation to the political economy, remain unaddressed.
66. Having set out above the next steps for increasing the meaningful participation
of women, I recognize the need for an enhanced focus on economic recovery and
access for women to resources for prevention and sustaining peace, in particular in
conflict and post-conflict settings. I encourage United Nations entities and Members
States to take innovative, gender-sensitive approaches, with a view to accelerating
progress in the economic empowerment of women in peacebuilding and conflict recovery contexts by identifying which investments are taking precedence over
women’s economic recovery and reinvesting in larger scale efforts in that regard. In
economic terms, transparency in budgeting, financial flows and allocation are
essential to ensuring that Member States, regional organizations and the United
Nations have the tools required to reallocate and reinvest in economic recovery and
access to resources for women. It is not only the gender-blindness in these areas and
metrics that impel us to do better and more, but the daily violence women experience
through deprivation and disparity and violations of their social, economic and cultural
rights. In addition, failure to invest in the economic empowerment of women is a
failure to invest in peace amid the growing evidence linking the empowerment of
women to conflict prevention and resilience.

D.

Promotion of the participation of women in disarmament,
non-proliferation and arms control
67. Disarmament and arms control play a key role in preventing and ending violent
conflict, yet the world is moving towards increased militarization, the continued
spread of small arms and growing inter-State tensions. In response to those negative
global trends, in May I launched a new agenda for disarmament, as set out in the
document Securing Our Common Future: An Agenda for Disarmament, which
addresses weapons of mass destruction, conventional weapons and emerging means
and methods of warfare, 60 aimed at fully aligning with the core purpose of the women
and peace and security agenda, including through the meaningful participation of
women.
68. Today, there are an estimated 857 million small arms in civilian possessi on, 61
and they are often involved in various forms of violence, such as in the context of
forced displacement and sexual and gender-based violence, including killings of
women by male intimate partners. At the third United Nations Conference to Review
Progress Made in the Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat
and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,

__________________

Securing Our Common Future: An Agenda for Disarmament (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.18.IX.6).
61
Out of some 1,013 million small arms in the world, almost 85 per cent are in civilian hands —
the majority unlicensed. See Aaron Karp, “Estimated global civilian-held firearms numbers”,
Small Arms Survey Briefing Paper, June 2018. Available at www.smallarmssurvey.org/
fileadmin/docs/T-Briefing-Papers/SAS-BP-Civilian-Firearms-Numbers.pdf; see also
www.smallarmssurvey.org/weapons-and-markets/stockpiles/civilian-inventories.html.
60

18-16827

19/34

S/2018/900

countries reaffirmed their commitment to prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons. For the 2016–2017 reporting period, of the 77
countries that submitted their national reports, 33 reported that a gender perspective
had been incorporated into policymaking, planning and the implementation of the
Programme of Action, and 11 reported that that they collect data disaggregated by
sex, which enable a better understanding of the gender dynamics of weapons
collection, ownership and related impacts. 62 I welcome such efforts and urge more
countries to build capacity for such analysis and data collection.
69. Despite women’s historic roles in movements calling for disarmament, they
remain significantly underrepresented across disarmament efforts. In 2017, only one
quarter of the participants in multilateral disarmament meet ings at the United Nations
were women. In the outcome document of the third Review Conference on the
Programme of Action (A/CONF.192/2018/RC/3, annex), States encouraged the full
participation, representation and leadership of women in policymaking, planning and
implementation related to the Programme of Action, such as national small arms
commissions and programmes relating to community safety, violence reduction, the
collection and destruction of small arms and light weapons, and conflict prevention
and resolution.
70. Data from disarmament initiatives implemented by the United Nations in field
missions also show mixed progress in this regard. In 2017, women represented only
7 and 12 per cent of the total caseload demobilized with support of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
and the United Nations-African Union Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID),
respectively. Although women on average constitute a small percentage of
demobilized combatants, their participation as direct beneficiaries in community based projects, such as community violence reduction continues to grow. In projects
implemented by five peacekeeping missions in 2017, the p articipation of women
ranged from 25 to 52 per cent. Projects targeting women directly sought to support
women’s organizations, address education gaps, promote the development of
vocational skills and provide livelihood support.

E.

Preventing and countering violent extremism and
countering terrorism
71. Violence perpetrated by designated terrorist and violent extremist groups listed
on Security Council sanctions lists continues to have a devastating impact, and
includes indiscriminate violence against civilian populations and the targeting of
civilian objects, discrimination against women and girls as an organizing force and
the strategic manipulation of gender norms and stereotypes (see S/2017/861). Many
groups, including Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Boko Haram, use
the promise of marriage and access to sex to incentivize recruitment of men and boys,
engage in trafficking and other gendered practices that promote and reinforce violent
masculinities, and perpetuate sexual and gender-based violence and the persecution
of individuals on the basis of their sexual orientation 63 or gender identity (S/2018/250,
para. 13). Other terrorist and violent extremist groups also continue to demonstrate
foundational ideologies and cultures of violent misogyny.

__________________
62
63

20/34

National reports are available at http://smallarms.un-arm.org/national-reports/.
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, conference room
paper on human rights abuses and international humanitarian law violations i n the Syrian Arab
Republic, 21 July 2016–28 February 2017, para. 110. Available from
www.ohchr.org/en/hrbodies/
hrc/regularsessions/session34/pages/listreports.aspx.
18-16827

S/2018/900

72. Gender-sensitive approaches to addressing terrorism and violent extremism
require the respect, protection and promotion of the human rights of women and girls,
the mainstreaming of gender analysis and investment in research aimed at
understanding the gender-specific dynamics and impacts of violent extremism and
terrorism. It also requires the representation and meaningful participation of women
and women’s civil society organizations in the design and implementation of measures
aimed at preventing and countering violent extremism and countering terrorism. 64
Related counter-measures, including comprehensive and tailored prosecution,
rehabilitation and reintegration programmes, as well as all security policies and
strategies, including disarmament and demobilization, must also be gender-sensitive.
Increasing the availability of data disaggregated by sex and age and substantive
research on the perspectives of women on and their experience with designated
terrorist or violent extremist groups will continue to guide success in that regard. 65
73. The violations experienced by women and girls in contexts affected by terrorism
and violent extremism are broad and compounded, with personal violence often
resulting in social stigma, economic hardship and discrimination. 66 I encourage
Member States and entities to tailor responses to reflect those experiences and am
encouraged by efforts in that regard.
74. Counter-terrorism and national security policies carry gender-specific impacts,
including on women’s and youth organizations and on women suspected or convicted
of association with nationally listed groups. It is the obligation of Member States, as
well as the Security Council and the whole of the United Nations system, to ensure
that efforts to prevent and counter terrorism and violent extremism respond to the full
scope of commitments in the context of the women and peace and security agenda
and are inclusive, coordinated, human rights-based and gender-sensitive. 67 I am
increasingly concerned about the expanding scope of rehabilitation with limited
oversight of rehabilitation and reintegration programmes and violations of human
rights, including the misuse of states of emergency (A/HRC/37/52, para. 72). I am
encouraged by efforts by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) to identify and respond to the gender dimensions of criminal justice
responses to terrorism.
75. I encourage all Member States to stand firm in their commitments to
international law in all their efforts, as reflected in the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and Security Council resolutions. I encourage UNODC,
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, OHCHR, UN-Women and
other relevant entities to continue working with Member States to mainstream gender
analysis as a core component of their efforts. I encourage Member States to review
national counter-terrorism policies for gender-specific impacts, taking note of the
existing examples of good practices.
__________________

Coomaraswamy, Preventing Conflict. See also, Fionnuala Ní Aoláin and Jayne Huckerby,
“Gendering Counterterrorism: How to, and How Not to — Part II”, Just Security, 3 May 2018.
Available at www.justsecurity.org/55670/gendering-counterterrorism-to-part-ii/.
65
S/2017/861, paras. 44–45.Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and UN-Women,
summary report of its Research Symposium, held in New York, on 18 July 2018. Available at
www.un.org/sc/ctc/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/Summary-report_final.pdf.
66
Joanne Neenan, Closing the Protection Gap for Children Born of War, The London School of
Economics and Political Science Centre for Women, Peace and Security, June 2018. Available at
www.lse.ac.uk/women-peace-security/assets/documents/2018/LSE-WPS-Children-Born-of-War.pdf.
67
Arun Kundnani and Ben Hayes, “The globalisation of countering violent extremism policies:
undermining human rights, instrumentalising civil society”, Transnational Institute, February
2018. Available at www.tni.org/files/publication-downloads/the_globalisation_of_countering_
violent_extremism_policies.pdf.
64

18-16827

21/34

S/2018/900

76. With a view to increasing the representation and meaningful participation of
women in counter-terrorism efforts, I am pleased to report the appointment in 2017
of the first woman to hold the mandate of Assistant Secretary-General and Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate. As counterterrorism has been a historically male-dominated field, I am committed to paying
special attention to gender parity in that area. Earlier in 2018, the Office of Counter
Terrorism committed to improving gender parity strategies across all staffing levels.
I urge Member States to also consider gender parity strategies in this field at the
national and regional levels. 68
77. The meaningful participation of women includes the participation of women and
women’s civil society organizations in shaping security priorities and effort s and
addressing root causes (Security Council resolution 2396 (2017), para. 39). I am
concerned, however, by recent research data that shows that 90 per cent of grass -roots
women’s organizations working in areas directly impacted by terrorism and violent
extremism reported that counter-terrorism measures had an adverse impact on work
for peace, women’s rights and gender equality, in generally. 69 That indicates the clear
need for improved consultation and support to allow for women’s organizations to
influence and control further programming in this area, including through financing.
78. I urge Member States and United Nations entities tasked with implementation
of Security Council resolution 2242 (2015) and the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy to prioritize upstream prevention and meaningful engagement
with women’s civil society organizations. I recognize and welcome the continued
support by Member States, such as Australia, Japan, Jordan, the Netherlands, Norway,
the United Arab Emirates and the United Kingdom, for their research and
programming, including with civil society actors, such as Hedayah, the election
monitoring programme of the Al-Hayat Center for Civil Society Development, and
the WO=MEN Dutch Gender Platform.
79. The partnership between UN-Women and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate resulted in the first joint briefing 70 to the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism, the inclusion of the gender expertise from experts at UN -Women in all
assessment missions conducted in 2017 and increased collaboration on new gendersensitive research. I welcome the continued partnerships between UN -Women, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the Office of CounterTerrorism in advance of the global strategy review in 2020 and look forward to th e
expansion of partnerships between UN-Women and UNODC and other United Nations
entities working in this area. I encourage the Office of Counter-Terrorism to continue
integrating a gender perspective into its work, including by advancing mechanisms
for consistent and meaningful dialogue with women’s civil society organizations.

__________________

As at 14 August 2018, women accounted for 53 per cent of Counter -Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate staff overall; see www.un.org/gender/content/united-nations-secretariatdata. As at August 2018, the Office of Counter-Terrorism had only achieved gender parity at the
P-4 and P-3 levels, with women comprising only 39 per cent of its staff.
69
Duke Law International Human Rights Clinic and Women Peacemakers Program, Tightening the
Purse Strings: What Countering Terrorism Financing Costs Gender Equality and Security ,
March 2017. Available at https://law.duke.edu/sites/default/files/humanrights/
tighteningpursestrings.pdf.
70
United Nations, “UN-Women and CTED jointly brief Security Council Committee on gender
dimension in counter-terrorism efforts”, 31 March 2017. Available at www.un.org/sc/ctc/news/
2017/03/31/un-women-cted-jointly-brief-security-council-committee-gender-dimension-counterterrorism-efforts/.
68

22/34

18-16827

S/2018/900

F.

Governance and political participation of women
80. Little progress has been made since my previous report in increasing the
political representation of women in conflict and post-conflict countries. As at July
2018, only 17 countries had elected a woman to the position of Head of State or
Government, none of which were post-conflict countries. The global proportion of
parliamentary seats occupied by women stood at 23.8 per cent in June 2018. 71 For
conflict and post-conflict countries, 72 available data continue to show lower numbers
of women parliamentarians than the global average, with a stagnating average of
around 16 per cent. In a worrying trend, the proportion of women in pa rliament has
decreased in several conflict and post-conflict countries. In Lebanon, although the
representation of women in parliament increased from 3.1 to 4.69 per cent when an
additional two women were elected to parliament, overall representation remai ns
lower than average for conflict and post-conflict countries. 73 Data on the use of quotas
for candidate lists or for elected representatives, a form of temporary special measure,
continue to demonstrate their positive impact on increasing the representati on of
women. As at June 2018, women in conflict and post-conflict countries with legislated
quotas occupied 19.82 per cent of parliamentary seats, compared with 12.1 per cent
in countries without such quotas.
81. The barriers to the full and effective participation and leadership of women in
decision-making in political, economic and public life are well known. Increased and
improved efforts are therefore required to ensure that the participation of women is
supported and that Member States implement temporary special measures to fulfil
their commitments under the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, taking into consideration general recommendation
No. 25 of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Wo men and
Sustainable Development Goal 5. Improved data and related reporting across all areas
of political participation is also needed. I am encouraged by the methodological
advances in data collection and analysis for Sustainable Development Goal
indicator 5.5.1 (b) on the proportion of seats held by women in local government and
welcome efforts by countries such as Uganda, which is already collecting such data. 74
I hope such examples will inspire improved statistical and analytical capacity across
related areas, such as data and analysis on the registration of women to stand for
election and voter turnout.
82. I welcome the increased attention to combating violence against women in
politics, 75 which is integrally linked to the advancement of the women and p eace and
security agenda. In conflict and post-conflict settings, threats and protection
challenges surrounding the political participation of women are often heightened,
preventing women from participating in political transitions and the consolidation of
peace.

__________________

Inter-Parliamentary Union, Women in National Parliaments database, data as at 1 June 2018.
Available at http://archive.ipu.org/wmn-e/arc/world010618.htm.
72
Countries with peacekeeping or special political missions in 2017 and countries that received
programmatic funds from the Peacebuilding Fund in 2017.
73
Inter-Parliamentary Union, PARLINE database on national parliaments. Available at
http://archive.ipu.org/parline-e/parlinesearch.asp.
74
UN-Women, Turning Promises into Action: Gender Equality in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (2018), box 3.2, p. 97.
75
A/73/301; United Nations Development Programme and UN-Women, Preventing Violence
against Women in Elections: A Programming Guide (2017).
71

18-16827

23/34

S/2018/900

G.

Rule of law and access by women to justice and security
83. Discriminatory laws and practices prevent women, young women and girls from
enjoying full and equal protection under the law and achieving just outcomes for
violations of their human rights. I reiterate that improving access for women and girls
to justice is central to the achievement of all Sustainable Development Goals, in
particular Goals 5, 10 and 16. Structural inequalities, poverty and discrimination in
both conflict and non-conflict contexts reduce opportunities for women, young
women and girls to be informed of their rights and hinder their access to justice
before, during and after conflict.
84. Women also remain unevenly represented in transitional justice and rule of la w
institutions. As at 1 July 2018, women comprised 30 per cent of commissioners on
United Nations-supported truth commissions. In Colombia, 5 of the 11 commissioners
(45.5 per cent) were women; in the Gambia, 4 of 11 (36.4 per cent) were women; in
Tunisia, 4 of 9 (44.4 per cent); and in Mali, 5 of 25 (20 per cent). Of the magistrates
in the Special Criminal Court in the Central African Republic, only 3 of 11 (27.3 per
cent) were women. I welcome the appointments by the Government of Colombia of
women to senior transitional justice positions, including Director of the Unit for the
Search for Persons deemed as missing and President of the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace, in which women also comprise 54.9 per cent of the judicial panel. In the
Gambia, efforts by the Government, civil society and the United Nations have already
resulted in the establishment of a civil society coordination mechanism and plans for
gender mainstreaming in the transitional justice process.
85. Member States have repeatedly made commitments to increase their use of
human rights monitoring and reporting mechanisms, including the universal periodic
review mechanism of the Human Rights Council, to address accountability for
violations of the human rights of women and girls, including in c onflict and postconflict settings (S/2017/861, para. 72). In 2017, special procedures of the Human
Rights Council sent a total of 497 communications, of which 36 related to women ’s
human rights and violations thereof, pertaining to 21 conflict and post-conflict
countries. 72 The authors of the communications raised allegations of killing,
enslavement, trafficking, sexual violence, forced labour, displacement, harassment
and threats against women human rights defenders and judges, discrimination in land
ownership, denial of food, access to healthcare, safe drinking water and sanitation,
politically motivated prosecutions, and abductions of women and girls for sexual
exploitation.
86. As at 31 July 2018, the Human Rights Council had also received reports on
independent human rights investigations in Burundi ( A/HRC/36/54), the Kasaï region
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (A/HRC/38/31), Myanmar (A/HRC/39/64),
South Sudan (A/HRC/37/71), the Syrian Arab Republic (A/HRC/37/72) and Yemen
(A/HRC/39/43). The reports documented grave violations of the human rights of
women and girls and endemic sexual and gender-based violence, including sexualized
torture in Burundi (see A/HRC/36/54), gang rape in front of family members in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (see A/HRC/38/31) and rape and mutilations of
sexual organs in South Sudan (see A/HRC/37/71). The independent international factfinding mission on Myanmar, established by the Human Rights Council, found that
sexual violence was a “hallmark” of the Tatmadaw deliberate strategy to intimidate,
terrorize or punish a civilian population and that such violence should be investigated
and prosecuted as part of an alleged genocide (see A/HRC/39/64). The Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic released its first
thematic paper on sexual and gender-based crimes, containing harrowing accounts of
sexual violence at checkpoints, in place of detention, on the street and inside homes
throughout the Syrian Arab Republic, with a majority of documented cases

24/34

18-16827

S/2018/900

attributable to Syrian government forces and associated militias. Dedicated gender
expertise is essential to documenting the full range of human rights violations and
professionally and ethically gathering evidence that can be used t o hold perpetrators
of sexual and gender-based crimes to account. UN-Women, Justice Rapid Response
and OHCHR worked in close partnership on all Human Rights Council mandated
missions in 2017 and 2018, including through the deployment of gender advisors and
sexual violence investigators.
87. In 2017, the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women
continued to engage States regarding the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda, its general recommendation No. 30 (2013) on wo men in conflict
prevention, conflict and post-conflict situations (CEDAW/C/GC/30) and its general
recommendation No. 35 (2017) on gender-based violence against women, updating
general recommendation No. 19 (CEDAW/C/GC/35). In 2017, the Committee
examined the periodic reports of 28 States parties to the Convention and addressed
issues related to peace and security in the concluding observations of 18 of those
States parties; 6 of those 18 States are considered in the present report. 76 The
Committee’s concluding observations for 11 non-conflict countries contained
references to the women and peace and security agenda. 77
88. Transitional justice mechanisms and rule of law institutions in transitional and
conflict-affected contexts are essential tools for ensuring that the perpetrators of
violations and discrimination against women, young women and girls are held to
account, the crimes addressed and the contexts thereby transformed. They include
holistic, survivor-focused and community-led initiatives, which are main contributors
in enhancing access to justice. I remain encouraged by collaborations between
Member States, United Nations entities and civil society organiz ations to enhance
access for women to transitional justice and advance survivor-centred processes. For
example, in 2018 in Kosovo, the government established a commission to provide
reparations to survivors of conflict-related sexual violence, working in close
partnership with victims’ associations; the commission is the result of years of civil
society activism and the support of an innovative partnership between UN -Women
and the European Union to advance gender-sensitive transitional justice (see
S/2017/861).
89. Justice is a fundamental aspect of peace and reconciliation. Sexual and gender based crimes and other serious violations of international criminal law must be
investigated and prosecuted. I welcome the appointment of the Special Adviser of the
Investigative Team established pursuant to Security Council resolution 2379 (2017)
and the continued work of the International, Impartial and Independent Mechani sm
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since
March 2011 (see General Assembly resolution 71/248) to advance the effective
investigation of sexual and gender-based crimes (see A/72/764), in accordance with
international standards, including through overall integrating a gender perspective
and dedicated gender expertise.
90. The global focal point for the police, justice and corrections areas in the rule of
law in post-conflict and other crisis situations arrangement led by the Department of
__________________

Burkina Faso (CEDAW/C/BFA/CO/7), El Salvador (CEDAW/C/SLV/CO/8-9), Guatemala
(CEDAW/C/GTM/CO/8-9), the Niger (CEDAW/C/NER/CO/3-4), Sri Lanka
(CEDAW/C/LKC/CO/8) and Ukraine (CEDAW/C/UKR/CO/8).
77
In addition, in July 2018, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence
in Conflict signed a framework of cooperation with the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women to address the structural and root causes of conflict-related sexual
violence.
76

18-16827

25/34

S/2018/900

Peacekeeping Operations and UNDP, and in partnership with OHCHR, Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, UN-Women and UNODC,
continued to make progress on interventions on access for women to justice and
protection from sexual and gender-based violence and (see S/2017/861). In Haiti, the
arrangement supported the transition process, so as to ensure the robust inclusion of
gender commitments with a view to strengthening access for women to justice and
the political participation and leadership of women within justice and security
institutions, reinforcing women’s security and supporting the establishment of
gender-sensitive national legislation, planning and accountability frameworks. An
independent review of the arrangement is an opportunity for t he global focal point for
police, justice and corrections to scale up rule of law assistance.

VI. Financing the women and peace and security agenda
91. Essential services for women and girls in conflict-affected countries are
chronically underfunded, as are initiatives that promote gender equality and the
participation and leadership of women in peace and security areas. Although overall
bilateral aid 78 to promote gender equality in fragile country situations is on the rise,
dedicated support for programmes prioritizing gender equality remains low. In the
period 2015–2016, an average of $18.5 billion per year was received to support
programmes to enhance gender equality and the empowerment of women in fragile
and conflict-affected countries, an increase of 17 per cent from the previous year. 79
However, total bilateral aid allocated to programmes with the primary objective of
targeting gender equality and the empowerment of women in conflict -affected
countries remains low, at 5 per cent of total bilateral aid to such countries.

__________________

“Aid” refers to sector-allocable official development assistance committed by members of the
Development Assistance Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD). The Committee has 30 members as at July 2018.
79
See www.oecd.org/dac/stats/gender-related-aid-data.htm.
78

26/34

18-16827

S/2018/900

Figure II
Bilateral allocable aid targeting gender equality in fragile and conflict affected countries
(or territories), 2006–2016
25

60

50

Billions of United States dollars
(2016 constant price)

20

Significant

40
Principal

15

30 %

10

20

Gender-focused
Gender
focused
aid
aid in
in % of
bilateral
percentage of
allocable
bilateral
screened aid
allocable
screened aid

5

10

0

0
2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

92. Of the dedicated aid, major donors, including Canada, institutions of the
European Union, Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom, the United States and Sweden,
contributed over 80 per cent. Notably, Sweden and the Netherlands each committed
more than 20 per cent of aid for programmes targeting gender equality and the
empowerment of women as a primary objective. 80 In a new initiative, the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of the United Arab Emirates launched
the “100 per cent women policy”, which aims at ensuring that, by 2021, 100 per cent
of bilateral and multilateral foreign assistance will target or integrate gender equality
and the empowerment of women as key components of their programming.
93. Commitments to gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls must
be an essential component of national, regional and global strategies for implementation
of the Sustainable Development Goals. Preliminary estimates based on eight
aggregate sectors suggest that just meeting the commitments of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development will require investments ranging from $2 to $3 trillion per
year. Conflict-affected countries will require even greater financial support to realize

__________________
80

18-16827

OECD, “Creditor Reporting System”, OECD.Stat database. Available at https://stats.oecd.org/
Index.aspx?DataSetCode=crs1.
27/34

S/2018/900

the Goals. I take note of and recognize the long-standing calls by women civil society
organizations to reprioritize and make better use of availab le funds. 81
94. Contrary to the slow increase in gender-focused aid, global military spending
has reached a staggering $1.74 trillion in 2017, a 57 per cent increase since 2000.
Whereas most countries worldwide limit military spending to less than 2 per cen t of
their gross domestic product (GDP), some now spend over 3 per cent of GDP on the
military and others now allocate more public money to the military than to education . 82
Other financial outflows cripple countries’ budgets and limit public spending, thereby
weakening the overall resilience of societies. The most recent data shows that
financial outflows from developing countries were 2.5 times the amount of aid
flowing in, 83 with $3.3 trillion of the outflows as interest payments on foreign debt,
foreign investment, repatriated income and capital flight, and an estimated 84 per cent
of those net resource transfers being unrecorded capital flight, including illicit
outflows (see S/2017/861).
95. Allocating a minimum of 15 per cent of all United Nations-managed funding in
support of peacebuilding projects to advance gender equality and the empowerment
of women was one of the benchmarks in the seven-point action plan for genderresponsive peacebuilding. Progress and capacity to track project funding remains
highly uneven across entities. I have established an internal high -level task force on
financing for gender equality, which will help to establish a baseline, more
consistently monitor expenditure on gender equality internally and put forward
ambitious targets for future allocations of resources. I call upon relevant United
Nations entities to establish dedicated systems to measure progress and respond to
stagnated or downward trends. I am encouraged that the idea of establishing minimum
targets has been adopted by a growing number of leading stakeholders, including
Canada. Demand for the expertise of UN-Women on gender and women and peace
and security continues; its allocated budget for peace and security programming and
humanitarian interventions remained at $71 million in 2017, similar to the preceding
year.
96. For the period 2017–2019, the Peacebuilding Fund raised its target for genderresponsive peacebuilding investments from 15 to 30 per cent, after exceeding the
minimum 15 per cent target in 2016. In 2017, the Fund reached 36 per cent by
combining improved gender mainstreaming and targeted gender equality
programming (see A/72/740). The Fund’s gender and youth promotion initiatives
allocated $27.5 million to gender-responsive and youth-inclusive peacebuilding
projects in 13 countries, of which $16 million is earmarked for gender-responsive
projects and $11 million for youth-inclusive projects. I reiterate my call to ensure
adequate financial support to the Peacebuilding Fund, up to $500 million per year.
With the new target of 30 per cent, a fully funded Peacebuilding Fund can be a major
source of support to gender-responsive peacebuilding and sustaining peace. A positive
trend was also reported by the global focal point for police, justice and corrections,
with funds allocated to promote gender equality and women ’s rights in joint
programming exceeding 15 per cent in the Central African Republic (16 per cent),
Mali, Haiti, the State of Palestine (20 per cent) and Somalia (27 per cent).
97. I am concerned about signs of the shrinking space and funding for women -led
civil society organizations, many of which operate on the front lines of conflict. In
the period 2015–2016, bilateral aid to women’s institutions and organizations in all
__________________

For example, calls to move the money from war to gender equality and peace, using the hashtag
#movethemoney.
82
See www.sipri.org/databases/milex.
83
UN-Women, Turning Promises, p. 129.
81

28/34

18-16827

S/2018/900

developing countries was $464 million on average per year. 84 Trend analyses have
indicated that the share of the aid channelled through women’s non-governmental
organizations has dropped, from 52.3 per cent in 2011, and stagnated below that level
ever since, to 48.1 per cent in 2016. 85 I call upon donors to counter such trends and
increase support for initiatives led by diverse women ’s governmental and
non-governmental organizations, including women-led organizations for persons with
disabilities. In particular, an increase in long-term core funding is required to ensure
that women’s organizations can carry out their work successfully and safely. Financial
commitments must match the extent to which women’s civil society organizations are
relied upon to achieve collective agendas, including contributing to core policy and
programming design and development.
Figure III
Bilateral aid to women’s organizations and institutions and percentage of that aid channeled
through non-governmental organizations and civil society, 2011–2016
500

%

50

400

Millions of United States dollars
(2016 constant price)

40

300
30

200
20

100

Bilaternal aid to women’s
institutions and
organisations

%
of the aid channeled
Percentage
of the aid
through
NGOs
and Civil
channeled
through
Society
non-governmental
organizations and civil
society

10

0

0
2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

98. The Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund 86 is a unique mechanism, fully
dedicated to supporting women’s organizations in their peace and security efforts. To
date, the Fund has been supporting over 40 civil society organizations in Burundi,
Colombia, Jordan, Fiji, Samoa, the Solomon Islands and Vanuatu. In 2018, with the
support of donors, the Fund was able to initiate interventions in Iraq. The Fund has
already contributed evidence and innovation to global efforts to prevent conflict. I
__________________

OECD, “Aid to gender equality and women’s empowerment: an overview”, July 2018.
OECD, “Creditor Reporting System” database.
86
See http://wphfund.org/.
84
85

18-16827

29/34

S/2018/900

call upon Member States to increase their funding to the Fund and to help it to reach
its target of $40 million by the end of 2020. Reaching the $40 million target would
allow the Fund to support local and grass-roots civil society organizations in all
24 countries eligible for its assistance.

VII. Work of the Security Council
99. I am pleased to report progress across several areas of the work of the Security
Council. In 2017, the Council increased the number of decisions 87 that contained one
or more provisions on women and peace and security to 70.5 per cent of resolutions 88
and 88.8 per cent of presidential statements. 89 Importantly, decisions relating to
country-specific or regional situations that contain one or more provisions on women
and peace and security increased to 75.7 per cent, 90 from 51 per cent in 2016, with
many resolutions containing stronger and more concrete language regarding leadership
and participation of women. For example, on Iraq, the Security Council underscored
the need for the equal participation of women in the upcoming elections, stabilization
planning and local and national reconciliation (see Security Council resolution 2367
(2017)); on the Central African Republic (see resolution 2387 (2017)) and Mali (see
resolution 2364 (2017)), mandate renewals included stronger provisions on women
and peace and security; and its first resolution on the Lake Chad Basin urged
Governments in the region to ensure the full and equal participation of women in
national institutions and mechanisms for the prevention and re solution of conflicts,
including in the security sector and counter-terrorism efforts (see resolution 2349
(2017)).
100. At the same time, the number of women leaders and civil society representatives
who provided briefings to the Security Council also increased. Women from civil
society who provide briefings bring essential perspectives to the meetings of the
Council (see Security Council resolution 2242 (2015)). In 2017, seven women from
civil society organizations and one woman from a national human rights institution
provided briefings at region- or country-specific meetings; 91 and women from civil
society provided briefings during three thematic open debates. I am pleased to note
that progress has also extended into 2018, with several Member States leading by
example during their presidency. In March 2018, the Netherlands invited an increased
number of women from civil society to provide country-specific briefings, with four
such women addressing the Council. 92 The Netherlands also focused its Afghanistan
briefing on women and peace and security. In July and August 2018, respectively,
Sweden achieved gender parity among those providing briefings to the C ouncil for
the first time 93 and the United Kingdom offered guidance to those providing briefings
__________________

For the purposes of the present report, Security Council decisions include resolutions and
presidential statements.
88
Three of the 43 Security Council resolutions included references to sexual exploitation and abuse
only (resolutions 2361 (2017), 2373 (2017) and 2394 (2017)).
89
S/2017/861. See NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security, “Mapping women, peace
and security in the UN Security Council: 2016”, 13 June 2017. Available from
www.womenpeacesecurity.org/resource/mapping-women-peace-and-security-in-the-un-securitycouncil-2016/.
90
See https://unite.un.org/sites/unite.un.org/files/app-schighlights-2017/index.html.
91
Afghanistan (S/PV.7896, S/PV.8147), Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/PV.7903), Lake
Chad Basin (S/PV.7861, S/PV.8047), Somalia (S/PV.7873), South Sudan (S/PV.7906), Yemen
(S/PV.7954).
92
Generally, past presidencies have included one to two women from civil society among those
providing briefings.
93
Of the 20 people providing briefings to the Security Council in July, 11 were women and 9 were
men.
87

30/34

18-16827

S/2018/900

on mainstreaming gender analysis into their interventions. I strongly encourage all
members of the Security Council to ensure that women leaders and civil socie ty
representatives are included in all briefings and debates in the Council, and I thank
the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security for their continued support
to Member States.
101. During 2017, the Security Council’s Informal Expert Group on Women and
Peace and Security was chaired by Sweden and Uruguay, in close consultation with
the United Kingdom, with UN-Women as the secretariat. The Informal Expert Group
held focused meetings on Afghanistan, the Central African Republic, Iraq, Mali,
Yemen and the Lake Chad Basin and helped to improve the quality of situation
analysis through deeper analysis of women and peace and security concerns and
priorities and to monitor progress. That included details on the extent of women ’s
stark underrepresentation in multiple committees set up to implement peace
agreements in Mali and the Central African Republic, as well as the noticeable
absence of Afghan women in negotiations about upcoming peace talks. There were
also more positive updates. Many of the recommendations highlighted in the first
meeting on Afghanistan were addressed over the past two years, including
repositioning the gender advisory expertise in the mission and revision of the Penal
Code to include a definition of rape in line with international sta ndards and the
prohibition of the practice of bacha bazi. The capacity of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq was strengthened through the deployment of a senior
women’s protection advisor, and gender equality and the empowerment of women
was identified as one of the mission’s seven strategic priorities.
102. Across all countries on the agenda of the Informal Expert Group on Women and
Peace and Security and the agenda of the Security Council, much work remains. I
encourage members of the Security Council to continue to make use of the
information received and shared through the Informal Expert Group as a matter of
practice, both in their statements and action in the Council and subsidiary bodies and
through all other diplomatic channels, from human rights bodies to their embassies. I
applaud the co-chairs of the Informal Expert Group for following up on those
meetings and engaging with Governments, regional organizations and the United
Nations. I extend my gratitude to the current co -chairs, Sweden and Peru, for
consolidating and expanding the programme of work of the Informal Expert Group in
2018.
103. All outcome documents 94 of the five Security Council field missions undertaken
during the reporting period also contained references to women and pe ace and
security, either in written mission reports (see S/2017/403 (Lake Chad Basin) and
S/2017/757 (Ethiopia)) or in briefings by mission leads or co-leads. 95 During the
mission to the Lake Chad Basin in particular, several members of the Security Council
raised the matter of the visibility of issues relating to women and peace and security
with diverse stakeholders, many of which were also raised in the context of the
previous month’s meeting of the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security. I encourage members of the Security Council to include provisions relating
to women and peace and security in the terms of reference of Security Council field
missions, which only two of five missions did in 2017 (see S/2017/181 and
S/2017/871).
104. In 2018, joint high-level women and peace and security-focused missions
inspired by the African Women Leaders Network continued their work ( S/2017/861,
__________________

For the purposes of the present report, outcome documents include written reports, verbal
briefings and presidential statements.
95
See S/PV.7894 (Lake Chad Basin), S/PV.7941 (Colombia), S/PV.7994 (Haiti) and S/PV.8077
(Sahel).
94

18-16827

31/34

S/2018/900

para. 7). In July 2018, the Deputy Secretary-General and the Special Envoy of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission on Women, Peace and Security
undertook a mission to Chad, South Sudan and the Niger. At various points during the
visit, they were joined by other United Nations leaders and the President of the
Security Council in July (Sweden). Through such broad representation a nd expertise,
the mission addressed issues related to the leadership of women, sexual and gender based violence, preventing radicalization, violent extremism and terrorism, and peace
and climate security. As in 2017, the Security Council was provided with a briefing
on the outcome of the mission. 96
105. In 2017, 84 per cent of my reports to the Security Council contained references
to women and peace and security, including 16 of 20 reports on country and regional
situations, all 25 periodic reports on special political missions and 36 of 41 periodic
reports on peacekeeping operations. 97 I expect my Special Representatives to ensure
that gender-responsive conflict and peace analysis is included in all reporting to the
Security Council and I encourage members of the Security Council to address specific
questions on women and peace and security to field leadership during consultations.
106. The full potential of mainstreaming women and peace and security
considerations within sanctions regimes has yet to be real ized. The number of
sanctions regimes containing conflict-related sexual violence and/or gender-based
violence as part of their designation criteria increased to seven in 2017. Notably, the
newly established sanctions regime for Mali included an explicit r eference to sexual
and gender-based violence, and the sanctions regime for the Central African Republic
was amended to provide for sexual violence as a separate designation criterion. The
Security Council also expressed its readiness to sanction individual s and entities who
are supporting ISIL, Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities, and commit trafficking in persons, the sale of women and girls, or forced
marriage (see Security Council resolution 2388 (2017)). In 2017, the Security Council
Affairs Division, in cooperation with the Gender, Peace and Security Unit of the
Department of Political Affairs, introduced a dedicated women and peace and security
training for all expert panels. In the past, even when included in the mandate of the
committee and publicly reported on by the panel of experts, very few individuals or
entities were sanctioned for sexual violence, trafficking in persons, gender-related
persecution, targeted abductions, killings of women and girls, or gross violations of
women’s human rights.

VIII. Concluding observations and recommendations
107. As I submit the present yearly report on women and peace and security, I am
cognizant that such reports often cannot capture the scope and scale of global human
rights violations or the short- and long-term impacts of conflict and crises. They also
fail to convey the individual stories, fears and tragedies behind the numbers or to give
proper recognition to the leadership, vison and activism demonstrated by many
women in the most difficult of situations. Every year commitments to promote the
role of women in peace and security are not sufficiently backed with the requisite
financial and political support. This year is no different.
108. We face a true test of our commitments in the lead up to 2020. Therefore, in
cooperation with Member States, I intend to continue realigning our efforts towards
the full implementation of women and peace and security commitments. Pr ogress in
__________________
96
97

32/34

See S/PV.8306.
See NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security, “Mapping women, peace and
security”.
18-16827

S/2018/900

this area is inextricably linked and essential to our global efforts to prevent conflict,
sustain peace and fulfil our goal to leave no one behind.
109. Practical and institutional barriers continue to prevent women from participating
fully and substantively in all peace processes. In that regard, I call upon Member
States and regional organizations to address those barriers by adopting concrete
measures that are responsive to the needs of women participants. I ask Member States
that make positive commitments to this agenda in the Security Council to link those
commitments to positive actions in the peace processes that they support.
110. Efforts of Member States could further advance the women and peace and
security agenda by championing it in all forums and supporting a stronger United
Nations gender architecture thorough assessed budgets for posts dedicated to building
gender advisory capacity.
111. I welcome the contributions by the Security Council Informal Expert Group on
Women and Peace and Security and encourage the Council to bring forward the
information gathered by the Informal Expert Group into its deliberations and
outcomes, demonstrating the true impact of high-quality gender conflict analysis.
112. To document our collective achievements and identify gaps in the
implementation of their commitments on women and peace and security, I encourage
Member States to initiate national and regional review processes in the lead up to the
20-year anniversary, in 2020, of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000).
113. In the context of United Nations peace operations, I will continue to work with
my senior managers to improve gender parity. My temporarily established working
group on emergency measures for the implementation of gender parity in peace
operations has already taken forward bold measures to ensure real change and will
play a catalytic role in the efforts of the Organization to achieve gender parity and
geographical diversity in peace operations.
114. My Envoys and Special Representatives, with support from my High -level
Advisory Board on Mediation as appropriate, will identify ways to advance the
effective participation of women in United Nations-supported peace processes. They
will strive to integrate gender equality and gender parity in all aspects of their work
and ensure the inclusion of dedicated gender expertise in their teams.
115. All entities in the United Nations system with reporting requirements on women
and peace and security will be expected to develop gender-sensitive conflict analysis
guidelines and mechanisms by 2020. In the same vein, I will continue to ensure that
a gender-sensitive perspective informs my statements, reports and briefings,
including those to the Security Council.
116. I call upon all relevant United Nations operational entities to track targeted and
mainstreamed budgetary allocations and expenditures related to women and peace
and security. Those data will serve to indicate progress achieved towards reaching or
exceeding the minimum 15 per cent target for programmes that further gender
equality and the empowerment of women in peacebuilding contexts ahead of 2020
and will inform my annual reports on women and peace and security.
117. I reiterate my intention to review and update the seven-point action plan on
gender-responsive peacebuilding that was set out in 2010, for agreement by the
United Nations system in 2020. It will be led by UN-Women and the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, in close coordination with members of the
Standing Committee on Women, Peace and Security. I encourage UN-Women to begin
a consultative process on improving collection of data and measurements to monitor
trends and progress globally. Those efforts should consider new data initiatives

18-16827

33/34

S/2018/900

specific to women and peace and security and efforts to populate and disaggregate
data across the Sustainable Development Goal indicators.
118. In conclusion, I intend to include in my next report on women and peace and
security an assessment of implementation of the recommendations related to women
and peace and security relevant to the United Nations system drawn from the three
peace and security reviews undertaken in 2015. The findings and recommendations
from the exercise will provide the basis for more concrete action in the 12 months
leading up to the twentieth anniversary of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000).

34/34

18-16827
