TWENTY-EIGHTH

YEAR
th
MEETING:

NEW

13 APRIL

1973

YORK

CONTENTS
, . . . . . , . . . . . . . . I . . . . . . . . .

Page
1

. . . . .. .. , , . . . , . , . . . , . . . , , . . . , . , . , , . , . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 April 1973 from the Permanent
Representative
of Lebanon to
the United
Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council
(S/10913)
. . . . . , . . . , , . . . . , , , , . . . . . , . . . . , . . , . . . . . , . ‘. * . +

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l

Adoption

of the agenda

706)

. , . ,

S/PV. 1706

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council, The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEENHUNDREDANDSIXTHMEETING
Held in New York on F’riday, 13 April 1973, at 3.30 p.m.
hh.Wt:

Mr. Javier PEREZ DE CUELLAR

(Peru).

Z%SWF: The representatives of the following States:
hJstralia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, I’wJ, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.
Provisional agenda(S/Agenda/l 706)
1. Adoption of the agenda

letters from the representatives
of Algeria and the Syrian
Arab Republicin whichthey askto participate,without the
right to vote, in the Council’sconsiderationof the item on
its agenda.
4. In accordancewith the established
practice, and with
the consentof the COWA, I shall invite the representatives
of Algeria and the Syrian Arab Republicto take the places
reservedfor them in the Councilchamber,on the understandingthat they will be invited to take places at the
Counciltablewhenthey wishto speak.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
At the invitation of the President,Mr. A Rahal(Algeria)
Letter dated 12 April 1973 from the Permanent and Mr. H. Kelani (Syrian Arab Republic)took the places
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations reservedfor themat the sideof the Councilchamber.
addressedto the President of the Security Council
(S/10913)
5. The PRESIDENT(interpretationfrom Spanish):The
first nameon the list of speakers
is that of the represen77remcetirtg wascalled to order at 4 p.m.
tative of Algeria, I invite him to take a placeat the Council
table andto makehisstatement.
Adoption of the agenda
6. Mr. RAHAL (Algeria) (interpretationfrom French):
7% age&a wasadopted.
Once againthe SecurityCouncilismeetingin orderto learn
of and discuss
a complaintagainstthe brutal aggression
of
The situation in the Middle East
Israel. Once again the international community is confronted with this Middle Eastcrisis, which undoubtedly
Letter dated 12 April 1973 from the PermanentRepre- disturbsconsciences,
but which keepson thrustingitself to
sentative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed
to
the forefront to remindusof the dangers
inherentin it and
the Presidentof the Security Council (S/l 0913)
of the futility of the efforts undertakenthus far to find a
remedyto it throughpartialandsuperficialsolutions.
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): In
accordance with the decisiontaken by the Council/l 705th 7. It is therefore upon you, Mr. President,that the
meeting], and with its consent, I &all invite the repre- weighty privilege devolvesof directingthe Council’sprosentatives of Lebanon and Israel to take placesat the
ceedingsat a time,whentherereturnsto it-just asa letter is
Council table,
returnedto a careless
senderwhohasfailedto comply with
all the conditionsof its dispatch-a problemwhich reflects
to find a solution.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. E. Ghorra jts concerns,but also its powerlessness
May I therefore expressour satisfactionat seeingthe
ILebauonj and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) took placesat the
representativeof Perupresidingover this debate.The high
Council table.
esteemin whichyou areunanimouslyheldandthe personal
2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):Again friendship that I bear you justify our hope that the
will succeedin breakingout of what
in accordance with the decision of the Council [ibid], 1 Council’sdiscussions
invite the representativesof Egypt and Saudi Arabia to take has unfortunately becomea shabby routine and, in the
the placesreservedfor theIn in the Council chamber,on the study of a complex situation which involves so much
passion, somany considerations
of all kindsandthe future
understanding that they will be invited to take a Placeat
of so many men, womenand children, will be able to
the Council table when they wish to speak.
distinguishthe subjectivefrom the realand the temporary
from the definjtjve jn order to movetowardsthe effective
At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. E. Abdel
exerciseof the true responsibilities
of the Security Council.
Meguid (Egypt) and Mr. J. Baroody (Saudi Arabia) toOkthe
placesresewedfor them at the sideof the Councilchamber.
g, The Councilismeetingtoday at the requestOf Lebanon
which,
once again, has been the victim of an act of
3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):1Wish
aggression
by Israel, Once againIsraeliforces havestruck
to inform membersof the Council that 1 have received

scruple and without
merit.

that country and, in a brief and rapid action, using the
effect of surprise and supported by the most powerful
means, more death and destruction’ has been added to all
that which already stands to Israel’s discredit following its
criminal policies.

fear of either disapproval or punish-

13. The Council is accustomed to the explanations that
Israel gives of its successive acts of aggression, and we have
already witnessed a repetition of this in the course of this
series of meetings. We are told that it is a matter of
struggling against Arab terrorism by the only methods
which can put an end to it. Let us say immediately, in order
to put facts in their real light and against the historical
background, that, no matter how much Israel may dislike
the fact, there is no Arab terrorism, and if we are to speak
of terrorism at all, it must properly be described as
Palestinian, which would give it its true meaning and its real
foundation. There is Palestinian ierrorism, just as yesterday there was Algerian terrorism, in which we glory, and
which it occurred to no one to describe at that time as Arab
terrorism. But the confusion which Israel seeks to maintain
is deliberate, because it serves its propaganda objectives and
seeks to maintain in international opinion the simplistic
image of a small Jewish people confronted
with the
stubborn hostility of fanatical Arab masses bent on its
destruction.

9. Yet throughout the world there are admirers of what
they describe as “Israeli efficiency”, people who add their
satisfaction to that of the Israelis themselves. That effi.:iency, which is still all too fresh in our memories is,
however, in no way glorious, for it calls into play power
founded on considerable external assistance, cunning
founded on immorality and boldness founded on impunity.
10. But the international community would do well to
concern itself otherwise with the danger to its own security,
in the present and above all in the future, from the
aggressiveness of Israel’s behaviour, an aggressiveness which,
if it is manifested directly and brutally in its immediate
environment, also has grave repercussions in other areas.
Indeed we might well ask why the Israelis should abandon
this policy of the “fait accompli” which has stood them in
such good stead so far and thanks to which they are
imposing their law and extending their domination, knowing full well that the discussions and the debates to which
their actions will give rise will not affect the results they
have achieved in the field.

14. And first of all Israel uses this in order to pretend that
it is authorized to commit acts of aggression against an
Arab country like Lebanon, using the pretext that that
country is harbouring Palestinian refugees that are involved
in terrorist action against Israel..We know that, as regards
terrorism, the Israelis hardly need to take lessons from
anyone, and that the experience they have gained and nut
hesitated to put at the service of anti-revolutionary movements, particularly during the Algerian war, undoubtedly
enables them better to understand and confront it. And it is
now with the means it has at its disposal as a State, and that
are lavishedupon it by the United States, that Israel in its
turn ispractisingthe sameterrorism that it condemnsin the
Palestinians.It is curious to say the least that the United
Statesshould recognizeno responsibility for the usethat is
madeof the armsand financial aid that it furnished Israel,
or that it should express astonishmentat the susp’cion
shown towards it when events such as those in Lebanon
take place.

11. This attitude of defiance of international law and of
contempt for the decisions of international organizations,
through its persistence, its repeated manifestations and the
acquiescence it enjoys in certain sectors of Jpinion,
constitutes in the longer term a serious threat to international order and an encouragement to the establishment
of a situation in every respect similar to those which, in the
past, have given rise to world conflicts. It would be a
mistake to think that the events which are today the
subject of the Council’s debate are of concern only to the
countries of the hliddle East or that they are confined to
the limited framework of the conflict between Arabs and
Israelis.
12. Israel’s aggressive policy is, to be sure, directed in the
first instance against the Arab countries, but it is neither
fortuitous nor provisional; it is indelibly stamped on Israel’s
behaviour on the international scene, The arrogance it
shows in regard to the resolutions of the Security Council is
one aspect of it and should give pause to those who are so
unwise as to give it their nod. It is surprising enough that a
State should be allowed to keep territory it has acquired by
force, it is still more disquieting that the international
community should fail to react to the measures taken by
that State with the obvious aim of ensuring its permanent
presence there. The world is ;.>day too small for’us to
suppose that the danger that affects the Middle East
because of such acts remains limited to that region, or that
its extension and its inherent contagion cannot reach the
rest of the world. Action by the great Powers-is unquestionably necessary for the maintenance of international
peace and security, action by a small country is sufficient
to destroy them, particularly when it is a small country
which, like Israel, has at its disposal resources whose size we
are well aware of. and is too much used to act without

15. Israel’s explanations would undoubtedly be more
plausibleand more convincing to us if the brutality of its
interventions in Lebanon had been matched in other
countries-for example,in Europe or in America-where it
could also find justification in the presenceof groups
of
Palestinians
engagedin terrorist action. But Israel’s boldness
and temerity find an easierfield of action in Lebanotl. a
countr), whose peaceful inclinations need no further
demonstration and where the accidents of geography
expose it to acts of aggressionwithout risk and without
glory on the part of an unscrupulousneighbour.
16. The Israeli leaderssay they wish to force Lebanon and
the other Arab countries to put an end to Palestinian
terrorism and to oblige the Palestiniansto abandon tile
struggle to which they have committed themselves. The
term “Arab” which they apply to Palestinianterrorism is in
their mind intended to confuse international opinion ill a
manner which is to their advantage and furthers their
designs.But that is to overlook at once the nature of the
2

’

bonds between the Arab countries and the Palestinian
people and the very nature of the Palestinian struggle.

22. In this case as in many others, the ineffectiveness of
international institutions
and the Security Council in
tackling this problem stems from the fact that too much
attention is given to its immediate manifestations and too
little to its deep-seated causes and the failure to take them
as a matter of priority.

17. If the Arab countries show their solidarity with all
peoples struggling for their freedom and independence, how
can anyone suppose that they would withhold their support
from the Palestinian people, which continues to be the
victim of a conscious and deliberate injustice on the part of
the international community and whose very existence as a
national community is today under threat?

23. The situation which exists in the Middle East, which
bears within it the seeds of tension that threaten not only
the people of the region but world peace, did not arise
spontaneously or without reason, and it has not persisted
for a quarter-century without valid reasons that we may not
ignore. It is, however, clear that this crisis is to be explained
by the conditions which obtained at the time of Israel’s
creation, by the foreseeable consequences of that creation
and by the very nature of Israel.

18. When the Algerian people was conducting its liberation struggle it found wide support throughout the world,
but more particularly and quite naturally in the brother and
neighbour countries of Morocco, Tunisia, Libya and Mali.
No one could accuse France of having at that time failed to
be firm in its action against the Algerian revolution, yet it
managed to contain its war efforts within the limits of
Algeria without mounting acts of aggression against the
neighbouring countries, which nevertheless harboured and
gave refuge to the Algerian fighters. The brazenness of
Israel is now introducing into international relations a new
dimension the more remote consequences of which some
are not yet willing to gauge.

24. I do not want to go into developments that would be
beyond the framework of this statement, but we should
like to recall the responsibility of the countries that didnot,
despite the controversies at the time, hesitate to take a
dubious decision, thus vitally affecting the future of a
population and arbitrarily deciding its fate, We may
understand the emotional atmosphere in which a decision
of such importance was taken, immediately following a war
which had threatened the freedom of peoples; but it is only
all tl-.e more astonishing that it could have been possible in
all conscience and on the pretext of making good an
injustice to commit another injustice which was every bit as
unpardonable against a people that had no reason to
suppose that so unhappy a destiny was awaiting them.

19. That attitude obviously reflects a total misreading of
the nature of the Palestinian struggle. For &he Palestinians,
this is not just a liberation struggle to break foreign
domination arid to recover a homeland of which they were
dispossessed. It is, rather, a struggle for their survival as a
people-an Arab people, of course, but a people with its
own history and an ancient national tradition, a people
which finds in its deep feeling of attachment 10 its
community the strength and the justification for its fight.

25. Yet the objectives of Zionism were well known to all
and no one c&Id have had any illusions about the
consequences that the creation of Israel would bring with
it. No one can claim to be unware that the Zionists aspired
to the creation of an essentially Jewish State within limits
that explain the present expansionism of Israel. The
elimination of the Palestinians from what had been their
homeland therefore followed inexorably from the decision
to create Israel, and those who took the decision are thus
responsible .‘or it.

20. But we are told that terrorism is an inhumane form of
struggle which does not distinguish between the guilty and
the innocent and which disturbs international order. Yes,
that is true, and we all deplore the blind violence it sets in
motion, which threatens all equally. But do the Palestinians
have the choice of any other form of struggle more
acceptable to those who uphold international order? What,
after all, has the international community done to make
good the injustice visited on that people beyond adopting
resolutions which remain without effect and providing
humanitarian aid which maintains that people in wretched
refugee camps? Does it have an organized army that could
fact the lsraeli forces in accordance with the classic rules of
war? Like many other people before them placed in the
same situation as this, the Palestinians are resorting to the
only form of struggle open to them, in which the risks to
which they are exposed are at least as great as the threat
they level against others.

26. The fundamental problem is that of the Palestinian
people, but it is not just a humanitarian problem. The
political facts of the situation are quite clear; they rest on
the legitimate aspirations that can be concealed neither by
the periodic explosions of violence nor by the complexity
of a situation that has now grown to encompass the whole
of the Middle East. This problem will no1 be solved
SO brlg
as lsrael maintains its Zionist character, through which it
presents itself as the State of all Jews in the world. Because
of this Zionist character Israel not only is opposed to the
rightful claims of the Palestinians to live in their own
country, but also is a real danger because of its claim to
represent all Jewish colonis: wherever they arc, even in
countries where they enjoy full citizenship. This perhaps
explains the wide support it has always enjoyed on the
international level. This is the key to the power on which it
can draw and which it uses in order to carry out the most
extremist objectives of international zionism, but this could
ultimately lead to the gravest disturbances in international
lift.

21. It is essential that we understand that this is a struggle
to which an entire people is committed, a struggle that does
not rest solely on a few leaders whose disappearance will
result in the abandonment of the struggle. It is a dangerous
illusion to think that Israeli terrorism can break the
determination of the Palestinians or compel them to accept
their lot, On the contrary, their determination will only be
further sharpened, and the present generation of Palestinian
leaders will be succeeded by another even more determined
and assuredly better prepared to carry on the combat.
3

27. I am well aware that the Security Council has not met
in order to find a solution to the Middle East crisis, and in
any case it is no part of my intention to propose one. But the
situation created by the Israeli aggression in Lebanon
must be seen in its over-all context, which highlights an
Israeli policy which is simplistic in its conception, subtle in
its formulation and monstrous in its execution. This is not
just the deIiberate violation of the sovereignty of a State
Member of the United Nations; this is not just the useby a
Member of the Organization of its armed forces for a
terrorist action. It is in fact far more than that: what is
happeninggoesfar beyond a mere infringement of the rules
of law or a breach-even a grave breach-of the principlesof
international law. The problem before you is that of a
peoplethat has rights to claim and that refusesta resign
itself to an intolerable fate. Israel’s aggressionagainst
Lebanon is reprehensiblenot only becauseit is directed
againsta sovereigncountry, but also and above all because
it futilely claims to furnish a reply to the inalterable
aspirationsof the Palestinians.

international community. For the Security Council, whose
fundamental missionis to watch over the maintenanceof
world peaceand security, hereis food for thought and here
are guidelines for its action, if it wishes to rise to its
responsibilitiesand to justify the hopes that the peoples
continue to placein it.
31. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):Tile
next name on the list of speakersis that of the representativeof the Syrian Arab Republic.I invite him to take a
placeat the Counciltable and to makea statement.
32. Mr. KELANI (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation
French): Mr. President,I thank you and the members
of the Council for allowing my delegationto participate in
the discussionof this agendaitem. I also wishto expressto
you my most sincerecongratulations on the occasionof
your becoming President of the Security Council and
reiterate our tribute to your dearcountry and your enlinenl
person_

jkonz

33. The representativeof Lebanon[I 705th nleetiug] hss
given the Council an account of the terrorist escalation in
which the Zionist authorities are engagingand the declarations of their intention to intensify it, in particular against
Lebanonand the neighbouringcountries in the area.Their
purposeis avowed, and the torrent of propagandacannot
conceal it. It is genocide, pure and simple, against the
people of Palestine-to stifle its voice and eliminate jrs
personality. Yesterday the Councilheard the representative
of Israel [ibid./ apply to the Palestinian Arabs epithets
29. In taking up this problem which is so painful for all,
worthy of himself-“assassins”and “barbarians”. What he
the international community must be aware of its own
tried to do wasto makeusforget that the PalestinianArabs
responsibility in the tragedy of the Palestinianpeople. It
are a people,a peoplewith its personality and its inalienable
cannot ask that people to respect an international order
rights and one which has bee<chasedaway from its home
which neglects its rights or to bow to international law
which is so unjust vis-8-vis itself. The Palestinianpeople by a foreign conquest which was racist and coioniaiist.
Since then the’ most atrocious conditions have been
cannot resignitself to waiting until a solution to its tragedy
comes from international institutions that have been imposedon that martyred people, The representative of
Israel dwelt at length on the manifestationsof a few young
quicker to ruin its national life than to see its rights
Palestin:ansfilled with frustration and despair. He never
restored.The struggle it is carrying on today by the only
meansthat remain available to it is part of the normal mentioned the behaviour of the authorities of Israel
towards the Palestinians,a behaviour which is even exprocesswhich has led all oppressedpeoplesto rise up
againstdomination, all humiliated peoplesto rebelagainst tended to their campsof exile. No reasonwasgiven for the
attitude of that colonialistPowerin regard to resolutions of
the arroganceof power and all peoplesthat arethe victims
the United Nations on the Palestinian people or on any
of injusticeto claim their rights.
other resolutionson self-determination, the return of the
30. The international community must also cast an un- refugeesto their country, the Statute of Jerusalem, the
waveringeye on the behaviour of Israel, a State which it has inadmissibility of the acquisitionof territory by force and
the return of displacedpersonsto their homeland. The
itself created and sustained,and whose policies,basedon
tragedy which has struck the people of Palestine and has
force and contempt for international law, representone of
the gravest dangersto world equilibrium. The monstrous been extended to the neighbouring countries by the
terrorismin which it is engaging,supported by the immense neo-colonialistracist forces which make a cult of force and
resourcesat its disposal,is unquestionably oneof the most have loudly proclaimed the policy of terrorism W;IS not
mentioned, and the representativeof the State that has
disquietingphenomenaof our time. It was the wont of the
great Powers to practise the policy of intimidation and violated every United Nations resolution and caused the
failure of every action intended to lessen the injustices
intervention in the affairs of other countries; it wastheir
privilegeto trample under foot the rule of law andto make committed againstthe PalestinianArabs comesto ask the
their own law. That these same dangerousand criminal membersof the Security Council for their support
to
consummatethe massacre
of the Palestinepeoplewhich his
tendenciesare now seenin the attitude of a smallcountry,
PrimeMinister describedas“very marvellous”.
installedthrough force in the Middle East in the midst of
nationsthat have only just becomeindependentthemselves
and are at grips with the problems of strengthening, 34. It would take too long to mention here the endless list
organ&g and developing themselves-this is what gives of resolutions which were adopted by the Gerleral
causefor the gravest concern as regardsthe future of the
Assembly and by the Security Council after the Israeli
28. The humanitarian aspect of these events, no matter
how important, must not distract the Council’sattention
from an objective consideration of the situation and the
appallingdisparity between the two terrorisrnswhich face
one another and which, on the Palestinianside, can be
offset only by an unshakablefaith in the justice of their
causeand by the determination to accept the heaviest
sacrificesso that it may triumph,

aggression of June 1967. Those resolutions referred mainly
to the refusal of Israel to recognize the fundamental rights
of the Palestinian refugees. Those rights are enunciated h
the Charter of the United Nations and in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.
35. More recently the General Assembly, in its resolution
2963 A [XXVII),
“1. Notes with deep regret that repatriation or compensation of the refugees as provided for in paragraph 11
of General Assembly resolution 194 (III) has not been
effected. + .;I’.
In its resolution 2963 D (XXVII)

it

“5. Ci& again upor? Israel to desist forthwith from all
measures affecting the physical, geographic and detnographic structure of the occupied territories;“.
111its resolution 2963 E (XXVII)

it

“1. Affirnts that the people of Palestine are entitled to
equal rights and self-determination, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations;
“2. Expresses once more its grave concem that the
people of Palestine have not been pertnitted to enjoy
their inalienable rights and to exercise their right to
self-deterIninatior1;
“3. Rccognizes that full respect for and realization of
the inalienable rights of the people of Palestine are
indispensable for the establishment of a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East ,”
36. The real question before the Security Council at
present is the terrorism practised by Israel as a doctrine, as
a faith and as a cult. The details of its latest crimes are only
tile first fruits of the application of this doctrine, and the
blood-thirsty
leaders of Israel openly tell us: “We shall get
to the Palestinian leaders, wherever they are.” Neither the
rules of justice or law nor the sovereignty of States are any
barrier to their aggressive thrusts, their expansionism and
genocide,
37. lt is this State terrorism-fundamentally
different
from individual acts of violence, which are an expression of
despair-which
the Council is called upon to consider,
particularly in its flagrant manifestations of violation Of the
sovereignty of Member States and their territorial integrity.
38. Under the pretext of security, Israel has broken the
June 1967 armistice lines, conquered new Arab territory
and established colonies and settlements there which are
military
fortresses Where militarily trained people are
settled. Under the pretext of security, lsrael retains the
occupied Arab territories and fights by every means against
the return to their homes of the children of the Palestinians
and other displaced persons. Under the pretext of security,
Israel is now striking at the front lines and deeply into Arab
territories, Under the pretext of security, Israel Will Sooner

Or later try to undertake one aggression after the other
until, on the basis of its Calculations, it can achieve the
“great Israel”.
39% Under the pretext of Security, Israel wishes to retain
the newly acquired territories which were not under its
domination in 1967, in order to preserve Israeli colonies.
Assuming that that were true, why does Israel set up new
colonies in the recently occupied territories near the
cease-fire lines? Are not those new colonies to serve aSa
Pretext for soon claiming new territories which will remove
them frOtt1 the cease-fire lines with the Arabs? Yes,
Colonies which need new territories for their security,
new
territories which need new colonies for their security, and
then new colonies which need new territories, and so on, ad
infinitum, until achievement of the “great Israel”.
40. This terrorism is now escalating. The Zionist authorities are preparing international public opinion for a new
war to be unleashed against the Arab countries in order to
eliminate forever what remains of the Palestinian people,
and to impose their own peace terms on the neighbouring
countries. It is this escalation which the Council tnust
consider with all due seriousness, before a new conflagrdtion once againjeopardizes international peace.
41. Israel’s attitude of defiance could not have attained
these dimensions of arrogance and intoxication had it not
been for the unconditional support furnished it by a great
Power, the United States of America. The representative of
the United States becomes indignant in the Council at the
rumours of the complicity of his authorities in the acts of
terrorism perpetrated against Lebanon. But he says not a
word about the aid and sophisticated material for all-out
war, about the participation of his authorities in the deadly
War industry of Israel and the promotion of that industry
by American capital and technology, about the funds
disbursed by the United States to Israel to maintain its
tyranny over the Arab peoples and perpetuate its occupation of their territories and, finally, about the veto Cast by
his delegation last September in regard to a draft resolution
Which only asked for a cessation of military Operations, or
the immense encouragement which Israel has received to
perpetrate With impunity its aggression against innocent
people. Js this not an invitation to Israel on the part Oftbe
United States of America to do anything it Wishes against
the Arab countries, since Israel iS always Sure that the
United States will never oppose its acts, however abominable they might be’?
42. At this Stage,1 Should like to affirm that the attitude
of the Syrian Arab Republic in regard to the question of
Palestine and the imperialist Zionist aggression against the
Arab countries and against Lebanon in particular is firm
and based on the principles and provisions Of the Charter Of
the United Nations; it is based on the rules Of international
law and precepts
of justice and equity. 1 affirm alSothat
two conditions are essential for the establishment of Peace
in the Middle East: first, recognition Of the right of the
people of Palestine to their land, their homeland, free
excercise of their right to self-determination, and then, the
complete, immediate and unconditional withdrawal of
Israeli forces from all occupied Arab territories.

43. Many Security Council resolutions have condemned
Israeli acts of aggression similar to the latest aggression, and
the Council has warned Israel unequivocally that a repetition of such acts would lead to the adoption of enforcement measures. There has been no change in Israel’s
attitude, however. Its leaders loudly proclaim their defiance
of United Nations resolutions and of the resolutions
of the Security Council in particular. A State which thus
tramples under foot the resolutions of the international
community should have no place in this Organization. Israel
persistently
breaches the principles enunciated in the
Charter. It is high time that the Security Council discharged
its obligations. Similarly, the Council can no longer
postpone adoption of appropriate measures so that the
consequences of Israeli aggression can be eliminated.

and Sidon and caused great material damage to the
Lebanese.
48. This criminal act perpetrated by the Israeli aggressors
in their unbounded insolence is the latest link in the chain
of crimes committed by Israeli extremists who are seeking,
through terrorism elevated to the level of State policy and
through intimidation and aggression, to put into effect their
predatory plans to annex the lands of other countries and
to achieve the Israelization of the Arab territories seized in
1967.
49. For the tenth time in the past four years, the Security
Council is considering questions relating to Israeli acts of
aggression against Lebanon. As it discusses today this new
act of international gangsterism committed by Israel, the
Council cannot fail to recall the long list of crimes of
aggression by Israel against Lebanon which have been
brought before it.

44. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian): Mr. President, before making
the Soviet delegation’s statement on the substance of this
item, I should like to express to you the sincere and cordial
satisfaction and congratulations of the Soviet delegation on
your present occupancy of the lofty and responsible
position of President of the Security Council. We are quite
sure that you, distinguished diplomat and the representative
of a friendly country, will discharge these weighty duties
with honour. YOJ may count on the co-operation of the
Soviet delegation as you carry out the lofty and honourable
obligations incumbent on the President of the Council,

50. In December 1968 the Council considered the armed
attack by Israeli armed forces on the civilian international
airport of Beirut. On that occasion Israel was condemned
by the Council for its premeditated military actions.
51. In August 1969 the Council condemned, in resolution 270 (1969), the premeditated air attack by Israel 011
populated areas in southern Lebanon. In May 1970,
referring to the invasion of Lebanese territory by Israeli
armed forces, the Council demanded, in resolution 279
(1970), the immediate withdrawal of Israeli armed forces
from Lebanese territory. Also in May 1970, in resolution 280 (1970), the Security Council condemned lsrael for
its premeditated military action against Lebanon. In September 1970, referring to another invasion of Lebanese
territory by Israeli armed forces, the Council again demanded, in resolution 285 (1970), the complete and immediate
withdrawal of those Israeli armed forces.

45. I should also like to express the deep satisfaction I
have felt at working with your predecessor and to comment
on his outstanding work as President of the Council. I am
referring to our colleague Mr. Boyd, the representative of
Panama, whose actions added a new page to the history of
the Security Council-the
holding of a second series of
meetings of the Security Council away from United Nations
Headquarters. As President of the Council during that
period, he displayed his brilliant qualities, and he had an
equally brilliant helper and deputy-his Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Tack.

52. In February 1972, after new acts af aggression by
Israel against Lebanon, the Council demanded, in resolution 313 (1972), that Israel immediately desist and refrain
from any ground and air military action against Lebanon
and forthwith withdraw its military forces from Lebanese
territory.

46. That series of meetings was so well organized in
Panama that, as I have already remarked during informal
consultations among members of the Council, many members feel tempted to hold meetings of the Council away
from Headquarters more frequently.

53. In June 1972 lsrael was again condemned by the
Council, in resolution 316 (1972), for its repeated attacks
on Lebanese territory and population. Lastly, in 3uly 1973,
the Council, considering the question of the latest acts of
aggression by Israel against Lebanon, deplored, in resalution 317 (1972), the fact that the Syrian and Lebanese
military personnel abducted by Israeli armed forces frorll
Lebanese territory had not been returned and called for
their immediate return.

47. The Security Council is once again compelled to
consider the question of a new act of aggression by Israel
against the peace-loving State of Lebanon, an act unprecedented in its insolence and in the cynicism in
international affairs which it reveals. As we learned from
the statement of Mr. Ghorra (1705th meeting], the distinguished representative of Lebanon, on 10 April a large
group of Israeli troops carried out a gangster-like raid on
the Lebanese capital city of Beirut and the town of Sidon.
Like thieves in the night, using the methods once used by
Hi-litler’s SS cutthroats, the Israeli terrorist saboteurs penetrated into a foreign country and into a foreign capital,
where they committed their bloody crime. As a result of
this act of banditry and terrorism, 12 persons lost their lives
and 29 were wounded, In addition to these bestial murders,
the Israeli terrorists blew up a number of buildings in Beirut

54. In September 1972 the Council considered furtller
acts of aggression by Israel against Lebanon. At that tirlle
three members of the Security Council submitted
a
relatively moderate draft resolution [S/l 080.5 WC{ Rw. I/
calling for the immediate cessation of all military opcrations and requesting the parties-primarily,
of COII~SC,
Israel-to show the utmost restraint in the interests of
international peace and security. Unfortunately,
this ex6

tremely moderate and undemanding draft resolution was
not adopted by the Council because one of the permanent
members-the United States-voted against it, that is to say,
used the veto and thus made it impossible for the Council
to take the necessary steps against the Israeli aggressors. It
is quite obvious that actions of this kind amount to nothing
less than support and encouragement for the aggressor to
carry out further gangster-like attacks on the Arab States
and to use force in any form,
55. In this connexion we must also draw attention to the
following fact: it was certainly not by chance but by design
‘-that-i- Israel, as the aggressor State, was one of the States
which refused, &the twenty-seventh session of the General
Assembly, to support resolution 2936 (XXVII) on non-use
of force in international relations and permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons. That this was far from a
chance decision is confirmed by Israel’s subsequent behaviour, namely, the continuation of its policy of aggression
and the use of force in all its forms and manifestations
against the Arab States. That is why the aggressors and the
advocates of the use of force and the use of nuclear
weapons had no liking for this resolution, which is cast in
the form of a solemn declaration by the General Assembly
on behalf of all States Members of the United Nations. It
.was and remains clearly repugnant to them.
56. Moreover, subsequent events-the continued aggression by Israel in the Middle East and the aggressive actions
of Portugal, South Africa and Southern Rhodesia against
African States-have made it even clearer that this General
Assembly resolution protects the legitimate interests of the
victims of imperialist and colonial aggression. The resolution, as we are all aware, also reaffirms the principle of the
inadmissibility of acquisition of territory by force. It again
upholds the inherent right of States subjected to aggression
to recover such territories by all means at their disposal.
That is why the overwhelming majority of Arab States,
with the unfortunate exception of two, voted for the
resolution and for this solemn declaration by the General
Assembly on behalf of all States Members of the United
Nations.
57. In the light of these facts it is quite evident that those
who spoke against adoption of the resolution, voted against
its adoption or abstained in the vote were in fact
encouraging Israel and the other aggressors to continue the
policy of aggression and to continue to use force in
international relations.
58. At the same time it is quite obvious that, by virtue of
the adoption by the General Assembly, at its twentyseventh session, of this resolution in the form of a solemn
declaration on behalf of all States Members of the United
Nations, the principle of the non-use of force in international relations and the permanent prohibition of the use of
nuclear weapons has become a new rule of international
law. Consequently, any new act of aggression on the part of
Israel against the Arab States is now-a violation not only of
the Charter of the United Nations but also of this important
new rule of internationfl law. And this fact must be stated
plainly in the resolution which the Security Council will
adopt on this question.

59. Furthermore, it is incumbent on the members of the
Council to take another important decision. In that
resolution the General Assembly recommended that the
Council should take, as soon as possible, appropriate
measures for the full implementation of the solemn
declaration of the General Assembly. The Council is under
an obligation not to defer this question any longer but to
consider it in the immediate future and, in accordance with
its competence and powers under the Charter, to adopt an
appropriate decision and affirm that the renunciation of the
use or threat of force in all its forms for the settlement of
disputes among States has become a law of international
life.
60. The Soviet Union firmly and consistently advocates
the non-use of force in international relations and the
permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons.
Anyone who opposes this position is in fact giving “grist to
the mills” of the aggressors, including Israel, and under.
mining the defence of the rights and interests of the victims
of aggression.
61. We must add that four times in recent years-in
December 1968, August 1969, May 1970 and June
1972-the Security Council warned Israel that, if it continued its acts of aggression against Lebanon, the Council
would meet to consider further action and would be
obliged to provide for the adoption of appropriate effective
measures, in accordance with the provisions of the Charter,
to ensure that its resolutions were carried out.
62. Israel, however, is continuing its established practice
of outright disregard for and violation of Security Council
decisions and General Assembly resolutions.
63. As the representative of Lebanon correctly pointed
out in his letter and in his statement lI705th meeting/, the
repeated criminal acts committed by detachments of the
Israeli armed forces in Lebanon are carried out as part of
the Israeli Government’s policy of intimidation and State
terrorism.
64. In this connexion we cannot pass over the fact that
the latest gangster operation by the Israeli aggressors is
praised to the skies by the Government of Israel and is
depicted as a kind of “retaliatory measure”, Attention has
already been drawn here to the unprecedentedly cynical
and misanthropic statement by the Prime Minister of Israel,
Mrs. Golda Meir, who termed the gangster-like raid on the
Lebanese capital by the Israeli saboteurs an absolutely
magnificent operation, about which glowing pages would be
written. The Israeli Chief of Staff, General Elazar, used
equally bare-faced and boastful words when, in violation of
the generally accepted elementary rules of international law
and morality, he stated that Israel did not intend to respect
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon.
65, The Soviet Union’s position with regard to acts of
international terrorism is well known. We are categorically
opposed to international terrorism. The Soviet Union
speaks out from positions of principle against acts of
terrorism which disrupt the diplomatic activities of States
and of their representatives, transport links between them,

and the normal course of international contacts and
meetings, and against acts of violence which serve no
positive purpose and cause the deaths of innocent people.
We oppose equally firmly and categorically any attempts to
influence the policy of a State through inhuman acts of
terrorism,

situation in the Middle East which endangers the cause of
peace is that the consequences of Israel’s aggression against
the Arab countries in June 1967 have not yet been
eliminated and, moreover, that Israeli armed forces, sup.
ported by the forces of imperialism and zionism, continue
to commit new acts of aggression against neighbouring Arab
States.

66. The USSR opposes with equal vigour an aggressor’s
use of terrorist activities carried out by individuals and
irresponsible loners as an excuse for its own aggression
against other countries and for barbaric, gangster-like
attacks by a State on a neighbouring State under the
pretext of “equal retribution”,
that is to say, a pretext
aimed at justifying international lawlessness and gangsterism. We are categorically opposed to the “law of the
jungle” in international relations. Accordingly, we condemn
the terroristic methods used by Israel in its international
policy and Israel’s elevation of terrorism to the level of
State policy.

70. The Israeli representative in the Security Council has
done his utmost to justify this latest monstrous act of
aggression
by Israel against Lebanon.,He has claimed that
certain individuals, who have committed or attempted to
commit acts of terrorism in other countries, came from
Lebanon. We are expected to believe that Israel is thus
justified in committing any act of aggression against
Lebanon.If we are to follow this logic of aggressionargued
by Israeland its representativein the Security Council, who
has defended recourse to the “law of the jungle” in
international relations, then Lebanon in turn ought to
launch reprisalsagainstthose countriesthrough which the
Israelisaboteurscameto Beirut.

67. The Soviet Union firmly opposes all acts of aggression
and advocates the complete and speedy elimination of any
aggression and its consequences; it favours, of course, the
withdrawal
of the aggressor’s troops from its victim’s
territory. As far as the Middle East is concerned, this
indicates the urgent need for a just settlement which will
establish lasting peace on the basis of implementation of all
the provisions of Security Council resolution 242 (1967). It
means that Israeli troops must be withdrawn from all the
Arab territories occupied in 1967. It means that the Arab
people of Palestine must be given a guarantee of their
legitimate rights; this guarantee, together with the withdrawal of Israeli troops, is a basic requisite for the
establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
Quite clearly, the responsibility for everything which is
going on in the Middle East, and elsewhere in connexion
with the Middle East problem, rests wholly and entirely
with IsraeI. It is Israel’s aggressive policy which lies at the
root of the dangerous tension and all its disastrous
consequences in and beyond that troubled and dangerous
part of the world.

71. According to pressreports, they came to Lebanon as
tourists from Westerncountries, dressedin civilian clothing
and with United Kingdom, West German and Belgium
passports.They basedthemselvesin the Sands,Coral Beach
and Atlantic hotels. After careful preparations, these
gangsterscarried out their criminal missionon 10 April.
What action should Lebanontake if the logic and philosophy of the Israeliaggressors
were to be followed? it should
sendits terrorist saboteursto London, Bonn and Brusselsto
commit there acts similarto thosecommitted by the Israeli
gangstersat Beirut. Such is the monstrous logic of Israe
andits representatives.
72. Mr. Tekoah, if you think seriously and responsibly
about what you were saying and what you were proposing,
you will yourself realize how absurd, ridiculous and
monstrousare your attempts to justify this latest criminal
act of aggression
by your country againstLebanon. You are
proposingand defendingthe “law of the jungle” and lynch
law in relations between States. You are advocating the
mediaevallaw of blood vengeance-an eye for an eye, a
tooth for a tooth. How strangeand monstrous! And this in
the secondhalf of the twentieth century! Eulogizing the
adoption and useof suchcriminal methodsin international
relations was a characteristic only of the paranoid Hitlerites, who lost their reasonin bloody orgies of permanent
aggressionand terrorism elevated to the level of State
policy in FascistGermany.

68. The Israeli Government’s claims that the piratical raid
by the Israeli saboteurs was undertaken as a “reprisal”
against the activities of Palestinian organizations cannot
serve as an excuse and do not stand up to critical
examination. We are all aware that the Security Council
categorically condemned any attempts to use pleas of
so-called reprisals for justifying aggression or any other
attacks by one State on another. In this connexion, it must
be noted in particular that, in resolution 270 (1969) of 26
August 1969, which deals specifically with acts of aggression by Israel against Lebanon, the Council categorically
condemned military reprisals. Security Council resolution 248 (1968) adopted in March 1968 contains a similar
provision to the effect that military reprisals by Israel
against another Arab country-Jordan-cannot
be tolerated
or permitted. This position of the Council was also clearly
reflected in a number of its subsequent decisions.

73. In a vain attempt to indict Lebanon and to shift the
blame from the sick to the healthy, the representative of
Israel expatiated on the theory that Lebanon wanted to
obtain from the Security Council “licence for the continuation of terrorism”. In fact that is far from being the case;
the truth is quite the reverse.Israelhascome here to justify
its policy of international terrorism andto obtain from the
Security Council licence for the continuation of its terrorismand its policy of gangsterism.But Israel’s efforts and
hopes are in vain. Israel has not obtained and will not
obtain such licence from the Security Council. On the
contrary, as many speakershave noted, Israel has been

69. No matter how much the Israeli militarists try to
confuse the matter and obscure its essence, they will not
succeed. The root of the evil and of the perpetuation of a
8

Secretary-General’s Special Representative, Mr. Jarring.
And we are certain that the person who is due by rotation
to preside over those consultations-I mean our distinguished colleague and friend Mr. de Guiringaud, representativeof France-would alsobe ready to convene in the
next few days a consultationmeetingof the five permanent
members, provided that there was no objection from
certain participants in such a meeting. This is how matters
stand with regard to the responsibility of the great Powers
for the situation in the Middle East and the apportioning of
that responsibility.

condemned by the Council for its policy of
aggression and international gangsterism, and it will be
condemned on this occasion too. The representative Of
Israel need have no doubt of that. Israel will be recognized
as morally and politically guilty and will be condemned by
the United Nations and world public opinion for this new
bloody crime, even if one of its friends and highly placed
protectors prevents the Security Council from adopting an
appropriate resolution.

~peatedly

74. The Soviet Union persistently and consistently advocates a political settlement of the Middle East crisis, the
withdrawal of Israeli troops from all the occupied Arab
territories and respect for the lawful rights of the Arab
people of Palestine. Only if the question is resolved in this
way can a just and lasting peace be established in the
Middle East, The ending of the war in Viet-Nam has now
prepared the way for all advocates of peace to multiply
their efforts to liquidate the hotbed of war in the Middle
East and to eliminate the consequences of Israeli aggression
against the Arab States.

77. The essenceof the problem before the Council today
is Israel’s stubborn unwillingnessto proceed towards a
peaceful political settlementin the Middle East on the basis
of the well-known decisionsand resolutionsof the Security
Council and the General Assembly.In the five years which
have elapsed since June 1967, when it carried out its
imperialist aggressionagainst three neighbouring Arab
States, Israel has stubbornly refusedto withdraw its troops
from the unlawfully occupied Arab territories. It is cynically sabotaginga peacefulpolitical settlementbasedon the
decisions and demands of the United Nations and is
carrying on a destructive policy of assimilationand Israelization of the Arab territories which it seizedby meansof
war and aggression.

75. In this connexion we cannot fail to agree with those
representatives who have called on the great Powers-the
permanent members of the Security Council-to take active
measures and do all they can to liquidate the dangerous
hotbed of war in the Middle East and curb Israeli
aggression. Of course there is no justification for the
unfounded, indiscriminate and uncritical attempts to saddle
all the great Powers with the blame for Israeli aggression.
That is not the true situation. To take just one example: it
is common knowledge that, in accordance with Security
Council resolution 242 (1967), the permanent members of
the Council, that is to say, the great Powers, were given
responsibility for providing all possible co-operation to
Mr. Jarring as he carried out his noble mission of seeking a
peaceful political settlement in the Middle East. We ASO
know that, to this end, consultationswereheld amongfour
permanentmembersof the Council, without of coursethe
participationof the ChiangKai-shekagent,who represented
no one in the United Nations. Wealsoknow who opposed,
duringtheseconsultations,the adoption of effective measuresto eliminate the consequences
of the aggression
and to
achievea peaceful political settlement in the Middle East.
Lastly, everyone is aware who sought to break off the
consultationsand why they were broken off. It is also
commonknowledgethat now two of the five greatPowers,
permanentmembersof the Council, are unwilling to take
part in the consultations and are thus preventing their
resumption.Nor is it difficult to seewho benefitsfrom the
positionadopted by thesepermanentmembers.It benefits
the aggressor and is directed against the victims of
aggression,
againstthe defence of the legitimate rights of
the Arab peopleof Palestine.

78. The Israeli militarists, carried away by the impunity
which they enjoy and relying on the support of international Zionism, are stoking the fires of crisisin the region
more and more and are resortingto systematic gangster-like
attacks and acts of violent provocation againstthe neighbouring Arab States.
79. Consequently, the acute conflict in the Middle East
region-a result of Israel’scontinued aggressionagainst the
neighbouring Arab States and its continued occupation of
the Arab territories which it seized-still representsa grave
threat to the causeof peace.
80. Pursuing its policy of aggressionand assimilationof
the occupied Arab territories, the Israeli Government .is
flagrantly flouting the United Nations. It tries to justify Its
refusal to carry out the decisionsand resolutionsof United
Nations organswith the preposterousargument that these
decisionsare “one-sided”. No, these decisionsare just. In
his letter of 9 April 1973 addressedto the SecretaryGeneral[S/10910],
the representativeof Israel went so far
as to makethe absurdassertionthat the United Nationshas
been-I quote from his letter-“deprived. . of its ability to
play a meaningful role in solvingthe Middle East conflict”.
81, This Israeli policy is a grossand unworthy challengeto
the United Nations and posesa seriousthreat to international peaceandsecurity.

76. For its part, the Soviet Union is ready, together with
the other permanent membersof the Council, to make
every necessaryeffort, up to and including the adoption of
the most effective measures,in the matter of eliminating
aggression
and achievinga political settlementin the Middle
East.It is ready to renewimmediately the consultationson
the Middle East amongthe five permanentmembersof the
Security Council, with a view to providing assistance
to the

82. Recently, on 22 March 1973, on the occasionof the
visit to the USSR of Mr. SaddamHussein,Vice-Presidentof
the Council of the Revolutionary Command of Iraq,
Comrade A. N. Kosygin, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of the USSR,stated:
“We have never doubted, nor do we now doubt, that
the aggressor’sattempts to imposehis will on the Arabs
9

and in its ability to play a constructive role in the Middle
East situation-a fact which is apparently known to all but
which the Soviet representative found it necessaryto
questiontoday-it is sufficient to considersimply the nature
of someof the statementsmade at yesterday’sand today’s
meetings.Yesterday, for instance,the Council was treated
to a parody of Jewish history which would be simply
consideredludicrous in its mockery of truth were it not
sinister in its anti-Jewish overtones. If the vicious libels
against the Jewish people as compiled in the ill-famed
CzaristProtocols of Zion are allowed to be repeatedhere in
lengthy cacophony year after year, debate after debate,
what can the world think of our deliberations? What can it
think of a Council meeting like yesterday’s, half of which
wastaken up by a sermonabout human rights and human
suffering delivered by the representative of a State, Saudi
Arabia, in which slaveryexists to this very day?

will fail and that he will have to leave the occupied Arab
lands. The longer Israel opposes the establishment of a
just peace in the Middle East, the more’inglorious will be
the end which awaits its aggressive policy. Such an end is
inevitable. The experience of Viet-Nam proves conclusively that not even the most powerful military
machine of imperialism can conquer a people which
defends its freedom and independence with self-sacrifice,
a people whose just cause enjoys the support of all
progressive mankind.”
83. The Soviet Government expresses serious concern at
the tense situation in the Middle East, which has recently
become even further exacerbated as a result of the piratical
raids of the Israeli terrorist saboteurs in Lebanon. As was
pointed out in the joint Soviet-Finnish statement of 6 April
last on the occasion of the visit to Finland of Comrade
N. V. Podgorny, President of the Presidium of the Supreme
Soviet of the USSR, the Soviet Union and Finland

88. This sorry spectaclehas continued at today’s meeting,
especially in the statement just delivered by the repre“have reaffirmed their conviction that it is essential to
sentative of the Soviet Union. For a representativeof the
Soviet Union to accuse other States of aggression,of
establish in the immediate future a just and lasting peace
gangsterism,of expansionism,borders on a farce. For him
in this region on the basis of the Security Council
resolution of 22 November 1967, which provides for the
to speakof the non-useof force in international reiations or
withdrawal of Israeli troops from the occupied territories
of the right to liberty and independenceof smallpeoplesis
the height of audacity. For the Soviet Union to preach
and for guaranteeing the security of every State in the
arca. Constant support must also be given to future
about international morality, about respectfor the rights of
United Nations efforts to achieve a settlement of the
groupsor individuals, is a sham.This is especially SOwhen
Middle East problem on this basis”.
the discussioncentres,asit doestoday, on measuresagainst
international terrorism. It wasthe Soviet Union that helI?ed
84. The Soviet delegation fully supports the Lebanese the Arab delegationsto frustrate the effort made at the
Government’s protest at this new, unprecedentedlybare- twenty-seventh sessionof the General Assembly to deal
faced act of aggressionby Israel against Lebanon. We effectively with the scourgeof international terrorism. NOW
categorically condemn Israel’spolicy of continuing its acts the Soviet representativecomesto the Council and, tlzougi~
of terrorist aggressionagainst Lebanon and other Arab he deplores acts of terrorism, he counsels victims of
States.
terrorist atrocities not to defend themselves.I wish to tell
Mr. Malik that the Jewishpeople has had enough of that
8.5. The Soviet delegation believes that the Security kind of advice. Our history is replete with demands that
Councilshouldtake the following points into accountwhen Jewspassivelyhold their throats out to the butcher’s knife.
decidingon its courseof action in this matter. The Council This will not happen.
has not only repeatedly condemnedIsrael but haswarned
that country that if it continues its armed attacks on 89. It is high time to understandthat Israel has the sa111e
neighbouring Arab States, the Council will considerthe right to defend itself and protect its citizens asother States
question of adopting appropriate effective measuresin
and other nations, If Arab Governmentsrefuse to abide by
accordancewith the Charter. The time for such action has their international obligationsand continue to support CHICI
arrived. The Soviet delegation believes that the Security supply terrorist groups that constantly violate the soverCouncil must not only categorically condemn Israel’slatest eignty of other Statesand spreadviolence andbloodshed all
gangster-likeactivities but alsotake effective stepsto put an over the world, the least that Israel is entitled to do is to
end to the extremist Israeli militarists acts of aggression strike at thesemurdererswhereverit can reach them, There
and gangsterism.The Soviet delegation is ready to support, cannot be one law for the Arab States and another for
in the Security Council, effective sanctions againstIsrael, Israel.
even the expulsion of Israelfrom the United Nationson the
groundsthat it is a State which hasmadeaggression
a main 90. The method of argumentation used by the S&et
objective of its foreign policy, stubbornly, systematically representative today is perhaps best illustrated by his
and deliberately violating the decisions of the United
referencesto the resolution on the non-use of force in
Nations andthe fundamental purposesand principlesof the
international relations and permanent prohibition of the
Charter, which are designedto maintain and strengthen use of nuclear weapons.The representative of the Soviet
international peaceand security.
Union built almosthis entire caseagainstIsrael on Israel%
vote on that resolution. However, he did not mention two
86. The PRESIDENT /interpretation from Spanish): I call
simple but rather significant facts: first of all, that that
on the representativeof Israel.
resolution was initiated in the usualannual propagandistic
exercise of the Soviet delegation and, secondly, that 50
87. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): If an explanation wererequired States,not Israel alone, refusedto support it, 46 abstained
for the deterioration in the stature of the United Nations and 6 voted against.
0

91. It is not surprising that the Syrian Arab Republic
should have chosen to participate in the debate in order to
defend Arab terrorism. Its role in the inception and
operation of the terrorist organizations is well known.
Support of terrorist operations has been a central tenet in
the policy of the Ba’ath leaders who have ruled the Syrian
Arab Republic since 1966. Today it supports on its
territory the largest group of terrorists based in any Arab
country. Of 14,000 terrorists based in Arab States, 9,000
are located in the Syrian Arab Republic. The central
military commands of some of the terrorist organizations
are situated in Damascus. President Asad, in an interview
with the newapaper Al Mussawnr on 2 September 1971,
stated:

94. According to reports, it has now been established
beyond any doubt that some Syrian-trained commandos in
southern Lebanon are actually Syrian army soldiers in
commando uniforms. Ostensibly, the Syrian-trained commandos, called Sa’iqa, aim to harass Israel. In fact, those
commandos are seeded with camouflaged Syrian regulars.
Three thousand of their approximately 9,000 terrorists in
the Syrian Arab Republic belong to the Palestine Liberation
Army. These are under Syrian army command. The status
of the Palestine Liberation Army in the Syrian Arab
Republic is regulated by special agreement.
95. Moreover the Syrian Arab Republic, as is well known,
actively supports the Popular Front and the General
Command, which split away from the Popular Front for the
Liberation of Palestine in the summer of 1968. The
Commander of that terrorist organization was a colonel in
the regular Syrian army until 1967.

“The Pdayeen are to be found in more than one area of
Syria, and they have absolute freedom of movement on
the Syrian front. Moreover, we encourage and stimulate
them, and often we complain that they are not sufficiently active”.

96. The Syrian Arab Republic maintains tight control over
terrorist operations based on its territory. The Syrian
Government has established a special office in Damascus
which is responsible for liaison with the terrorist groups,
Every terrorist operation from Syrian territory must receive
the prior approval of that office. In effect, authorization is
given by top-level Government and military authorities.

President Asad also declared on Damascus Radio on 21
April 1972:
“Ifit had not been for Syria, there would not have been
any feduyeelz action,”

97. The El Fatah representative in Damascus, Abu Amar
Saad, assures liaison between his organization and the
Syrian Government. Military equipment destined for the
terrorist organizations passes freely through Syrian ports.
Syrian passports and other papers are available to terrorists
on foreign missions. The Syrian authorities enable foreign
volunteers to enter the Syrian Arab Republic to join the
terrorist organizations.

The Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of the
Syrian Arab Republic declared:
“We, the Syrians, wish that the support [of the
fedaycenl should not be merely in words but that it be
practical and in deeds. The fedayeen military activity
springs from Syrian soil, and carries out successful
operations with every assistance from Syria.”

98. In the Syrian Arab Republic are located several
training bases primarily of the El Fatah organization, in
addition to the training bases of other organizations SUCI~as
Sa’iqa. The training in them includes basic training, naval
training and special weapon training. Training is carried out
in former camps of the regular Syrian army, which also
provides instructors and weapons. It also supplies special
courses within its own army bases.

I am certain that the representative of Lebanon is fully
aware of the truth of these facts.
92, The terrorist organizations maintain command offices
in Damascus. In addition, there are regional commands in
those areas of the Syrian Arab Republic where there are
military bases, for example in the Dera’s area. The
following terrorist organizations maintain their offices in
Damascus: Sa’iqa, El Fatah, the National Front and the
Democratic Front. The Syrian Arab Republic is also the
main centre in which conferences of the various murder
groups are held. Among those groups which hold meetings
regularly in that country are: the annual Conference of the
El Fatah Organization, the Central Committee of the
so-called Palestine Liberation Army, the Palestine Supreme
Military Council, the General Council of the Palestine
National Front and the Central Committee of the Democratic National Front.

99. The support which the Syrian Arab Republic offers
those terrorist organisations is apparent through the Syrian
communications media: the terrorist organizations have
regular daily broadcasts on Damascus Radio. On those
programmes the announcements of the terrorist organizations are broadcast, as well as political incitement against
Israel, There is direct supervision by the Syrian Government
of those broadcasts, In addition, the terrorist groups have
their own broadcasting station in Dara. That station is also
used by the terrorists to attack Jordan.

93. The Syrian Arab Republic is a territorial base for
several terrorist organizations, as 1 have already indicated.
First of all, there is the organization known as Sa’iqa. This
iS a terrorist group established by the Syrian Ba’ath Party,
the ruling party in the Syrian Arab Republic. For all
practical purposes, it is part of the Syrian Army. It is
headed by Syrian officials, such as Zuhayr Muhsin and
Colonel Mustafa Saad el Din.

100. My observations regarding the oddity of States guilty
of international depravities and yet sermonizing on proper
international behaviour apply especially to the Syrian Arab
Republic. Its complicity in international terrorism is only
one of many of these depravities. It has simply torn to
pieces the Charter of the United Nations in relation to
Israel, Its Government has openly proclaimed, time and
again, that it has no intention of ever making peace with
1

Israel. It has unequivocaliy rejected Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967. The avowed
objective of the State whose representative lectured the
Council today on international law and morality is to
destroy a neighbouring State Member of the United
Nations.

innocent elderly inhabitants. More recently, booby-trapped
letters have been sent to a Jewish home for the aged in
Frankfurt. A Jewish welfare organization in Rome has
received similar letters, So have Jewish women in New York
active in an organization devoted to medical assistance.
Jewish businessmen in the United Kingdom have been
showered with the deadly envelopes. Non-Jews, as well,
have at times fallen victims to these assaults and, frequently, the terrorist groups direct their murderous attacks
against Arabs themselves.

101. This is also the declared objective of another Government that has abused this forum-Algeria.
Its President put
it very succinctly when he said: “The true freedom of the
entire homeland must be won through the liquidation of
the State of the Zionists.” And this was confirmed again
today by the Algerian representative. This is the key to the
understanding of what Israel confronts in Arab terrorism,
for this is also the fundamental motivation of the terrorist
organization-destroy
the Jewish State, annihilate the
Jewish people. It is this bloodthirsty objective that has
brought about the savage atrocities of El Fatah, Black
September and other Arab murder groups. It is this
bloodlust that made it possible for Algiers radio to state on
13 March 1973, after the slaughter of the three diplomats
in Sudan’s capital:

106. These characteristics of the campaign of atrocities
conducted against Israel and the Jewish people, the fact
that it is directed by premeditation against guiltless
civilians, the fact that it aims at indiscriminate murder for
murder’s sake and the fact that it regards Jews everywhere
as targets for physical destruction are sufficient to make it B
heinous onslaught on humanity requiring effective countermeasures of the kind taken by the Israel defence forces on
9 to 10 April.
107. The barbarism of this Arab onslaught is further
deepened by its openly declared objective which, as 1
pointed out, is to destroy a State Member of the United
Nations and to wrest from the Jewish people its right to
self-determination, freedom and independence. This is the
banner under which Jewish blood is being spilled. It is in
the name of this savage goal that men, women and children
are being slaughtered, It is a design to take the life of
individual Jewish people so as to deprive the entire Jewish
nation of the rights enjoyed by other nations.

“The fe&yeen who carried out the Khartoum operations are honourable men; they are not murderers. Let
Gaafer ai-Nimeiry understand this.”
102. This is the attitude and these arc the outrages that
the Government of Israel and other responsible Governments have to cope with. No action to thwart such
bestialities can be inappropriate. There is no principle
superior to that of preservation of life.

108. As I indicated yesterday /I 705th meeting], the Arab
nation has secured these very rights for itself in 18
sovereign Arab States Members of the United Nations. Time
Arabs of Palestine have attained these rights within Jordan,
a State which is Palestinian geographically and demographically. Yet the terrorist organizations supported by
Arab Governments have unleashed a campaign that denies
the Jewish people’s right to national existence and would
like to destroy its sovereign State.

103. Finally, 1 should like to rebut the attempts made
again at this meeting to whitewash the sinister nature and
motivations of Arab terrorism. The generally felt revulsion
from Arab terrorism is due in large measure to its particular
features. Firstly, the atrocities to which Jews in Israel and
abroad have been subjected are conceived, initiated,
organized and perpetrated as assaults on innocent civilians.
The ambushing of school buses, the detonation of explosive
charges in supermarkets crowded with women shoppers, or
in universities, and the murder of athletes at Munich are all
acts deliberately directed against defenceless civilians.

109. There is no objective that could be more despicable.
Violence has rarely been put in the service of so criminal a
cause. Not since the days of Hitler have Jews as Jews been
the target of a campaign of premeditated slaughter. Not
since Hitler have Governments praised the planned, indiscriminate murder of Jews, as some Governments, through
their representatives, have done today. Not since the Nazi
SS and their Einsatz Kommandos have organizations, acting
with governmental blessing, gloated over the blood of
innocent Jews-men, women and children-shed in bestial
atrocities.

104. Secondly, these crimes are planned and executed in
a manner in which the killing is indiscriminate. It does not
matter to the assailants who the victims are. The blowing
up of civil aircraft in flight, the slaughter of passengers who
happen to be at an air terminal, are not concerned with the
identity of the casualties. The aim is murder for murder’s
sake. In fact, in the words of a leader of one of the terror
organizations interviewed some time ago by the London
Daily A&l, it is immaterial who the dead are “. . . so long as
they are Jews”. This is one of the most revolting aspects of
this terrorist campaign, for, in a way reminiscent of the
Nazi atrocities against the Jews of Europe, Jewish people in
various parts of the globe have been earmarked for physical
destruction. In Israel, every Jew, whether man, woman or
child, is considered a target for murder.

110. Arab terrorism is doing that again. Arab terrorist
organizations arc again engaged in such outrages. Again
behind
their Governments-Arab
Governments-stand
crimes which draw inspiration from the genocide of the
Jewish people by the Hitlerite hordes. The historic and
ideological affinity between the Nazi atrocities and Arab
terrorism is well known. Only ignorance, gullibility or
wilful malevolence will accept the propaganda distortion
repeated today that Arab terrorism is the result of the
refugee problem or of the 1967 hostilities. 1 have already

lOS. But the plague, as we know, has spread to other
regions. As long ago as 1970 Arab terrorists had set fire to a
Jewish home for the aged in Germany, killing seven of its
12

drawn attention to the fact that this reprehensible murder
and bloodshed had its beginnings half a century earlier. The
spiritual father and organizer of Arab terrorism is the
notorious Haj Amin el-Husseini, mentioned by me yesterday, the former Mufti of Jerusalem, who initiated, in the
I92Os, a campaign of violence and terror against the Jews
of Palestine.

behind a screen of borrowed slogans and misappropriated
ideals. The objective of destroying the sole Jewish sovereignty is explained by them as “purification of the land”
and “a struggle against aggression”. An unabashed effort to
deprive the Jewish people of Israel of its right to self-determination is presented as a war of liberation in the name of
self-determination. Indiscriminate and cowardly mtirder of
innocent Jewish civilians is hailed as “heroism”. Gangs
unrepresentative of the Arab population composed of paid
assassins, foreign mercenaries and military personnel from
regular Arab armies are depicted as champions of ideals and
humane values,

11 1. On 4 April 1920, Husseini launched an attack on the
Jews of the old city of Jerusalem, massacring, burning and
pillaging for four days. In the following year, 47 Jews were
killed in terrorist attacks organized by him and his murder
groups. Then came other assaults such as the massacre of
the Jewish communities of Hebron and Safad in 1929, in
which 133 defenceless Jewish men, women and children
were slaughtered and 339 wounded. The campaign of terror
and murder continued under the same leadership during the
1930s. Throughout that period, Husseini maintained close
contact with the Hitler rigime. When the Second World War
broke out, he went to Berlin, where he acted as Hitler’s and
Eichmann’s adviser in the annih’ilation of European Jewry.
The Allies declared him a war criminal. He is still being
sought by the Yugoslav Government. After the war, he was
arrested but escaped and made his way back to the Middle
East. This is the man who initiated Arab terrorism and
conducted it for 20 years. This is the man who, though a
war criminal on the Allied Powers’ lists, including that of
the Soviet Union, is free today in the Arab States to pursue
his nefarious activities and to continue the incitement to
shed Jewish blood. That is the true face of Arab terrorism.

114. The Nazi roots of Amin el-Husseini, the counsels of
the Nazi propaganda advisers employed by Egypt and the
Syrian Arab Republic are bearing fruit. The Nazis, too,
killed Jews saying that they were purifying the land. They,
too, shed Jewish blood under the pretext that they were
liberating Germany and then Europe from the Jews. The
Nazis, too, like the Arab States today, awarded the laurels
of heroism to the slaughterers of Jewish women and
children. No semantic contortions can remove the stigma of
wanton, cruel bloodshed from the Arab terrorist campaign.
Responsible Governments will combat it, not defend it as
the three preceding speakers did.
11.5. Mr. ABDULLA (Sudan): Mr. President, it gives my
delegation great pleasure to welcome you in the chair of the
Security Council for the month of April. I had the pleasure
of your close company and friendship during the Special
Mission of the Security Council to Zambia last February,
when I came to realize and appreciate your wisdom, your
integrity and objectivity. I have no doubt that these
qualities will enable you to conduct your presidency with
every success.

112. Since Israel’s independence in 1948, attacks have been
used, through this method, during the periods of the
continuing war against the Jewish State, when attack by a
regular Arab army has appeared too hazardous. This is what
happened in the 1950s and in the 196Os, and this is what is
taking place today. The first terrorist hordes came from
Sinai and Gaza. Their crimes were brought to an end in
1956, when Israel destroyed their bases in those regions.
Terror warfare moved, however, to Israel’s eastern and
northern frontiers. El Fatah was established in the late
1950s and began its armed attacks in 1965 on the initiative
of the Syrian Government. Indeed, the 1960s were years of
growing
armed forays by terrorist gangs from Jordan, and
particularly from the Syrian Arab Republic directed against
Israeli civilians in towns and villages, on the roads and in
the field. This campaign of cruel violence and murder
against the people of Israel was one of the factors that
contributed to the outbreak of the 1967 hostilities.

1 16. Last month the Council was also fartunate to be
presided over by yet another Latin American of distinguished qualities and long-standing experience in the affairs
of state and the United Nations. I refer to Mr. Aquilino
Boyd of the Republic of Panama. We owe him warm
congratulations for the admirable manner in which he
guided the Council during the discussions of the difficult
Latin American questions, here in New York and at Panama
City. We are also indebted to his Government and people
for the kind hospitality and treatment extended to US
during our stay in that beautiful city.
117. Until two months ago the whole world had been
haunted and threatened by three dangerous issues, namely,
Viet-Nam, Israeli aggressions, and the racist regimes in
southern Africa. With the end of hostilities in Viet-Nam and
the advent of peace in the area, South-East Asia has left
behind a quarter of a century of unbelievable misery and
suffering, and the whole world rejoices for the people of
the area.

113, Since 1967, frustrated in their effort ta undermine
the Jewish people’s determination to defend its inalienable
rights, taken aback by the refusal of the Arab inhabitants of
Israeli-administered areas to co-operate with them, the
terror organizations began to have recourse to increasingly
barbaric methods, trying in this manner to earn at least
international attention. Well, they have. Savage outrages
have become their trademark. The world suddenly realized
that no one, nowhere, was safe from the atrocities of Arab
terrorists. Their crimes became a plague that is threatening
to destroy the very fabric of international life, and the
initiators and perpetrators of this campaign of terror have
been trying to conceal its true nature, as we heard today,

118. Yet for years Israel and the other racist regimes have
continued to defy the world by conducting systematic
campaigns of terror as part of a permanent policy, The use
of force and the continuous threat of the use of force are
not practised as a matter of expediency, but as part of a
philosophy of intimidation and domination over others.
13

119. In the case of Israel one cannot fail to see that from
the moment of its creation by the United Nations it has
based the whole of its system on military settlements, on a
huge military institution far beyond its financial capacity
built on the old organs of terrorism, which account for the
murder and assassination of hundreds of Arab Palestinians
and others. The Haganah, the Irgun and the Stern gangs,
that were responsible for barbarous murders before and
after the creation of Israel, form the core of the Israeli
Army, whjch is now playing havoc in and outside the
region.
120. I need not go into the nature of Israel and its
philosophy of Zionism, from which both Arabs and millions
of innocent Jews suffer-under
its intimidation and extortions. Its practised policy of military aggression and its
expansionist policy of military force-before and after its
creation-fill the annals of the United Nations. No Member
of this Organization has a more eventful record of playing
defendant before this Council than Israel. No other country
but Israel, and for that matter the similar racist and
colonialist rkgimes in southern Africa, has arrogantly and
contemptuously defied this august Council.
121. Indeed, Mr. Tekoah has been candid enough to admit
the guilt of his country in committing aggressions against
sovereign States and claiming the blood of the innocent
victims-those
Palestinian Arabs for whose destitution and
misery Israel has been responsible for the last quarter of a
century. This admission is always wrapped up in all sorts of
rationalization which no thinking person can accept. On
various occasions we have listened to absurd distortions of
history, of how the Arabs murdered Jews in 1947, when it
is a well-known fact that the Arabs never attacked Jews nor
destroyed Jewish property in the Israeli sector. On the
contrary, it was the Israeli gangs which committed murders
and destruction ‘in the Arab sector. Another distortion of
fact, which is repeatedly referred to, concerns the association of the Mufti of Palestine with Eichmann, whereas
Eichmann himself denied any such association, except for a
meeting at a reception. All those incidents of violence
which Mr. Tekoah keeps citing, and for which he holds
Lebanon responsible, are the very ultimate results of Israeli
aggression and terrorism,

Records
Meetings,

of the General Assembly,
2045th meeting.

123. The representatives of Lebanon and Saudi Arabia
yesterday [I 705th meeting] presented a specific case of
premeditated aggression by Israel against peace-loving and
peace-living Lebanon and the heinous act of the bloody
murder of innocent men and women in the early hours of
the day and in their bedrooms. This is a deplorable criminal
act of a dual nature where both a State and innocent people
are involved. We know from Israel’s declared policy itself,
from the statements of Mr. Tekoah before this Council and
from the oft-repeated rationalizations that these crimes
against Lebanon and innocent people will be repeated.
They will always be repeated in the name of the security of
Israel, which threatens but was never threatened. We know
that the ultimate aim of Israel is to exterminate the 2.5
million Arab Palestinians who claim their right to their
homes in Palestine and their right to self-determination. ‘IYe
all know that a people, who are determined to struggle by
all possible means for their inherent rights, cannot be scared
by the force of armsor persuadedby a 1 per cent money
bribe from Arab oil or elsewhere,asnaively suggestedby
Mr. Tekoah, to give up their natural rights. Indeed, the
Arab Palestinianscan no longer be called refugees and
continue to live on charity. To kill Palestinianpoliticians
like El Najjai or Nassaor Adwan doesnot necessarilymean
to kill the burning fires of nationalism in a people or to
pacify the millions of young men and women whom Israel
drove into destitution and bitterness.
124. It is not for Israel alone to ponder the impossibility
of killing the urgefor self-determinationand independence.
It is the duty of the United Nations to uphold the right of
the PalestinianArabs not as refugeesbut as a legitimate
nationalliberation movement.
125. We strongly believe that these crimes repeatedly
committed by Israel against Lebanon and other neighbouring countries and its premeditated acts of terrorism
and their repercussions
can only stop when Israel sinccreIy
decidesto live in peaceand give up its policy of aggression
and extermination of the Palestinianpeople and to withdraw within the borders assignedto it by the United
Nations. We regret to say that every declaration or act by
Israelindicatesthe contrary. As long as Israel is assuredof
the over-stocking of Phantoms,Skyhawks, sophisticated
weaponsand billions of dollars, it is unlikely that it will
elect to live by methodsother than force and violence. In
that case,the Council will soon have to face yet another
aggression
by Israelon Lebanonor any other Arab State.

122. From the time of the inscription of the item on
international violence and terrorism on the agenda of the
twenty-seventh
session of the General Assembly, my
delegation warned that both lsrael and the racist and
colonial rbgimes in southern Africa would not hesitate to
exploit a genuine and sincere movement in extending their
policy of aggression and terrorism. Indeed, this was
immediately confirmed by Mr. Aba Eban during the same
General Assembly session, and by no less a person than
Mrs. Golda Meir, who declared that the strong arm of Israel
would reach the Palestinians everywhere in the world.1 And
we have more cases of murder and assassination in various
countries committed by Israeli agents, including the death
of 106 innocent men, women and children in the Libyan
civil airliner, confirming the determination of Israel to
create international terrorism. Mr. Tekoah, for the sake of
1 See Official
S,ession, Plenary

truth, should have quoted the numerous cases of terrorism
everywhere which Israel has committed indirectly or
directly, and of which this latest aggression is but one
glaring example. These digressions and rhetorical statements
by Mr. Tekoah should not and cannot divert the attention
and the grave concern of this Council from the very case
under consideration.

126. For the time being, the Israeli acts of aggressionand
piracy in Lebanonof 10 April shouldbe condemned in the
strongestterms, and Israel should be instructed forthwith
to stop any premeditatedaggression
on Lebanon under any
of the familiar Israeli pretexts. In view of the repeated
aggressions,
should Israel continue to take the law into its
own handsand extend its terrorism on a world-wide scale,

Twenty-seventh

14

no less, if not more, grave bombing attacks by Israel against
two refugee camps-one of them a camp of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for PalestineRefugeesin
the Near East-which killed a large number of innocent
civilians including women and children, should not be
forgotten, although the Council did not meet to consider
that gravest of attacks and in my opinion wasremissin not
doing so. The downing of a civilian aircraft, a Libyan
airliner, with the known catastrophic consequences-the
death of more than 100 innocent civilians, again including
children and women-was also a tragic event to be seenin
the context of the policy of ready use of arrogant and
naked force. That it wasa civilian airliner and that it had
turned to leave the airspaceof occupied Sinai and was
heading towards Cairo is now no longer disputed by
anyone.

making itself a promoter of international terrorism, this
Council should seriously consider applying effective
measures along the lines stipulated by the Charter. Should
Israel repeat its criminal practices, my delegation would be
quite disposed to suggest such lines of action to the
Council.
127. Finally, I wish to state that we strongly believe that,
as long as Israel is enabled to maintain its occupation of the
lands of others by force of arms and to practise its policy of
expansion against neighbouring States, depriving the people
of Palestine of their legitimate rights, the situation in the
Middle East will remain extremely dangerous. It remains
the duty of this Council to resolve this situation, which
poses a constant threat to international peace and security.
Every delay in taking such a decision will lead to furthe]
aggravation of the situation.

133. That policy, a policy of aggression,of intimidation
by force, of territorial expansion,of keepingpeoplesunder
subjugation, has been condemnedby my Government and
also by the United Nationsmany times and there is no need
for me today to repeat againeverything we stated here in
February, June, July and Septemberof last year whenever
we were consideringa new act of aggression
committed by
Israel.

128. I reserve my right to speak further on this subject.
129. Mr. MOJSOV (Yugoslavia): Mr. President, it gives me
particular pleasure to congratulate you on your assuming
the presidency of the Council for the month of April in
view of our warm and friendly personal relations, the
co-operation between our two Missions in all the work of
the United Nations and the friendly, substantial and
growing relations between our two countries and Govern,ments and their co-operation in bilateral and international
fields. We are both guided by the growing feeling of a
community of interests and proximity of views, You can
always count on us to extend to you our full support in
your arduous responsibility of steering the Council in
pursuance of its tasks, a responsibility for which you are
personally so eminently equipped.

134. But what is particularly onerousin the latest case,as
in so many previous ones,is that a superior,stronger,more
numerous and better equipped force-the force of a State
that defies the whole international community and officially proclaims its right to the arbitrary use of that
force-is used againsta smaller,weaker, peaceful country
whose only protection is the United Nations, the international community and its collective interest in not
permitting explicit or implicit, public or tacit licence for
the use or threat of force as an instrument for the
settlement of international disputes.

130. In saying how much we were impressed by the
manner and total dedication with which the representative
of Panama, our good friend Aquilino Boyd, discharged his
duties as President for the month of March, I avail myself
of the opportunity once more to convey through him to
the people and Government of Panama our warmest thanks
for their hospitality and friendship during 3ur meetings
there.

135. It is in that context that the Security Council hasto
react and must meet every time, without let-up, if only to
reiterate that mankind is not about to acquiescein the use
of force, that no one can expect from us, by repetition or
otherwise, to deadenour opposition to it, to lead usto the
conclusion that it is uselessto continue doing anything
about it. The interestsof any country, especiallysmalland
non-militaristic countries, make it imperative for us to act
in whatever fashionwe can.

131, It would be easy to succumb to a feeling of
familiarity and routine when faced with yet another
complaint by Lebanon about yet another aggressive attack
by Israel and when participating in yet another meeting of’
the Security Council seized of the problem. But to permit
that feeling to gain ground would not only be unjustified; it
would be irresponsible and dangerous, and we, the whole
international community, would do so at our collective
peril.

136. This last attack, which is only the direct and most
immediate causeof the LebaneseGovernment’scomplaint,
provides perhapsthe most concentrated example of that
particular and most threatening kind of international
terrorism, the terrorism of State, governmental terrorism,
basedon and employing all resourcesof a constituted State
organization. It isquite inadmissibleto link it and to equate
it with, let alone to justify it by, individual, senseless
terrorist activity by individual persons. It is no accident
that, in its whole history, the position of the United
Nations, when addressingitself to aggressionby States,has
beenand is unmistakableand clear. The Charter isvery firm
and specific on this point, and that is why at its
twenty-seventh session,the General Assembly, in formulating its agendaitem on “measuresto prevent international
terrorism”, found it overwhelmingly necessaryto include

132. There can be no sense of familiarity or simple
repetition, no shrugging of shoulders, when we are faced,
not only with acts of aggression and armed attacks against
and on the territory of a sovereign State, a peaceful
Member of the United Nations, but also and especially with
a most dangerous escalation of that war-like policy based
on the use of military force. The latest raid launched by
Israel in darkness in Beirut, resulting inter alia in the death
of a score of innocent civilians, is but the latest example of
what that policy means and where it leads. The recent and
15

141. The United Nations has a firm, definite position on
the Middle Eastern situation embodied in Council resoiution 242 (1967) and all other United Nations resolutions,
the last one being General Assembly resolution 2949
(XXVII). It is a noteworthy phenomenon that the everincreasing number of positive votes, and the ever-decreasing
number of negative votes or abstentions, are successively
cast for resolutions that deplore the non-compliance oT
Israel with previous resolutions, declare the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territories by force and affirm that
they must be restored; they call for the withdrawal of
israeii armed forces from territories occupied in the last
conflict, and so forth. And that change in voting patterns is
the result, not only of the increase in the membership of
our Organization, but also of changes of attitudes by a
growing number of countries, which indicates increasing
opposition to the policy of force and occupation and to the
policy of governmental terrorism.

the “underlying causes of those forms of terrorism and acts
of violence which lie in misery, frustration, grievance and
despair”. It is because of ail the attempts, employed
throughout hislory, to blacken the just struggle of peoples
for freedom and independence, that the international
community must always make clear that a distinction
should be made between international terrorism and that
liberation struggle.
137. WC are against international, individual, senseless
terrorism that causes deaths and hardship to innocent
persons and which, whatever its real sources, is so often
used to bring into question the inalienable right of peoples
to resort to force in defending their very lives, existence,
freedom, independence, territory and equality. Our views on
the matter were clearly stated in last year’s consideration of
the issue of international terrorism in the General Assembly. Equally, my Government’s position and reaction to
individual terrorist acts, recent as well as earlier ones, which
have taken place since the Second World War, is a matter of
public record for ail Governments to know. But let me
repeat that nothing in our attitude towards individual acts
of international terrorism can be construed or used in order
to deny to peoples, including the Palestinian people, their
right to fight for their just and true rights.

142. The Security Council must stress that it is not ready
to tolerate total disrespect and contempt for the whole
international community, for the United Nations and For its
decisions. We have to demonstrate that we are not about to
become passive observers in escalating aggression. We nlust
condemn the Israeli attack on Lebanese territory and the
assassination of the Palestinian Liberation Movement njcmbers there,

138. Ail that we are faced with today in the present
discussions in the Council must be seen in the context and
as a consequence of the still unsettled crisis in the Middle
East and of the still existing hotbed of war, which
represents a grave situation that erodes regional and
international peace and security. The major, fundamental
reason for that situation is the refusal of Israel to comply
with Security Council resolution 242 (1967) and ail the
other relevant resolutions of the Council, the General
Assembly and other United Nations bodies. The main cause
is its hold on the occupied Arab territories and its
expansionist policy of annexation and its constant and
brutal denial of the basic rights of the Palestinians.

143. We think it is high time for this organ of the United
Nations, entrusted with the main responsibility for international peace and security, to review the whole Middle
Eastern situation, which is continuously aggravated by the
non-compliance with resolution 242 (1967), as well as
other resolutions, to examine the reasons for the IWIV
implementation of those resolutions and to see what SIIOU~I
be done to make possible and ensure their final irllplementation.
144. In conclusion, let me only add that the Yugosiav
delegation is convinced that the next summit mcetirlg of
the heads of State and Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, to be held in Algiers in September this year, will
give its full attention to ail these matters and tvill
constitute, as always, a direct help to the United Natiorls in
its efforts to stop aggression and to bring a just peace to the
Middle East.

139. It should therefore be generally clear and accepted
that we cannot deal with the consequences before and
without removing the causes. That remains the responsibility of the whole international community. That must
be rccognized by ail, cspecialiy by those who are instrumental in preventing a peaceful solution on the basis of
resolution 242 (1967). a solution founded on respect for
the legitimate interests and rights of ail States and peoples
in the area. It is an undeniable fact that, whatever new steps
were taken by responsible Arab Governments to facilitate
the peaceful settlement on the aforementioned basis,
whatever requests, proclaimed as allegedly fundamental and
final ones, they satisfied, they were then always faced with
yet new demands and new conditions that would amount
to surrender.

145. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from S~llis/l/.’ l‘k
next name on the list of speakers is that of the reprcse!ltative of the Syrian Arab Republic. 1 invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make a statement.
146. Mr. KELANI (Syrian Arab Republic) (intcrprcfuli~m
front French): I apoiogize for speaking a second time, but
the representative of Israel acted as if he were exercisirlg tris
right of reply in order to refute the accusations against the
authorities of his country with regard to their usurpnlinnist.
colonialist, aggressive terrorist activities, against the United
Nations and in violation of the Charter. All he did in fact in
his reply was to bear out his accusers. There were no
references in his statement to resolutions of the Ihlitcd
Nations or to the Palestinian people or respect fm ttlc
sovereignty, the territorial integrity of Member States it to

140. The simplest and the first answer to the question of
what we can do in response to Lebanon’s complaint is that
we cannot afford to do nothing, to lend a mute acceptance
to the acts of aggression committed so far and to those
which wiil, judging by the attitude t‘aken by Israel,
undoubtedly follow in the near future.
16

the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force
or to the series of colonial conquests. He did not even
mention the genocide which the Zionist authorities are
practicing. His statements were insults, defamations, distortions, theatrical gestures and digressions from fundamental truth. He is to be pardoned. After all, he can do
nothing else. The acts of the Israeli authorities are, after all,
too much soaked in blood for him to be able to defend
them. As foi the thesis advanced at length, whereby
terrorism is perpetrated by the Arabs rather than the
Zionists, I should like to refer the speaker whose hypocrisy
is hidden behind a facade of eloquence to the book by his
inspirer, Menachem Begin, who told history differently. AS
everyone agrees, he is a far more credible authority. This is
the same man who came through New York in 1948. A
welcoming committee was formed comprising many members of the Congress and United States Government
officials. Nevertheless, having learnt of Begin’s exploits,
several of them dissociated themselves from the committee.
Among them was a man who was to become the President
of the United States in 1960, Senator John Kennedy, who
indicated to the president of the Committee his desire to
withdraw his name from the welcoming committee for
Menachem Begin, the commander of the lrgun Corce. He
said: “In accepting your invitation, I was not aware of the
true nature of these activities, and I wish to dissociate
myself from them completely.”

ills that exist in many parts of the world, including no
doubt Palestine,where the authorities of Mr, Tekoah seem
to think that they have a model rule that everybody should
COPY.
150. And the Zionists arrogatedto themselvesthe right to
come from outside of Palestineand occupy it. That is the
first point.
1.51. The secondpoint is this: they arrogated to themselvesthe right to expel the Palestiniansfrom their homes
by expropriation. And Mr. Tekoah talks about slavery.
152. Thirdly, they arrogated to themselvesthe right to
incarcerate 10,000 Palestinians. And they talk about
slavery. The Zionist State arrogated to itself the right to
subject 1 million Palestiniansto the rule of Israel, which is
tantamount to colonialism.And they talk about slavery.
153, They have occupiedthe Holy Placesof Christiansand
Moslems;and someChristiansand Moslemsthink that Israel
has desecratedthose Holy Places.And they talk of the social
ills that exist in the Arab world.
154. Last, but not least, they have deniedthe peopleof
Palestinethe right to self-determination,And they talk of
human rights and charge that the Arabs have trodden
human rights underfoot, and allege that the Arabs-and,
more specifically, the Palestinians-want to destroy the
Jewishpeople, 17 or 18 million of them, dispersedover the
world-mighty Jewishpeople.

147. The facts are more eloquent than the false protests of
innocence and purity of the spokesmen of Zionism which
are a cover for hatred and racism.

155. And then we are told that the Arabs are aggressors.
There is an Arabic proverb that says: “He hit me and was
the first to cry”. But Mr. Tekoah has forgotten the
intramural or intra-religious-if I may use that termdi&imination that is prevalent in occupiedPalestine:the
oriental-Yemenite-Jews, if they are swarthy, if the colour
of their faces is not pink, are looked down upon by the
Ashkenazy Jew. I am quoting what we read sometimesby
writers, not in Arab newspapers,but in the Jewishpress.I
did not bring cuttingshere to quote chapter and versefrom
the JewishpressbecauseI would be burdening the Council
with too many details. And Mr. Tekoah speaksof international morality andusessyllogismsthat are basedon invalid
logical premises,for the simple reasonthat Palestinewas
sold down the Thamesby the British-that is the invalid
premise-in 1917 by Mr. Balfour, as I mentioned the other
day, becausethe British wanted to cling to a straw. They
were sinking; the Germanswere beating them; and had it
not been for United States entry into the First World War
in 1917, when the Soviet Union got out of the war dueto
the Revolution, the British would have been beatenby the
Germans-not the Nazi Germans: there were no Nazis at
that time-by the militarists, the Kaiser, with his mustaches.
He was the tyrant they were fighting; the allies were
fighting Germanmilitarism. And we all know that the allies,
between France and England, had the biggestmilitary and
naval power. They were fighting German mercantilism,
because the Germans, cooped up as they were in the
continent of Europe, were more disciplined and were
outselling the British in the British colonies and in Latin
America, and everywhere; so the allieshad to wagea war
‘<to save the world for democracy”. And there was less

148. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next name on the list of speakers is that of the representative of Saudi Arabia. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make a statement.
149. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I was somewhat
astonished that after so many years the representative of
Israel, none other than Mr. Tekoah, finally deigned to
mention me and to refei- to my statement of yesterday. He
referred to the country I represent as one that still has
slavery. I do not know whether he has any spies in Saudi
Arabia who misinformed him, but the fact is that we
abolished slavery quite some time ago. I do not know why
he does not mention slavery in other countries. For
example,there were countries, like the alliesof Israel,that
traded in slaves.They had a civil war here, I think, in 1860.
Although that war wasfor the abolition of slavery,it had
economicundertonesbetween the North and South of the
United States. But he does not mention slaveryexcept in
SaudiArabia. I do not know why he shouldrefer to slavery
in Saudi Arabia. I know very well that slavery doesnot
exist there. None other than a former Ambassadorof the
United States, Mr. Hart, madea speechto an organization
of db-goodershere or in England;there are societiesfor the
abolition of slavery all over the world. He said:“I did not
see any slaves;there are no slavesany more in Saudi
Arabia.‘” That was someyears ago. However, if I were to
enter into what is done in certain countriesin connexion
with white slavery, the slavery of addiction to drugs and
socialills in the world, I think I would spendmore time
thag 1 should, and we are not here to dealwith the social
17

democracy after the First World War than there was before
it. This is not Baroody telling you this: this is British and
French historians and scholars, who are objective.

Empire now? Where are the other empires that tottered
down because they were built on injustice?
159. And you Zionists were very clever. You seized
opportunities; you railroaded the United States into the
war. You took that opportunity of siding with the Western
Allies, just as the Arabs were-if I may so caI1 them“suckers” and fought with the British against the Otto.
mans,and should never have done so. But this is hindsight
now. And you speakof international morality? The whole
basison which the Zionist State was built was wrong, 1
submit. But when I spokewith theZionists-when I wason
speakingterms with them in London and elsewherein the
1930sand early 194Os-I askedthem: “Why do you not
accept in a State a ratio of two thirds indigenous
population and one third Jews?” Their spokesmenwere
always evasive,and someof them said: “Becausethis land
was given to us by God”. I did not know they had had a
telephone conversation with God. How can God give land
to people? And supposethere are people who do not
believethat God givesland? What will you do?

156. And then the Zionists seized that opportunity:
Russia was having a revolution; the United Kingdom was in
a bad state; and the late Mr. Balfour forgot what he had
promised the Arabs in 1916 that, if they would fight on his
side, the 400 years of Turkish rule would be over. There
were posters in the Arab world about the liberation of the
Arab world from our brothers ,the Turks. That was the
biggest mistake, that the Arabs fought on the side of the
Rritish; they should never have done it. They seized the
opportunity, those Asbkenazies from Eastern Europe who
had been converted to Judaism in the eighth century and
who had never hailed from the area, in order to bring the
United States into the First World War in 1917. Otherwise,
if the United States had not come to the rescue of the
Western allies, they would have lost the war. So the Zionists
capitalized on it. As I said, they-turned their backs on the
Germans, because the Germans could not help them with
the Turks. That is how they came to Palestine, those
European political Zionists who had nothing to do with the
area. And they called Palestine “our land”. And Mr. Tekoah
speaks of international morality. Okay-as the people of the
host country would say. All right. So what? Finally, the
United Nations, in 1947, voted for the partition of
Palestine and, as I said yesterday, before the State
Department knew about it, the late Mr. Truman recognized
the State of Israel fo, political motives, Every politician has
certain motives.

160. 1 cited yesterday what King David saidin the Psalms:
“The earth is the Lord’sand the fullnessthereof”. You can
take certain things out of context in any holy bookwhether it is the Bible, the Koran or the New Testamentand build upon it what you want.’
161. And many of us have been reasonable.Many of us
say: “If you want to live in peace, all right, you were
persecuted, come and live in peace amongst the Palestinians-whom you have chasedout”, And you talk of
terrorism- becauseall this argumenthere revolves around
terrorist acts. But theseare only, shallI say, accessoryparts
of the question; they are not the core of the whole
question.

1.57. Why should the Palestinian people pay the price
when at that time, as I said, in 1947, two thirds of the
population consisted of the indigenous people of Palestine
and one third of ,Zionists-or call them Jews because ,many
were innocent Jews, Jews who were harassed, Jews who had
fled from Europe because of the persecution by Hitler.
They fled, and they were one third. What right had the
United Nations to vote for the partition of Palestine when
the majority consisted of the indigenous people of the land
regardless of whether they were Arabs, or Chinese, or
Indians, or what have you? What right? Just by way of a
vote? The vote was invalid in so far as justice is concerned:
it was valid by force. That is what happened,

162. Terrorism? Who doesnot deploreterrorism? Weall
know that if people are killed, whether they are Jewsor
Gentiles, it is somethingreally to be deplored. Of course,
the masses,
whether they are Zionistsor Palestinians,catI be
fomented and rousedand made to shout in the streetsthat
they should take vengeance.But if the leaders have that
kind of an attitude, they should never be leaders,because
we are all brothers under the skin, human beings. Forget
your Jewishness,for Heaven’ssake. There is nothing but
Jewishmatzohs and so on in the newspapers.“Eat this and
eat that.” You are entitled to it, but do not brandishit to
suchan extent that you separateyourselvesso as to be the
butt of discrimination by fanatics. That is what you are
doing. You are making a world problem. How many Jews
are there? Seventeen million? Out of which perhaps
500,000, if that many, are diehardpolitical Zionists. They
do not leave the Jewsof the world alone. They keep after
them. “You arethe chosenpeopleof God.” In other words,
if God choosesthis people, we are second-classpe~pk,
third-classpeople, dependingon how you classify us-the
goyim, asyou call many of us.

158. Unfortunately,
as I said yesterday, all the five
permanent members of the Security Council-.which should
have known better-voted for the creation of Israel, no
doubt for interests of their own because I do not think they
cast their votes lightly. Anyway, the British motjves in
1917 were recounted by Sir Ronald Storrs to a friend of
mine who is 83 years old and now lives in Cape Cod. I can
get you a written statement from him. Sir Ronald Storrs
was an Arabist in the Arab Agency in Cairo when Egypt
was a British Protectorate, and at the time he asked Lord
Balfour “How can we justify this declaration? -the declaration which was later named after Balfour. Lord Balfour
replied , “Oh, this will be a great experiment for the
preservation of the British Empire.” So it was not for the
beauty of Jewish eyes that Balfour gave his Declaration. He
thought that the British Empire, over wllich the sun never
set, was to be perpetuated for ever. Where is the British

163. You speakof socialills and of slavery when you set
yourselvesabove other people.Whom do you think you are
fooling, Mr. Tekoah? And have you forgotten Deir Yassin?
You spoke about those Zionists who, unfortunately, were
murdered, just as, unfortunately, the Palestinians were
18

young among the Arabs, fortunately or unfortunately-I
try
to be obiective--hanaen to be with the Palestinian people.
And what shall we’ ‘do? Shall we kill our young-or *tell
them, “You should not be with the Palestinian people? ”
Where is your cleverness? Why do you not apply the
cleverness that you have in commerce, in banking and in
other matters to the fact that the Arab youth is inflamed
by the Palestinians and that many Governments know it. If
they oppose the youth, they can become victims of the
youth. You may say, “Never mind, let them become
victims so that Israel can survive and flourish and prosper”.
Well, what human logic. No matter what you and your
colleagues have said about governments in the past-that
they are autocratic and that you are the only
democracy-what
kind of democracy is it that chases the
people of Palestine outside their borders and incarcerates
10,000, which is indicative of the suppression of rebels who
have to be punished because they are clamouring for their
independence?

murdered. Have you forgotten Count Bernadotte? Even
the Europeans forgot him about two or three months after
he was murdered. Why? Because you have permeated the
whole Western world and now you are trying to bring
pressure on the Soviet Union to release USSR citizens who
happen to be of the Jewish faith. Why do you not take
poor Lebanon, which you have encroached upon, as an
example? It has all sects, and they are trying to live in
peace. You go and bring pressure. Seventy-six Senators
banded together in Washington to bring pressure on
Mr. Nixon’s administration to say that if the Soviet Union
did not release Zionists they would not grant it the
most-favoured-nation clause in trade. And you are a small,
poor State? You are afraid the Arabs will push you into the
sea. The Arabs cannot push a frog into the sea, you know
that. It leaps by itself into the sea. Do not propagandize. I
am telling you the truth here so that, if it does not go over
to your authorities, you may convey it for what it is worth.
And you think I come here to sermonize. I do not
sermonize. I am not a preacher; I am not a Rabbi, nor a
minister nor a religious sheikh. I am just telling you the
truth as I see it, and I stand to be corrected. And you use
your rhetorical phrases here.

166. So might is right. Was it Nietzsche who said that? I
do not know. Americans say it here; “Might is right”. But
they rebel against might here in this country. J believe that
in 1776 they rebelled against the might of the British and
there was the war of liberation.

164. You used the words, “the deterioration in the stature
of the United Nations”, “a parody of Jewish history”,
‘sinister in its anti-Jewish overtones”. These are your
words, I have them here. “Stature of the United Nations”.
The United Nations is your mother. It created you and you
are cursing your mother now. Twenty-two condemnations
Ieveled against Israel by your mother. “Oh”, you said, “of
course it was rigged”. What about the partitioning of
Palestine? Was is not rigged? You had Palestine partitioned
by pressure. You only have to read the second volume-do
not buy the hardcover book; there is a paperback editionof Mr. Truman’s book to see how he was pestered and how
he had to admit Mr. Weizmann through the back door
because he did not know what to do. His former haberdashery partner, Jacobson, told Mr. Truman that those
Zionists “are pestering me all the time; please do something
for them”. Jacobson was a Jew. He did not begin as a
Zionist, but he ended up by being a Zionist. He went to
plead with Mr. Truman. And you talk about international
morality. The whole creation of Israel was artificial and a
mistake, All right, we have to accept the mistake. There
you are in the midst of the Arab world.

167. But you also arrogate to yourself the right to go and
chastise any Palestinians wherever they may be. And you
consider yourselves as one of the most advanced States in
the modern world, What do you think of France? Is not
France perhaps one of the most beloved States for its
culture, its art, its traditions and its humanism? In 1954 it
fell to me to write a letter of complaint against France for
staying in Algeria. There was a war and the French had half
a million French troops there. It took a man of the stature
of de Gaulle to put an end to that war. Where did the
so-called rebefs and terrorists, who were heroes to the
Algerians, sometimes take refuge? In Tunisia and Morocco.
Did the French chastise the Moroccans and the Tunisians?
No, Sir; they did not. They never invaded Tunisia or
Morocco or sent marauders there. That is to the honour of
France. I remember that -French writers sometimes criticized their own Government for not giving the Algerians
their freedom. I had many confidential and secret talks
with the then French Ambassador, none other than my
friend Mr. Georges.Picot, about how to resolve that conflict. France never followed the terrorists, those whom they
considered terrorists, but who were heroes to the Algerians,
to the neighbouring countries. They did not send planes
over Saudi Arabia. We supported the Algerian independence
movement, not only morally, but materialIy, and France
knew about it, They did not chastise us. To the honour of
the French people and their thinkers, they wrote, against
their own Government, that Algeria was not a part of
France. I used to say that Algeria was not across the River
Seine, and it could not be a department of France.

165. DO you not think about the long term, if you can
survive-and I hope nobody will hurt you personally, or any
human being, whether he is a Jew or a Gentile’? Do you not
think about the 120 million Arabs? Suppose you can
ingather another 3 million or 4 million Jews. You cannot
survive there by force of sheer numbers unless you perhaps
pave the way for a holocaust. Then there would be a world
war and it would not matter who survived. You are so drunk
with power that you do not think of the future. Do you
not realize that, in order to be able to survive, you have to
come to terms with the Palestinian people? And who are
those Palestinian people? They seem to be quite alive.
Otherwise you would not be sending marauders to kill
them. They are alive and kicking. But, as I said, they are
not accountable to Arab countries and they make it very
difficult for Arab countries to continue to rule, because the

168. And you people, whether you are descendents of the
Khazars converted to Judaism or whether you arc Sephardic Jews, Oriental Jews, why do you not rise above
petty national interests and consider the Palestinian people
as the indigenous people of Palestine and that you should
not rob them of their patrimony, of their homes, and try to
find a way to let those who want to return to their homes
19

United States.Try again. Do you not know the Eoy Scouts
of the United States say, “Never give up. Try and try
again”. Why do you not try again? It is not so easy. It is,
you might say, a highly political question.And the Zionists
are in the body politic and the body social of the United
States Government. That is your business,not ours,Why
shouldwe pay for it? If you accept that, well, tell usthat
you cannot do anything. Once and for all, makeit official
so that the Arabs, if someof them are thick-beaded,can
understandthat you are the victims of those Americans
who perhapsplay a big role in the formulation of your
policy. I am not sayingthey do, but tell us why you cannot
do anything; why, within an hour, your Government
decidedto participate with other Powersin the creation of
the State of Israel.And for 2.5yearsyou seemto havebeen
stymied, asthough you were in a straitjacket, unableto do
anything. You, the vital United States,cannot do anything
because you have in your Government Zionists who
perhapsplay a biggerrole than they should-or shouldnot;
it is none of my business.Why? Are you afraid of them?
They areyour compatriots.

do so? You will have no chance in the long term if you
keep this area in turmoil, because, as I said, the Arab youth
are inflamed; rightly or wrongly, they are on the side of the
Palestinians. What can we people of my generation do? Can
we tell them: “To hell with you”? They will send us to
hell. This is the truth. I do not engage in sermons. I am
telling you the truth. I am from the area. I know what is
happening. I go there every year. I have no grudge against
you as Jews. That is sometlling between you and your
conscience, but do not brandish it all over the world-“We
are Jews, we are Jews, we are Jews”. People get tired of
hearing about Jews or Gentiles in the end.
169. I do not want to conclude my intervention without
addressing myself to some of the permanent members of
the Council, the so-called great Powers. I believe that only
our Creator is great, but anyway that it the way they are
known. The great Powers-in
other words, those who
I
exercise world power.
170. I listened very carefully to what Mr. Malik said
regarding resolution 242 (1967). At the time of its adoption I called it a knot in the carpenter’s saw. 1 know that
Lord Caradon participated in its drafting. Mr. Malik was not
there; Mr. Federenko was. I made my views known in the
Security Council. They are on record. I said it was
equivocal, like the Balfour Declaration. It could be interpreted in different ways, and would not solve the problem.
And it has not solved the problem. What is the alternative,
then?

175. You have only to look at the propagandain the press
to seehow they all rally aroundthosewho areformulating
the policy in favour of Israel. We do not want you to be
againstIsrael. But do not proceed to the point where-you
know what will happen?-we Governmentswill not be able
to contain our people, my dear Sir. Weshall not be able to
contain our people,
176. And many of your Senators-I am not interfering in
your domesticaffairs; if they did not touch upon our arca,
it would be farthest from my intention to make these
remarks-what do they do? They bring pressureon whom?
On your Government. Pressureto continue aid in spite of
the unfavourablebalanceof payments.And then you bring
pressure-I do not like to use that word-you try in
different ways to persuadethe Soviet Union to allow
thousandsupon thousandsof Soviet Union citizens of the
Jewish faith to go-where? To Israel. It is in the newspapers.

171, Rightly, Mr. Malik has said that the one seized of the
situation is none other than Mr. Jarring, and he has his
mandate from the Security Council and the General
Assembly. But with all the skill and goodwill Mr. Jarring
possesses, he has not so far succeeded. I am not going to say
why, because if 1 did so and went into the facts it might be
tantamount to Baroody accusing Israel. I will not say why,
but the fact is that he did not succeed. From whom did he
receive his mandate? Essentially, from the major Powers,
because if the major Powers, the five permanent members
of the Council, had not been in agreement concerning the
wording of resolution 242 (1967) it would not have come
into being.

177. I feel sorry for your Administration. It is under great
pressure.But why should we pay? It takes someonelike
Baroody to bring this into the open in the Security COUIVZ~~.
And that is why we say it is high time that you and the
Soviet Union, which played a role in the creation of Israel,
cameandhelpedusresolvethis situation.

172. Now let us face the facts. Nothing has resulted from
resolution 242 (1967). Shall we keep Mr. Jarring carrying
out his exercise in futility ? That is why I addressed the
representatives of the United States and the Soviet Union
last night.

178. It cannot continue like this. Therewill be anarchy in
the Arab world. Perhaps not in my lifetime, perhaps
tomorrow, perhaps10 years from now. Who will benefit
from anarchy? I would assureMr. Tekoahthat his authorities, the Jewishpeople, will be the first to suffer-because,
as I have said, someday perhaps,and rightly or wrongly,
the world will get fed up with this Zionist questionand the
Jewishpeople may be madea scapegoat,and the innocent
among them will suffer as they did in Germany arrd
elsewhere,which wasvery deplorable.

173. You are not morally responsible, my good friend
Mr. Scali-not
you personally, Your Government is responsible-your
successive Governments since Mr. Truman’s
decision-for
doing the right thing, not the right thing by
the Arabs but the right thing in this question.
174. Now, I gathered from what Mr. Malik said, without
naming you-l know your are trading with each other now
and are very polite; it is not like it used to be in the times
of the late Mr, Krushchev, when you were calling each
other names here and at Lake Success-that there was “a
major Member that did not co-operate”. He meant you. I
say it for him; he was being polite. He meant YOLI, the

179. Why do you not do somethingabout it? You just sit
around this table, year in and year out, for 2.5years going
around in circles on this question. I hope Mr. ScaE will
20

Franjieh where to strike. Take that out of your mind,
Mr, Tekoah. They strike as you struck in Palestinein the
twenties and the thirties and perpetrated so many tragedies
through terrorism, and unfortunately they have thought:
“Perchance we will succeed in regaining our homeland
because the Zionists”-the Palestiniansthink that way“resorted to terrorism and they have a State, so why do not
we useit”?

bring new breath to the Council. You sit in the, Cabinet,
Mr. Scali. Tell you colleagues-or perhaps they are not
listening. Tell your illustrious President.
180. And you, my good friend Mr. Malik, you are no
newcomer on the international. scene, You are of my
generation, You have ‘seen a lot of things. Instead of US
trading insults among ourselves and casting aspersions on
each other, let us do something constructive. I cannot, but
who can? I am pleading with you, representatives of the
big nations, to do something lest things get out of our
hands. If they do get out of our hands, developments may
trigger a world conflict.
181. You know

185. Of course they are frustrated, and they cannot go
and have pitched battles with you in Israelbecauseyou are
stronger. It standsto reason.So they do what others do
when they cannot fight open battles. That is nothing new.

that in the Bible there is the parableof

Samson,who, when he wasblinded, said: “Let medie with
my enemies”. And his enemies were the Philistine&
incidentally, who gave tl;e land its name,They were from
Crete; they were not Semitesand you could have consideredthem asenemiesin thosedays.
182. Otherwisetomorrow there will be a resolution and I
cantell you the scenarioof that resolution. Israelmight be
condemned.Some will say, “Do not put the word
‘condemned’in, put in the word ‘deplore’-a jeu de mots. ”
Others will say “with consternation”, There are many
wordsthat can be used,Then your colleague,Mr. Tekoah,
will say,‘Who is the United Nations”-1 amparaphrasing,
I
am not aseloquent ashe is-“to say that we did something
wrong.We have to fend for ourselves.The whole United
Nationsnot only has lost its stature, it has no value”-althoughthe United Nationscreated Israel.
183. Most likely Mr. Scali and his colleaguesin Washington would put their headstogether, and they would tell
him “veto”. We have seenmany vetoes. The ‘United Stales
hascast only a couple of vetoes, but we have seenvetoes
castby other members.So where will we be? Weloseour
self-respectas the United Nations. I, after 27 years of
servicehere, would deplore that we should become the
laughing-stockof peopleeverywhere in the world. Is there
no alternative to such a scenario or blueprint? Yes,
somethingserious. Forget your power politics and checkerboardplay of chessin the area-you and the Soviet Union
in our area-and come to a gentlemen’sagreementto do
somethingfor the Palestinianpeople basedon the right of
self-determination.Do not pressureIsrael. You cannot
pressure
Israel becausethe Zionists will pressureyou, but
tell them: “It is high time you shouldbe persuadedto find
a solution on the basisof the self-determinationof the
Palestinian
people”.
184. Otherwise, what is the alternative? There will be
another “chastisement” on the part of Israel, and who
knows
where the frustrated Palestinianswill strike. They
might strike here in New York City. Incidentally, they
allegedlyput a car with explosives-it was said in the
newspapers-near
the IsraelDiscount Bank and the entrance
of my office is near that bank. I would be killed too,
perhaps.
Who knows? They do not care.They do not say,
“Baroodyis coming through here, he usedto defendus”. I
do not know where they will strike. They do not tell us
wherethey strike, They do not ask Mr. Ghorra or President
21

186. I spoke about the Second World War. I referred to
the Maquis, to the commandosof other nations. Theseare
the facts, and I am not sermonizinghere. They will strike
anywhere and they will not tell us innocent people, Jew
and Gentile alike, who will suffer. The word “gentile”
meansanyone who is not a Jew, not only Arabs. I know
many Jews,and they talk to me over the phone. Someare
from my part of the world and they deplore the situation.
Incidentally, they speakto me in Arabic, not in Hebrew. If
they deplore the situation, will you disown them? They
have no interest in me personallyand they are not trying to
get anything out of me. Many Jews do not like what is
happening in the world becausethey identify themselves
with the country of their birth or adoption, and you want
to in-gather them all in Palestineagainst the will of 110
million Arabs whoseyouth are againstthis movement. You
cannot tell usany more: “God gave usPalestine”. God gave
the world to the humanrace. Put it that way,
187. So please,I am pleading acrossthe table with you,
with everybody, that an end should be put to that conflict
lest it engulf us all in the future. This power politics game,
this spheres-of-influencegame at the expense of others
should be decried. There should be some self-respect.
Human rights should be observedand practised, not only
observed.
188. So I am sure that the representativesof France and
the United Kingdom will help you, and I am more than sure
that an Asian representative, the representative of the
People’s Republic of China, will co-operate with you.
Perhapsthey will forget their differences.The major Powers
all have their differenceslike the small Powers,But forget
your differences and try to solvethis problem and it will be
to your honour and you really will be serving the United
Nations. Otherwise,what will happen? The alternative is a
babbling like that of the Tower of Babel-not a tower of
Babel in the senseof tongues, but a tower of Babel in
thoughts.
189. I ask forgivenessof any one of my colleaguesif I
have been a little personal.I would not have been personal
had it not been that our contacts with thosewho formulate
the policies of your Governments are through you. We
cannot go to Mr. Nixon or to Mr. Brezhnev or to Mr. Mao
Tse-tung. We are telling you, hoping that you will transmit
our fears and our thoughts on the basisof justice and not
on the basisof antiquated pronouncementsfull of rhetoric
and polemicsof which we are sick in this Council, because
you are human like us and we
- needyour humanity to help

us. When you are, as you have sometimes been during my
tenure of office, in difficulties, we help you in our humble
way. I do not have to cite examples because then it wouId
be thought that we were asking tit for tat.

determination, with due regard to the right of the Jewish
people, who happen to be there, to live in peace with those
Palestinians who want to return. Do not bring pressure.
Persuade and be firm. Perchance there will be results. If
not, try again. Otherwise, the picture is gloomy and there
will be very little hope, with nothing emerging on the
horizon.

190. It is our duty to help one another here. Stop this
slaughter, stop this misery, stop this tragedy and satisfy the
people of Palestine on the basis of their right to self-

The meeting rose at 7.45.p.m.

22
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

2.00 (mequivalent

in other

currencies)

73-82001-June

1978-2,200
