S/2004/106

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 February 2004
Original: English

Letter dated 10 February 2004 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
With reference to the statement by the President of the Security Council of
12 December 2002 (S/PRST/2002/33), I have the honour to convey the letter dated
21 January 2004 which I received from the Secretary-General and High
Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union,
transmitting the report on the activities of the European Union Police Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina covering the period from 1 July to 31 December 2003
(see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

04-23807 (E)

120204

*
0
4
2
3
8
0
7
*

S/2004/106

Annex
Letter dated 21 January 2004 from the Secretary-General and
High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security
Policy of the European Union to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations
In accordance with the statement by the President of the Security Council of
12 December 2002 (S/PRST/2002/33), I attach a report on the activities of the
European Union Police Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUPM) covering the
period from 1 July to 31 December 2003 (see enclosure). I propose to continue to
provide the Security Council with a written update on the progress of EUPM every
six months, as appropriate. I should be grateful if you would transmit the present
letter and its enclosure to the President of the Security Council.
(Signed) Javier Solana

2

S/2004/106

Enclosure
Report of the Secretary-General and High Representative for the
Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union on
the activities of the European Union Police Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina covering the period from 1 July to 31 December 2003
Introduction
The European Union Police Mission is the first operation undertaken under the
European Security and Defence Policy. It was initiated as a follow-on mission to the
International Police Task Force (IPTF) in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
This report is the second update by the Secretary-General and High
Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union
to the Security Council on the activities of the Mission and covers the period from
1 July to 31 December 2003.
Status
As at 31 December 2003 EUPM numbered 861 personnel of whom 471 are
seconded police officers, 58 international civilians and 332 Bosnia and Herzegovina
national staff. All 15 European Union member States participate in the Mission (384
police officers) together with 18 non-EU contributing States (87 police officers). For
the first time, the Russian Federation contributed personnel to EUPM during this
reporting period. 1
Mandate and operations
The European Union Police Mission began operations on 1 January 2003 with
a mission to establish sustainable policing arrangements under Bosnia and
Herzegovina ownership in accordance with best European and international practice,
thereby raising current police standards in Bosnia and Herzegovina. 2 It is a nonexecutive mission and achieves its objectives through mentoring, advising and
monitoring the police forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Mission conducts its operations through intensive co-location at the senior
and middle levels of the police, from State to entity to public security centre/canton
level, and seven core programmes (five thematic and two institution specific):
• Crime police (including major and organized crime and human trafficking
“FIGHT” project)
• Criminal justice (including court police and cooperation between the police
and judiciary)
• Internal affairs (including establishment of public complaints bureaus in each
police force)
__________________
1 The 18 non-EU contributing States are Bulgaria, Canada, the Czech Republic, Cyprus, Estonia,

Hungary, Iceland, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Romania, the Russian Federation,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Switzerland, Turkey and Ukraine.
2 Council of the European Union Joint Action of 11 March 2002 on the European Union Police
Mission (2002/210/CFSP), annex, Mission Statement for EUPM.

3

S/2004/106

• Police administration (including financial, personnel and administrative
management training)
• Public order and security (including returnee safety, crime prevention, support
units)
• State Border Service (SBS)
• State Information and Protection Agency (SIPA).
A Bosnia and Herzegovina Police Steering Board has been established by
EUPM and has matured in the past six months. It comprises the Director of SIPA,
the Director and Chief of Service of SBS, the Director of Police of the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Republika Srpska Police Director, the Brcko District
Police Chief and the EUPM Police Head of Mission. Its function is to drive forward
the changes required to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the local police,
under local ownership, and to promote synergies, coordination and cooperation
between the different police forces. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Police Steering
Board is also the top-level operational vehicle whereby the core programmes are
tabled to the senior police officers in Bosnia and Herzegovina for their consideration
and action where appropriate. Each programme has a working group consisting of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and EUPM police officers.
Each core programme and the numerous sub-projects have been benchmarked.
The benchmarking process is the main tool whereby EUPM and the local police can
monitor the progress and implementation of the programmes across the police
forces.
As noted in the recent feasibility study by the European Commission on the
preparedness of Bosnia and Herzegovina to negotiate a Stabilization and
Association Agreement with the European Union, policing in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has improved: professionalism has increased, management capacity has
grown and cooperation between police services and other enforcement agencies has
improved (for example, SBS and the customs authorities). Understanding and
cooperation between the police forces is also improving. In November, for the first
time, a joint operation was conducted by the Federation, Republika Srpska and
Brcko District Police. Likewise, the State Border Service has improved its
operational cooperation with local police forces and inter-cantonal coordination is
much enhanced.
The feasibility study of the European Commission also gave an additional
impetus for further improvement in reforms in the police sector in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The study referred specifically to the need to reform further and to
enhance State-level enforcement capacity to fight crime, as well as the need for
further restructuring and rationalization of the disparate police forces.
It should be noted that progress in the Bosnia and Herzegovina police forces
has occurred against the backdrop of considerable overall progress in the
strengthening of the rule of law in Bosnia and Herzegovina, notably in the judicial
and prosecutorial fields.
Operational priorities
The Police Head of Mission has maintained the Mission’s priorities in the
second half of 2003 as the strengthening of the State-level law enforcement

4

S/2004/106

agencies, the fight against organized crime, especially human trafficking, and the
safety and security of returnees. The first two priorities are inextricably linked.
EUPM also recognizes the existing links between war crimes and organized crime as
well as returnee security. In this context, the War Crimes Advisory Unit is
addressing these issues and also ensuring correct local police procedures for the
handling of those war crimes cases being tried in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The implementation of two EUPM projects, “Major and organized crime” and
“Fight and intervention against human trafficking”, has produced improved police
and State Border Service performance in tackling car theft, drugs seizures and the
trafficking of human beings.
The local police’s abilities to fight organized crime have been improved by the
Mission’s introduction and mentoring of intelligence-led policing. In relation to
human trafficking, this was summarized in the recent UNICEF/OHCHR/OSCE
Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights report on the trafficking of
human beings in south-eastern Europe:
“EUPM has introduced a new law enforcement strategy to combat trafficking
based on investigation-led policing and the restructuring of the local police.
The changes introduced by EUPM are very positive. They are based on the
experience of members of the EUPM Trafficking Team in combating
trafficking in Western Europe. Investigation-led policing focuses on the
criminals rather than the victims by collecting evidence against the traffickers
rather than by constantly harassing the victims during repetitive, poorly
prepared bar raids. These are altogether necessary and very welcomed changes
in the law enforcement approach to the issue of trafficking, changes that are
also recommended for other countries.” 3
Nevertheless, the current capacity of the police forces to fight major and
organized crime in a coherent and coordinated way is still limited. This capacity can
only be raised by the effective establishment of SIPA with police powers, the ability
to gather and analyse criminal intelligence and enhance the coordination and
cooperation between the police forces, and an enhanced role of the Ministry of
Security regarding policy and administrative matters. Intensive work on these issues
has been a priority during this reporting period in close consultation between SIPA,
the Ministry of Security, EUPM and the Office of the High Representative (the High
Representative has also been appointed a European Union Special Representative
and part of the EUPM chain of command). It is expected that substantial progress
will have been made in this area by mid-2004. In terms of the rule of law, an
executive SIPA would provide the missing link in the chain that includes the State
Court and State Prosecutors that were established in 2003.
It became further apparent over the course of the last six months that the
structure and size of the local police forces are financially and operationally
inefficient. This will require further attention in 2004. In parallel, the European
Commission delegation initiated — as part of a wider assessment of public
administration — an audit on the police focusing, among other things, on the
financial viability of the police structures.

__________________
3 “Trafficking in Human Beings in South Eastern Europe”, November 2003.

5

S/2004/106

Challenges
The last three months of 2003 were dominated by the need to address
inappropriate political interference in the police in the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. On 29 October 2003, the High Representative/European Union Special
Representative, Lord Ashdown, accompanied by the EUPM Police Head of Mission,
called a press conference at which he drew attention to interference, in particular but
not exclusively by the SDA (Party of Democratic Action), in the policing of three
specific cantons as well as at the Federation level as the most worrying examples of
political meddling. Engagement by the High Representative/European Union Special
Representative and the Police Head of Mission with senior Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Federation politicians helped to stem the problem and served as a timely
reminder that political interference in the police would not be tolerated. It cannot be
discounted that attempted meddling will re-emerge. EUPM remains vigilant on this
score, and will continue to work towards the eradication of undue political influence
or interference in policing.
Challenges to and attempts to overturn the IPTF certification process have
continued. EUPM legal advisers have been constantly engaged in monitoring court
cases where the IPTF certification process has been challenged by police officers
who were denied certification. Some local courts rendered decisions declaring the
dismissal of those former police officers null and void because the Ministry of the
Interior did not apply domestic legislation. After careful consideration by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the United Nations Secretariat, the
Office of the High Representative, the United Nations representative in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and EUPM, it was agreed that United Nations Headquarters would
examine the specifics before coming to a final assessment on how to deal with this
important and urgent issue. It is of vital importance that this issue, which has the
capacity to overturn progress and to widen to other areas (for example, the
restructuring of the judiciary), is resolved without further delay.
Coordination with the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina
The relations of EUPM with the local police authorities have remained good,
as witnessed in the successful functioning of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Police
Steering Board. It has not met wilful obstruction across its co-locations and the
police have, for the most part, responded positively and professionally to EUPM
mentoring. A Bosnia and Herzegovina Police opinion survey, conducted by EUPM
in October and November, showed that the local police have a good understanding
of the EUPM mandate and that the Mission is well perceived. Public confidence in
the rule of law is rising, albeit slowly. In this regard, it is important that high-level
criminals be brought to justice quickly in order to demonstrate real, practical
progress to the public and seriousness of purpose. It is interesting to note that those
anonymous police officers surveyed saw political interference, material conditions
(salaries, equipment and education) and needed modifications to local laws as the
major obstacles to the successful implementation of the EUPM mandate.
Coordination at the State level has been hampered by the slow pace of the
establishment of the Ministry of Security and SIPA. SBS continues to become more
operationally effective. Relations were strained with the Federation Minister of the
Interior owing to his attempted interference in the police, and to a lesser extent the
Republika Srpska Minister of the Interior over the latter’s attempt to award a

6

S/2004/106

popular but unrealistic 20 per cent police pay rise. Extensive engagement and
coordination with other international actors has, it is hoped, laid these issues to rest
and will allow for greater coordination in 2004.
Liaison with the international community
Coordination between the Office of the High Representative and EUPM is
exemplary and has ensured a common approach and stance on the major issues that
span the rule of law. The High Representative/European Union Special
Representative has provided valuable political support, especially on the issues of
political interference, police reform and the certification process. Coordination is
further reinforced through the Political Department and the rule of law pillar of the
Office of the High Representative. EUPM and the Office of the High Representative
participate with SIPA authorities in the management group to establish SIPA.
Liaison with the European Commission delegation, particularly in relation to
the CARDS programme, remains close, as has EUPM liaison and cooperation with
other international community actors involved in the funding and development of
police related matters, such as embassies and the International Criminal
Investigative Training Assistance Program.
Liaison with appropriate elements of the Stabilization Force (SFOR) has been
particularly useful, especially in regard to issues such as major and organized crime,
information flow, situational awareness and security. The Situational Awareness
Groups, established by SFOR and EUPM in concert with OSCE, continue to work
well and all agencies involved continue to further the timely passage of security and
awareness information to the international community.
Outlook
EUPM will continue to consolidate its achievements and those of IPTF. It will
continue the implementation of its core programmes through the local ownership of
the Bosnia and Herzegovina Police Steering Board. It will be imperative that EUPM
continues to tackle inappropriate political interference as this is often the main
obstacle to the fulfilment of the programmes’ objectives. The schedule for this
implementation must remain on track, especially in Republika Srpska where it has
tended to be slower. It is to be expected that the challenges to the certification
process will continue in 2004.
The Mission priorities will remain, with special emphasis on the effective
establishment of SIPA and the fight against organized crime. On this issue and that
of police restructuring, EUPM will continue to work closely with the other
international actors in order to continue to raise the standard of the rule of law in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the effectiveness of its police forces.

7
