S/PRST/2005/1

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 January 2005
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5110th meeting of the Security Council, held on 12 January 2005, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The question
concerning Haiti”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms the comprehensive mandate of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) as set forth in
resolutions 1542 (2004) and 1576 (2004), and expresses its support for United
Nations presence in Haiti as long as necessary.
“The Security Council underlines that national reconciliation, security
and economic development remain key to stability in Haiti, and, in that regard,
stresses that all Member States and international organizations, especially
those in the region, should support the Transitional Government of Haiti in
those efforts.
“The Security Council underlines the important role of MINUSTAH in
ensuring a secure environment and commends the recent joint operations by
MINUSTAH and the Haitian National Police (HNP), in particular against all
illegal armed groups. It notes however that further urgent action is needed to
continue to improve the security situation. The Council again calls on all
parties in Haiti to respect human rights and to renounce the use of violence to
advance their goals.
“The Security Council encourages the Transitional Government to create
without delay the National Commission on Disarmament, Demobilization, and
Reintegration (DDR), to address all armed groups, particularly former
members of the military, in a comprehensive manner. It notes that any
compensation should be part of a comprehensive and durable solution.
“The Security Council renews its appeal for the prompt disbursement of
the funds pledged by international financial institutions and donor countries at
the International Donors Conference on Haiti held in July 2004. It recognizes
the need for MINUSTAH, other organs of the UN system, international
financial institutions, and Member States to assist the Transitional Government
in the preparation and implementation of development projects in Haiti, as
well as quick-impact projects. The Council reiterates the need to assist the
Transitional Government in establishing a long-term development strategy for

05-20703 (E) 120105

*0520703*

S/PRST/2005/1

Haiti, in accordance with the priorities set forth in the Interim Cooperation
Framework.
“The Security Council welcomes recent steps taken by the Transitional
Government of Haiti to release some individuals being held without formal
charge or trial, and calls on the Transitional Government to review all such
cases in order to ensure full respect for due process and the rule of law. In this
regard, the Council calls on MINUSTAH to continue its support for the
provision of human rights training to Haitian judicial, police and correctional
authorities to ensure adherence to international norms and standards.
“The Security Council encourages the Transitional Government to
continue to take steps towards a comprehensive and inclusive national
dialogue and reconciliation process and calls upon all political actors in Haiti
to renounce violence and join this dialogue without delay. The Council fully
supports MINUSTAH’s continuing facilitation of this process.
“The Security Council calls upon the Transitional Government, with the
assistance of MINUSTAH and the Organization of American States (OAS), to
take urgently the necessary measures to ensure the holding of free and fair
elections in 2005 and the subsequent transfer of power to elected authorities,
and welcomes the recent decisions of the Provisional Electoral Council (CEP)
in its preparations. It encourages all political parties that have rejected
violence to participate in the electoral process.
“The Security Council expresses its intention to organize a mission to
Haiti before 1 June 2005, possibly in conjunction with a mission of the
ECOSOC Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti.
“The Security Council expresses its gratitude to the countries that have
contributed personnel to the Mission. It urges troop and police contributing
countries to complete the authorized strength of MINUSTAH as soon as
possible, stressing that prompt completion of this step is an essential
requirement for the continuing success of the operation.
“The Security Council expresses its full support for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti, Juan Gabriel Valdés, and
commends the work done by MINUSTAH and all of its personnel.”

2
