United Nations

A/RES/58/314

General Assembly

Distr.: General
16 July 2004

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 59

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 1 July 2003
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/58/L.64)]

58/314. Participation of the Holy See in the work of
the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Recalling that the Holy See became a Permanent Observer State at the United
Nations on 6 April 1964, and since then has always been invited to participate in the
meetings of all the sessions of the General Assembly,
Recalling also that the Holy See is a party to diverse international instruments,
including the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, 1 the Vienna Convention
on the Law of Treaties, 2 the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees 3 and the
Protocol thereto, 4 the Convention on the Rights of the Child 5 and the Optional
Protocols thereto, 6 the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment, 7 the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 8 the Convention for the
Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict, 9 the Paris
Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, 10 the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 11 the main disarmament treaties and the Geneva
Conventions 12 and the Additional Protocols thereto, 13
Recalling further that the Holy See enjoys membership in various United
Nations subsidiary bodies, specialized agencies and international intergovernmental
_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 500, No. 7310.
Ibid., vol. 1155, No. 18232.
3
Ibid., vol. 189, No. 2545.
4
Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.
5
Resolution 44/25, annex.
6
Resolution 54/263, annexes I and II.
7
Resolution 39/46, annex.
8
Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
9
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 249, No. 3511.
10
Ibid., vol. 828, No. 11851.
11
Ibid., vol. 729, No. 10485.
12
Ibid., vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
13
Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
2

03 51470

A/RES/58/314

organizations, including the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, the World Intellectual Property Organization, the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
Organization and the International Committee of Military Medicine,
Aware that the Holy See actively participates as an observer in many of the
specialized agencies, such as the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the International Labour Organization, the World Health Organization, the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization, the International Fund for
Agricultural Development and the World Tourism Organization, as well as in the
World Trade Organization, that it is a full member of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and a Guest of Honour in its Parliamentary Assembly,
and that it participates as an observer in various other regional intergovernmental
organizations, including the Council of Europe, the Organization of American States
and the African Union, and is regularly invited to take part in the main meetings of
the Asian-African Legal Consultative Organization,
Aware also that the Economic and Social Council, by its decision 244 (LXIII)
of 22 July 1977, recommended that the Holy See attend sessions of the regional
commissions on a basis similar to that provided for in the relevant terms of
reference applicable to States Members of the United Nations not members of the
regional commissions,
Recalling that the Holy See contributes financially to the general
administration of the United Nations in accordance with the rate of assessment for
the Holy See as a non-member State, as adopted by the General Assembly in its
resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003,
Considering that it is in the interest of the United Nations that all States be
invited to participate in its work,
Desirous of contributing to the appropriate participation of the Holy See in the
work of the General Assembly in the context of the revitalization of the work of the
Assembly,
Acknowledges that the Holy See, in its capacity as an Observer State,
1.
shall be accorded the rights and privileges of participation in the sessions and work
of the General Assembly and the international conferences convened under the
auspices of the Assembly or other organs of the United Nations, as well as in United
Nations conferences as set out in the annex to the present resolution;
Requests the Secretary-General to inform the General Assembly during
2.
the current session about the implementation of the modalities annexed to the
present resolution.
92nd plenary meeting
1 July 2004

Annex
The rights and privileges of participation of the Holy See shall be effected
through the following modalities, without prejudice to the existing rights and
privileges:
1.
2

The right to participate in the general debate of the General Assembly;

A/RES/58/314

2.
Without prejudice to the priority of Member States, the Holy See shall have
the right of inscription on the list of speakers under agenda items at any plenary
meeting of the General Assembly, after the last Member State inscribed on the list;
3.
The right to make interventions, with a precursory explanation or the recall of
relevant General Assembly resolutions being made only once by the President of the
General Assembly at the start of each session of the Assembly;
4.

The right of reply;

5.
The right to have its communications relating to the sessions and work of the
General Assembly issued and circulated directly, and without intermediary, as
official documents of the Assembly;
6.
The right to have its communications relating to the sessions and work of all
international conferences convened under the auspices of the General Assembly
issued and circulated directly, and without intermediary, as official documents of
those conferences;
7.
The right to raise points of order relating to any proceedings involving the
Holy See, provided that the right to raise such a point of order shall not include the
right to challenge the decision of the presiding officer;
8.
The right to co-sponsor draft resolutions and decisions that make reference to
the Holy See; such draft resolutions and decisions shall be put to a vote only upon
request from a Member State;
9.
Seating for the Holy See shall be arranged immediately after Member States
and before the other observers when it participates as a non-member State observer,
with the allocation of six seats in the General Assembly Hall;
10. The Holy See shall not have the right to vote or to put forward candidates in
the General Assembly.

3
