S/PV.8642

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8642nd meeting

Thursday, 17 October 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Matjila. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Moriko
Ms. Morrison González
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Soemirat
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-32147 (E)
*1932147*

S/PV.8642

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator; and
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen;
Mr. Griffiths is joining the meeting via videoteleconference from Riyadh.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: As Council members have heard
me say many times before, Yemen is the world’s
worst humanitarian crisis and the location of the
Organization’s largest relief operation. More than 250
humanitarian agencies — most of them Yemeni — are
working to deliver the United Nations response plan.
Together, we are reaching more than 12 million people
across the country every month. But as the aid operation
has expanded, the drivers of the crisis have continued
to get worse. In fact, it often feels in Yemen that the
more we achieve, the bigger and more complicated the
problem becomes.
For more than a year, we have advocated progress
on five key priorities: first, the protection of civilians;
secondly, humanitarian access; thirdly, funding for the
aid operation; fourthly, support for the economy; and
fifthly, a political solution. I would like to update the
Council on where these issues now stand.
Let me start with protection of civilians. September
was the deadliest month for civilians so far this year,
with reports of 388 having been killed or injured due
to conflict across the country. That is an average
of 13 people every day. There are many gruesome
examples. Last week, four children in Al-Hudaydah
were killed when unexploded ordnance from previous
2/20

17/10/2019

rounds of shelling detonated nearby. All four were from
the same family. On 23 and 24 September, air strikes
killed 22 civilians in a mosque in Amran and a family
home in Al-Dhale’e. And in Sa’dah last week, air strikes
damaged a United Nations-supported water system that
serves 12,000 people. That was the fourth time that
facility had been hit since 2016.
As Mr. Griffiths will tell the Council during his
briefing, violence decreased a little in October, but
with more than 30 active front lines, we can only
hope that recent steps towards de-escalation, on which
Martin will brief the Council, will continue. I continue
to call for a nationwide ceasefire. In parallel to these
efforts, all parties must uphold their obligations under
international humanitarian law to protect civilians and
civilian infrastructure.
The second issue is humanitarian access, which
remains extremely challenging, particularly in the
north. Agencies there must still navigate more than
100 different restrictions imposed by Ansar Allah
authorities, in addition to frequent harassment and
attempts at interference. In September, Ansar Allah
authorities effectively expelled or refused entry to
several United Nations personnel, including a senior
official. Movement restrictions also remain severe. To
cite one example, local authorities recently blocked
humanitarian assessments in Hajjah and Al-Hudaydah,
where the authorities themselves tell us that more than
12,000 families have been affected by floods. We
are engaging with Ansar Allah authorities and have
underlined our expectation that they will take action to
improve the operating environment in accordance with
humanitarian principles. We have seen some progress,
with dozens of blocked projects recently cleared to
start, but many more projects remain pending.
On a separate note, we hope recent discussions
with Ansar Allah authorities will finally pave the way
for a United Nations-led assessment of the decaying
FSO SAFER oil tanker. This assessment is the first
step in preventing a major potential environmental and
humanitarian catastrophe in the Red Sea. The United
Nations remains eager to assist with the FSO SAFER. It
is entirely up to Ansar Allah whether we are able to do
so. We have, of course, been here before.
In the south, we are encouraged by reports that talks
between the Government and the Southern Transitional
Council are progressing. Mr. Griffiths will provide
further details on those reports. A renewal of hostilities
19-32147

17/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East

in the south would put civilians in harm’s way and
impact humanitarian operations. Last month, several
humanitarian organizations suspended activities in
parts of Abyan and Shabwah as a result of clashes
there. These programmes have now mostly resumed but
continue to face difficulties near front lines.
The Government has made substantial progress in
clearing backlogs of pending humanitarian projects,
with many recently approved to begin. But several
other projects are still awaiting Government clearance,
which is delaying assistance for people who need it.
The third point is funding for the aid operation.
For much of the year, agencies have struggled to raise
enough money. Over the last few months, funding
gaps have forced key programmes to close. I therefore
welcome the generous contributions we have received
in the past several weeks. At the General Assembly
high-level week last month, the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia gave the United Nations $500 million for the
response plan, bringing its total contributions to this
year’s plan to $708 million. Earlier in September, the
United Arab Emirates allocated $200 million to my
Office and the World Food Programme, bringing its
total to $380 million.
Other donors have also stepped forward. Kuwait has
just given $88 million. In the past two months, the United
States, Germany, the European Commission and others
have also given substantial additional funds on top of
their earlier contributions. With hundreds of millions
of dollars in new funding over the past six weeks, the
response plan has gone from 45 per cent funded in
early September to 65 per cent funded today. Although
substantial gaps remain, United Nations agencies have
reopened many programmes that had been suspended,
including support for health-care facilities, malnutrition
treatment centres and vaccination campaigns. Other
programmes should come back online soon.
The fourth point is the economy. Last year, economic
collapse pushed Yemen to the brink of widespread
famine. We should therefore all be concerned that
indicators are again pointing in that direction. The
exchange rate is fluctuating at between 580 and 595 rial
to the dollar. That is more than double the rate when
the conflict escalated five years ago. Because Yemen
imports almost everything, consumer prices have also
more than doubled, pushing basic goods out of reach for
millions of people. Therefore, although there may be
food in the markets, fewer people can afford it.

S/PV. 8642

Five hundred and eighty rial to the dollar is of
course an improvement over the sustained 600-rial rate
that we had seen for the past six weeks, and I want to
commend the Government of Yemen for its efforts to
stabilize the exchange rate and pay more civil servant
salaries and strengthen the economy. But ultimately
those efforts cannot manoeuvre around a fundamental
obstacle — the lack of foreign exchange. I call on
Yemen’s partners to provide regular injections of
foreign exchange at a scale that will keep the exchange
rate stable and help return food and other commodity
prices to more affordable levels.
I also want to repeat my concern about the
humanitarian impact of recent Government regulations
on commercial fuel imports, which have contributed to
severe fuel shortages in many areas. Fuel is essential to
transporting food to markets, pumping drinking water
and powering sanitation systems. Nearly three-quarters
of hospitals rely on fuel to provide care, and aid
organizations need fuel for their work.
Over the past several weeks, those regulations,
imposed by the Government, have blocked commercial
fuel imports from Al-Hudaydah. We understand,
however, that yesterday the Government cleared eight
vessels carrying the equivalent of more than a month’s
supply of average fuel imports. Several of those
vessels have already started sailing for Al-Hudaydah.
One of them arrived this morning. That is something
I welcome.
It is important to understand the central role of
fuel in determining the humanitarian needs in Yemen
and our ability to meet them. As severe shortages have
gripped many areas in recent weeks, fuel prices have
doubled or even tripled. Very quickly, that pushed the
cost of food and drinking water, which many people
already could not afford, to even higher prices. Without
fuel, municipal water systems in three cities have simply
stopped working altogether, and others have cut back
services. Sanitation plants have reduced operations.
Large quantities of human, animal and commercial
waste have accumulated in the streets, greatly
exacerbating the risk of cholera and other diseases.
Rising fuel prices also mean families are less
likely to get help when they need it because transport
simply becomes unaffordable or unavailable. In some
areas, the number of people reporting to health-care
facilities over the past several weeks has dropped by
50 per cent because sick people could not get there. At

19-321473/20

S/PV.8642

The situation in the Middle East

the same time, mobile health teams are struggling to
reach patients where they are because the teams do not
have fuel either.
Therefore, I once again welcome the step, which I
just announced, towards more flexibility, but I also call
on the Government to manage commercial imports in a
way that sustainably avoids exacerbating humanitarian
needs. I also call on Ansar Allah authorities to avoid
any steps that could worsen shortages or push price
rises higher. Everything possible has to be done to
ensure that families are able to buy what they need to
survive and that essential services can continue.
The funding we have received for the response plan
will allow humanitarian agencies to continue keeping
millions of people alive. That is cause for optimism, but
there is much more to do if our aim is not just to reduce
people’s suffering, but to end it altogether. The only
way to achieve that is to stop the war, and I am sure that
Martin Griffiths will address that shortly.
The President: I thank Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: I apologize for being late to this
important meeting and I thank you, Mr. President, for
allowing that, and Mark Lowcock for stepping forward.
I am in Riyadh at the moment. We were hoping to have
news by the time of this meeting on an agreement in
the south, which I will talk about during this brief
briefing, if I may. I thank you once again, Sir, for this
opportunity to brief the Council.
In recent months, I have warned darkly of the perils
facing Yemen, including the prospects for instability in
the south and the frightening risks of the country being
drawn into a regional conflict. I have seemed perhaps
at times to have abandoned the creed of the mediator,
which is to find and nurture any and all signs of hope.

17/10/2019

earlier. They are also apparent in a growing generosity
of spirit within and among the parties, which often
seems lacking, in, for example, freeing some of those
detained and imprisoned and finding creative ways
to allow desperately needed oil ships, to which Mark
also made several references, to enter Al-Hudaydah
in a very impressive way over the past several days.
As Mark has been telling us, they are much needed.
Those are perhaps small signs in a frightening season
but something for us to nurture.
In the south, the situation remains volatile, but with
a tenuous calm in Aden it is worth noting that there
has been no large-scale fighting in the areas of dispute,
despite our deep concerns in the Council beginning in
August. I believe that this can be taken as a testimony
to the restraint shown by those on the ground and their
leaders. As I said at the outset, many of us, including
myself in Riyadh, had hoped that an agreement could
have been announced today. I understand that we are
not quite there yet, but it certainly does seem that very
significant progress was made during the Jeddah talks
under the leadership of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
Thanks to the Saudis’ strenuous diplomatic
efforts, there are encouraging signs, as I said, that an
agreement aimed at resolving the issues between the
Government of Yemen under President Hadi Mansour
and the Southern Transitional Council may be well
within reach. I am sure that it is as important to the
members of the Council as it to me that this be done
swiftly, as the Government needs to return safely and
with full authority to Aden and State institutions must
be allowed to be fully functional again with all speed.
Law and order must be restored and services delivered
to the people of the south. The hiatus in Government
activities, particularly the disruption of basic service
delivery, threatens people’s lives.

Today, I want to claim that there are indeed signs of
hope for the people of Yemen, even in the middle of the
misery that Mark Lowcock described earlier with his
usual accuracy and deftness and that, to those involved,
must sometimes seem endless. Yes, there are signs of
hope, but they are fragile and in need of our diligent
care and attention.

I would like to say that the leadership of Saudi
Crown Prince Mohammed Bin Salman Bin Abdulaziz
Al-Saud is of key importance in that context, not just
in the mediation that we have seen in the Jeddah talks,
but also in the other contexts to which I will refer today,
in trying to create new opportunities for the parties to
engage with new confidence among them. I am grateful
to him for that.

In my briefing today, I will seek to point to those
signs of hope — in the south, of course, as I have already
mentioned, but also in the reduction in violence very
recently in the north, to which Mark Lowcock referred

I welcome, as I did publicly at the time it was
announced on 20 September, the initiative by Ansar
Allah, under the leadership of Abdul-Malik Al-Houthi,
to suspend all drone and ballistic missile attacks on

4/20

19-32147

17/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Saudi Arabia. I also welcome the reduction of violence
that followed that announcement. Mark is, of course,
quite right to remind us about the unconscionably
high level of civilian casualties in September and,
indeed, the degree of military activity on those fronts
that he was referring to. That is the objective truth.
It is also true, as he said, that since the beginning of
October — 10 days into that initiative — the number
of air strikes has fallen considerably across Yemen. I
am obviously encouraged by that. It is, however, a very
recent and obviously very fragile gain, but it is certainly
a step in the right direction.
My good friend and colleague Lieutenant General
Abhijit Guha has just assumed his duty as the Head of
the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah
Agreement (UNMHA) and Chair of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee. God bless him for carrying
out those tasks. I wish him success in his endeavour.
We met when he came to the region and are in daily
contact about the issues that are facing him. I am very
grateful to him for taking up this opportunity under the
leadership of the Secretary-General.
Confidence-building is the keystone to the full
implementation of the Al-Hudaydah Agreement.
I would like to emphasize that the presence and
work of UNMHA in Al-Hudaydah, and the ways
it has tailored — sometimes subtly and sometimes
radically — its operations to the needs on the ground
are indeed more groundbreaking than I think many
of us have realized. In that context, the leadership
shown by Lieutenant General Lollesgaard, his staff
and now Lieutenant General Guha in prioritizing the
establishment of a joint operations centre, along with the
two parties, as agreed in the meeting of the Committee
on the boat in the Red Sea — on which we have already
reported — has already resulted in a tangible reduction
in ceasefire violations. We are confident that that
process will continue.
In addition, the redeployment of forces, which
is so central to the Al-Hudaydah Agreement, will
continue to be a primary focus. I think that those
two parts of the strategy on Al-Hudaydah under
UNMHA and its parties in the Committee will ensure
our steady progress towards the achievement of the
objectives of the Stockholm Agreement, which are
essentially humanitarian and crucial to the success
and sustainability of the humanitarian programme in
Yemen. In that connection, this month — as I referred
to at the beginning of my briefing — the parties have

S/PV. 8642

shown their strong commitment to finding some
understanding on some measures that will alleviate the
suffering of the Yemeni people. I welcome the release
of 290 detainees by the authorities in Sana’a. It was
remarkable to see the joy — which we have wanted and
waited to see — of the many families welcoming back
their respective loved ones. I hope — and I am sure that
we all do — that that step will be the start of further
initiatives. We are engaged even today in talks with the
parties that will facilitate the release of all detainees.
I would like to use this statement to invite the
parties to meet with us and our partners, including the
International Committee of the Red Cross — whose
President, Mr. Peter Maurer, has been just this week
in Riyadh focusing on this issue — to resume at the
nearest opportunity the discussions on the further
releases set out, mandated, required and hoped for by
the Stockholm Agreement.
I am very grateful for the news Mark
delivered — and this is not the first time either of
us have referred to this issue — about President
Hadi Mansour’s decision to allow those fuel ships
into Al-Hudaydah. That important decision has not
only humanitarian consequences — which Mark has
already outlined — but also consequences in terms of
confidence. That important decision will respond to
humanitarian needs. It is a good example of an issue of
great humanitarian importance that can also, as I have
said, potentially build vital confidence between the
parties to address their differences, which, of course, is
my focus. I therefore thank Mr. Hadi Mansour for that.
As we speak and as I was coming to this briefing,
thanks to the support of the United Nations humanitarian
agencies and the concerted, detailed, difficult and
ultimately positive efforts of the parties to the conflict,
humanitarian assistance is, as we speak, being delivered
to people in need in Ad Durayhimi. I cannot express to
the Council the full extent of my respect for Resident
Coordinator Lise Grande, as well as the World Food
Programme and its leader, Mr. David Beasley, whom
we have been so often privileged to hear speak in the
Chamber and whose staff have diligently pursued this
difficult, tricky, necessary and ultimately successful
task. I thank them all for making this happen. That may
just be part of the daily tasks of those humanitarians,
but I must say that for the people of Ad Durayhimi, this
is a day of real consequence.

19-321475/20

S/PV.8642

The situation in the Middle East

In Taiz, we have heard reports of potential offers
from both parties to open humanitarian corridors. I
mention that because, of course, Taiz was one of the
issues agreed upon in Sweden, precisely in order to
seek such openings. I hope that those reports translate
into reality. God knows that Taiz deserves some good
news, so I hope an agreement comes on the heels of the
promises that are being made.
Finally, as I said at the outset, there are signs of hope.
We can clearly see that there are opportunities here that
need to be grasped. At the same time, let us be under no
illusion about the challenges and the difficulties ahead.
Today we have some positive indications, and I hope
that by the time the Council meets again on this issue
we shall have more clarity, more certainty and more
reason to hope.
The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank our two briefers and commend all the work that
their teams are doing on the ground.
I think that we have heard a very wide-ranging
description of what is going on the ground at the moment.
There are some very good parts, as Mr. Lowcock
said, but also some things that we need to watch very
carefully. I will speak to those points in a moment.
I want to begin by expressing support for our progress
to date with regard to the political process. Martin’s
plan to move forward, with political consultations
in parallel, with the ongoing implementation of the
Stockholm Agreement is very welcome. We obviously
support that action as quickly as possible. We welcome
the presence of Lieutenant General Guha, and we will
have a chance to hear from him in consultations. But
in the meantime, the reduction in violations of the
Stockholm Agreement is very welcome.
The United Kingdom was also pleased that during
the General Assembly high-level week we were able to
have meetings with a number of colleagues and with
Martin to support his efforts. We are also pleased that
on 29 August the Security Council issued a presidential
statement on Yemen (S/PRST/2019/9). As we have
heard from both Mark and Mr. Griffiths, now really is
the time to make one last big effort in order to get some
of these things over the line.
6/20

17/10/2019

Staying with the humanitarian situation, I think
Mark was absolutely right to remind us that despite the
good news — and I agree that the news about the fuel
ships is very good — we still have some underlying
matters that could tip the situation back towards famine
or some other risks. Thirteen people dying per day
is clearly too many and that is degrading the whole
situation on the ground. I understand what Mr. Lowcock
said about the need for foreign exchange and also what
all these factors, including the provision of fuel, mean
in terms of their knock-on effect on the ability of the
people of Yemen to have access to food. I think there is
a vicious cycle here that we need to watch out for.
Turning to the political side, we have been very
worried about the increased intensity of Houthi
attacks on Saudi Arabia over recent months. But the
announcement on 20 September that the Houthis would
cease strikes on Saudi Arabia and the welcoming
remarks issued by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia have
been an important step towards de-escalation and we
hope that further positive action can now happen on
the ground.
With respect to what Martin has been saying about
signs of hope, I think we all want those to crystallize
and develop. Again, it is clear that we are close to an
agreement, though not quite there. I believe that, from
the Security Council, we should appeal to all parties to
give this one last push to get it across the line. I think
that is really important, and we can talk more about that.
When it comes to the south, I believe that inclusivity
is the key to stability. We want a deal that brings southern
representatives into the Yemeni Government and that,
in turn, would hopefully be a self-sustaining, virtuous
cycle. We commend the Saudis and others for the talks
that have taken place and the Yemeni Government for all
its work with the Southern Transitional Council. What
Martin said about the unilateral release of detainees on
30 September by the Houthis was, obviously, positive,
and I am very pleased to see that the International
Committee of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
is taking part in that. We hope that there will be more
such measures as we work towards a peaceful solution
to the conflict in Yemen.
I want to draw attention to two specific points.
The first is about the FSO SAFER oil tanker.
As Mark has made very clear several times in this
Chamber, a rupture or explosion would mean over a
million barrels of oil leaking into the Red Sea. It is
19-32147

17/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East

critical to do something about this in order to protect
the fisheries and livelihoods of ordinary Yemenis, as
well as to prevent environmental impacts.
We need more efforts on humanitarian access,
which is deteriorating across the country, as Mark
said. We call on all parties to immediately comply with
resolution 2451 (2018).
Secondly, the issue of funding and disbursements
has been raised. Developments during the high-level
week on this front were most welcome. We commend the
Governments of Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates
and Kuwait for their very generous disbursements,
which in total came to around at $800 million, which
is very significant and demonstrates real international
leadership. We therefore express our gratitude to those
countries. However, we note that the response remains
underfunded by $1.5 billion, and therefore encourage
all donors to consider providing further funding to
the United Nations appeal. The United Kingdom has
brought forward funding from our nearly $300-million
pledge and provided 87 per cent of the funding we
pledged to United Nations this year.
In conclusion, I wanted to raise the case of the
Baha’i. The Baha’i are being persecuted for their
religious beliefs in areas under Houthi control. We
condemn such mistreatment and believe that the
continued persecution of the Baha’i is a matter to which
the Council should devote continued attention.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark
Lowcock for their briefings. I want to focus on two
main issues: political and security developments, and
humanitarian developments.
With regard to the political and security
developments, Mr. Griffiths’ briefing earlier gave
indications of a positive atmosphere that could move
the Yemeni peace process forward, and of limited
progress in implementing the Stockholm Agreement,
even though 10 months have passed since its entry
into force. During most of that period there was a total
impasse. The Yemeni issue clearly drew the attention of
the international community throughout the month of
September, especially during the high-level week of the
seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly, where
there was a need to uphold the political solution as the
only framework for resolving the Yemeni crisis.

S/PV. 8642

The most important international interactions
took place during the ministerial meeting that Kuwait
chaired along with the United Kingdom and Sweden.
Its outcome was a declaration that contained many
aspects, including the affirmation that the Stockholm
Agreement is the cornerstone of the Yemeni peace
process and that the Al-Hudaydah Agreement is to be
implemented through the constructive participation
of the Yemeni parties, in accordance with United
Nations proposals concerning security arrangements
authorizing the redeployment of forces, and the
establishment of the tripartite monitoring mechanism;
the importance of implementing the agreement on the
exchange of hostages and prisoners; condemnation of
the attacks perpetrated by the Houthis against civilian
installations and civilians in the sisterly Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia; and the need to cease such attacks
without preconditions. It also urged the Yemeni parties
to participate in the dialogue facilitated by the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia for maintaining the territorial integrity
of Yemen, and supported the plan of the Special Envoy
to hold informal consultations with Yemeni parties in
preparation for resuming the negotiations.
Kuwait has expressed its readiness once again
to host those negotiations, in cooperation with the
United Nations, in order to reach a comprehensive
and definitive agreement on resolving the crisis based
on the three terms of reference: the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism,
the outcome of the National Dialogue Conference and
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, in
particular resolution 2216 (2015).
With regard to the humanitarian situation, we
welcome Mr. Lowcock’s reference to the resumption
of the activities of humanitarian agencies in several
Yemeni regions, due to an increase in the funding of
the 2019 humanitarian response plan. The pledges of
the State of Kuwait in support of the United Nations
activities since the beginning of the crisis in Yemen
amount to approximately $600 million, of which we
have disbursed $350 million to international agencies
and organizations and relief agencies. We will disburse
the balance before the end of this year. In this context,
we stress the need to not impede humanitarian aid and
to cooperate with the humanitarian agencies, foremost
of which is the World Food Programme.
We commend the positive role of the Yemeni
Government in continuing to pay the salaries of civil
servants and retirees, in addition to the ongoing efforts

19-321477/20

S/PV.8642

The situation in the Middle East

of its Economic Committee to ensure the delivery
of fuel into the country. We hope that its 11 October
initiative to expedite the delivery of oil products to
Al-Hudaydah port will be dealt with positively.
We would like also to express our deep regret for
the inability of United Nations experts to inspect and
evaluate FSO SAFER floating oil tanker in Ras Isa.
That could foreshadow a serious environmental disaster
in the Red Sea.
In conclusion, we emphasize our firm position
that there is no military solution to this crisis. We once
again call on the Yemeni parties to implement in full
the Stockholm Agreement and its three pillars, thereby
supporting the efforts of the Special Envoy to achieve
a political solution based on the three agreed terms of
reference in order to end the crisis and preserve the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Yemen, as well as non-interference in its internal affairs.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock for their briefings.
The United States remains committed to the people
of Yemen as they continue to endure one of the worst
humanitarian crises in the world. We are concerned by
recent reports of widespread and acute food insecurity
in the country. It is unacceptable that 17 million people,
more than the combined populations of three members
of the Security Council, are in need of immediate food
assistance. Of course, the situation would be much
worse without international assistance. Significant
portions of that assistance have come from the World
Food Programme (WFP), to which the United States
is the largest donor. We are thankful that WFP has
extended its beneficiary reach from roughly 7 million
to more than 12 million individuals per month in 2019.
Those efforts have saved millions of lives.
We also know that sustenance is not enough, which
is why the United States continues to support the health
and economic welfare of the Yemeni population. We
recently announced an award of more than $14 million
to strengthen health systems in Yemen, which will
reduce maternal, neonatal and child mortality over the
next three years. Additionally, we made a $25-million
contribution to support UNICEF’s emergency cash
transfer programme, helping millions access goods and
services in the local economy. Those contributions are
just two smaller pieces of the more than $2.2 billion
8/20

17/10/2019

in United States humanitarian assistance to Yemen
since 2015.
While we are proud to be one of the largest
humanitarian donors to Yemen, the needs are too vast
for any one country to meet. We are grateful to Saudi
Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Kuwait and others
that have recently dispersed critical funds towards
humanitarian programming in Yemen. The United
Nations must be able to conduct its work helping
suffering Yemenis. Those much-needed funds will
allow it to do so more effectively.
As Under-Secretary-General Lowcock said, the
only way to end the suffering in Yemen is to stop the
war. In that regard, it is critical that we not lose sight
of the goal of reaching a political solution in Yemen.
We continue to support the work of the United Nations
Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement and
we are committed to the full implementation of the
Al-Hudaydah Agreement, but that cannot come at the
expense of progress on a broader political solution. The
time has come to pursue both concurrently.
We understand that the Government of the Republic
of Yemen and the Southern Transitional Council
have made important progress towards reaching an
agreement, and we appreciate Saudi Arabia’s efforts
to facilitate that dialogue. We also welcome the
announcement made by the Houthis on 20 September
that they will suspend missile attacks against
Saudi Arabia. It is our hope that this will serve as a
stepping stone to United Nations-led efforts towards a
comprehensive political settlement.
We continue to call on all parties to exercise
restraint, respect Government institutions underpinning
economic stability, refrain from imposing bureaucratic
impediments to the humanitarian response and allow
humanitarian aid workers unhindered access to the
civilians affected by the unrest. We hope that those
concrete actions will lead to further de-escalation in
Yemen and that they will help Special Envoy Griffiths
and his team galvanize the political process. Too many
people have suffered from that conflict for far too long;
now is the time for concrete action.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and the UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mark
Lowcock, for their briefings.
19-32147

17/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East

The humanitarian situation in Yemen remains
catastrophic, and our collective response must rise to
that challenge. The civilian population continues to
pay the highest price of the clashes; September was the
deadliest month of the year. Respect for international
humanitarian law is non-negotiable; it is binding on all.
The protection of civilians, including humanitarian and
medical personnel, as well as civilian infrastructure,
must be an absolute priority.
Every effort must also be made to ensure
immediate, safe and unhindered humanitarian access.
The increasing restrictions imposed by the Houthis
on humanitarian actors prevent millions of people
from receiving humanitarian assistance. That is
unacceptable. It is further essential that contributions
to the humanitarian response plan be made without
delay. In that regard, we welcome the announcements
made by Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates at
the General Assembly’s ministerial week.
Only a political solution will make it possible to put
a lasting end to the suffering of the Yemeni population.
We therefore call on the parties to seek such a solution
with the assistance of the United Nations, as quickly
as possible and without preconditions. We must waste
no more time and work without delay to that end, even
as we regret that the Al-Hudaydah Agreement is not
fully implemented. In that regard, we reiterate our full
and complete support for the Special Envoy. Progress
towards a cessation of hostilities could contribute to
that objective.
We have taken note of the announcement made by
the Houthis on 20 September that they would cease
their strikes on Saudi territory. That announcement
is positive and has been followed by a relative decline
in gunfire exchanges. It must be followed by tangible
progress on the ground and in the long term. The
recent release of prisoners was encouraging. We note
the positive signals sent by Riyadh regarding the
Houthi proposal. We hope to see an expedited easing
of tensions.
The United Nations has an essential role to play in
supporting those efforts and in helping to restore trust
between the parties. Moreover, there is a great risk that
clashes in the south will create an additional front. We
also welcome the progress made possible by the Jeddah
talks, initiated by Saudi Arabia. An agreement appears
to be imminent, and we hope that it will be concluded
as soon as possible. The engagement of various factions

S/PV. 8642

of Yemeni society is crucial to resolving the conflict.
The fight against terrorism remains a priority issue in
southern Yemen.
France remains fully mobilized and committed
to the search for a political solution, the only possible
solution to that conflict. The French authorities will
continue to act to that end, including at the highest
level, in the context of the efforts led by the President of
the Republic, Mr. Emmanuel Macron, to ease tensions
in the region.
Ms. Morrison González (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and
Mr. Mark Lowcock for their briefings.
We listened carefully to the information concerning
the implementation of the Stockholm Agreement and the
detailed briefing on the humanitarian situation. We take
note of the progress presented by Mr. Griffiths on the
political front towards advancing the implementation
of the Stockholm Agreement, while we also commend
all the efforts being made by countries of the region to
achieve a sustainable political solution to the conflict
in Yemen.
We also welcome the work being done by the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
under the current leadership of Lieutenant General
Abhijit Guha and the resumption of the joint working
sessions of the Redeployment Coordination Committee.
We are encouraged by the agreements reached, in
particular with respect to the mutual redeployment
of forces and the activation of the tripartite ceasefire
and the de-escalation mechanism. We encourage
the talks on the opening of humanitarian corridors
to take place as soon as possible so as to alleviate
human suffering, particularly that of children and
women, thereby ensuring timely, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access.
We are encouraged that the ceasefire in
Al-Hudaydah is still in place and that its violations have
decreased. However, we are concerned that the work to
mark the landmines in Al-Hudaydah has not yet been
completed. We urge further work on that regard, as it is
a critical step in ensuring effective humanitarian action
and openness to economic activities, especially in the
port of Al-Hudaydah.
We are concerned about the rapid rise in fuel prices
in Sana’a and other northern areas, which is affecting
the functioning of hospitals and clinics and the operation

19-321479/20

S/PV.8642

The situation in the Middle East

of key water and sanitation infrastructure. That is
particularly critical given that cases of cholera continue
to be reported, as Mr. Mark Lowcock mentioned this
morning. We note how the rise in fuel prices also
affect the cost of food for people by leading to greater
food insecurity.
The ongoing conflict has led to a severe economic
downturn and the collapse of essential services, which
has greatly affected the population and exacerbated
existing vulnerabilities. The expansion of the
conflict has also led to the large-scale displacement
of millions of people and high rates of malnutrition,
disproportionately affecting women and children. In
addition to the conflict, underdevelopment and poverty
have deprived millions of Yemeni children of their right
to education and of their hope for a better future. The
educational authorities must work together to find an
urgent solution to the issue of the payment of salaries to
all teachers and educational personnel, so that children
can return to school.
In view of the continued crisis affecting the people
of Yemen, the promised financial resources necessary
to meet the urgent needs there must be made available
speedily, predictably and with flexibility. In that regard,
we want to acknowledge the significant contribution
made by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the United
Arab Emirates and Kuwait to the Yemen humanitarian
response plan this year, which will no doubt help to
save millions of lives affected by this conflict.
Lastly, the Council remains united in the face
of the situation afflicting the Yemeni people. It is
only through political will that we will be able to
put an end to this scourge, and that is the hope of the
international community.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Mark Lowcock and Martin
Griffiths for their detailed briefings on the military,
political and humanitarian situation in the Republic
of Yemen.
As we heard today, the situation in the country,
especially on the humanitarian front, remains dire.
In spite of the fact that the cessation of hostilities in
Al-Hudaydah has continued, the outbreak of military
action in southern Yemen in September has jeopardized
the efforts to promote a peaceful settlement. In that
context, we welcome the initiatives, including the
launch of a dialogue in Jeddah, aimed at achieving a
compromise between the parties. We also welcome the
10/20

17/10/2019

announcements by various parties about their intention
to cease armed attacks and refrain from the use of force
in resolving problems both in and around Yemen. We
hope that this positive trend will be consolidated in the
interests of de-escalation.
We are encouraged by the fact that momentum
for a peace agreement appears to be gathering, as
reflected in the fact that the initiatives put forward
by Ansar Allah have been positively received by the
Government of Yemen and Saudi Arabia’s leaders, as
Mr. Griffiths and a number of speakers in this Chamber
today have discussed. We support Mr. Griffiths’
mediation efforts aimed at convincing the parties of
the futility of a military solution and of the importance
of achieving a universal ceasefire and formulating
confidence-building measures. In that regard, we
welcomed the meeting held on 8 and 9 September in
the framework of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee and hope that the agreements reached
at the meeting will enable the implementation of the
Stockholm Agreement to move forward.
The redeployment of military forces from the
ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa will not only
contribute to de-escalation throughout the country but
will also make it possible to eliminate obstacles to other
aspects of the Stockholm Agreement, including the
exchange of prisoners and de-escalation in Taiz, as well
as to move onto discussion of the framework for and
parameters of a peace settlement.
The humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate
and is increasingly resembling a full-blown disaster.
We talk about at every meeting on Yemen. Providing
humanitarian assistance to Yemen must be one of
our top priorities, but the best guarantee of success
in tackling the humanitarian problems is achieving
a peace settlement that will enable us to provide that
assistance unhindered and make it possible to start to
rebuild Yemen’s war-ravaged economy.
We believe firmly that the resolution of the Yemen
conflict could create a future window of opportunity
for tackling other acute problems in the region as
well. In this context, the well-known Russian concept
of collective security in the Persian Gulf is becoming
ever more relevant, aimed as it is at resolving conflict
situations and developing confidence-building and
control measures. It is also in line with resolution
598 (1987), which we have continually reminded the
Council of and which instructed the Secretary-General,
19-32147

17/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East

in cooperation with the States of the region, to develop
a security and confidence-building architecture in
the region.
Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock for their
important briefings, which shed light on a situation
that calls for the urgent attention of the Council. We
believe that the information they provide us, together
with that from representatives of civil society and
bodies of the United Nations system, makes it possible
for us to achieve a more in-depth, balanced and
objective understanding of the specifics underlying
any conflict, and this should therefore be promoted at
Council meetings.
Peru is monitoring with concern the developments
in Yemen. The facts show that violence persists in
various areas of the country, taking a high toll in human
lives. It is clear that the implementation of the important
agreements reached in Sweden is an extremely complex
undertaking, as the marked lack of confidence between
the parties represents a major obstacle in that respect.
The violations of the ceasefire and delays in the process
can largely be attributed to that factor.
However, Mr. Griffiths has reported some positive
signs. If we act quickly and resolutely, these could lead
to tangible progress towards achieving sustainable
peace in Yemen. Here we refer specifically to the
unilateral release by Ansar Allah of detainees and its
offer to stop its attacks on Saudi territory. We expect
a similar willingness by all parties, in keeping with
the expectations of the international community. We
urge them not to miss this window of opportunity,
which is based on the guarantee that the Council
will see to it that there is strict compliance with the
commitments undertaken.
We also expect that these necessary understandings,
if they are reached, will translate into a new round of
consultations, which will make it possible to progress
towards an inclusive political solution promoted by the
United Nations. We believe that, in parallel, efforts
should be made speedily so as to reduce tensions in
the south of the country. In that regard, we welcome
the good offices of Saudi Arabia and hope that they
will lead to an early agreement that will consolidate
Yemeni institutions and safeguard the country’s
territorial integrity.
All of these efforts at the political level are more
than ever necessary given that, as Mr. Lowcock

S/PV. 8642

has recalled, the humanitarian crisis seems to be
intensifying on the ground. There is an imminent threat
of widespread famine, and it has been reported that the
number of cases of cholera has increased this year.
We believe that the Council must fulfil its
responsibilities and ensure strict compliance with
the presidential statement adopted in August
(S/PRST/2019/9). This includes, inter alia, facilitating
the safe and unhindered delivery of humanitarian
assistance as well as the unrestricted flow of commercial
goods, especially food, medicine and fuel, as speakers
have emphasized this morning.
I wish to conclude by reaffirming Peru’s
commitment to achieving a sustainable peace in Yemen
that would put an end to the humanitarian disaster,
promote regional stability and ensure accountability for
the crimes committed.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation would like to thank Special Envoy
Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for
their briefings. China supports Special Envoy Griffiths
in his efforts to continue to promote the political
process in Yemen and commends the United Nations
and the relevant agencies on their unremitting efforts
to improve the humanitarian situation in that country.
The conflict in Yemen has been raging for several
years, bringing profound suffering to its people. The
frequent clashes in the Middle East have added complex
dimensions to the quest for a political settlement of
the issue of Yemen and to the situation in the region.
China believes that at the next stage, attention should
be focused on the following issues.
First, it is necessary to strengthen dialogue, enhance
mutual trust and create the conditions necessary
to resolve differences. The situation in Yemen has
undergone complex changes recently, and attacks
targeting civilians and civilian installations during the
conflict in southern Yemen, among other things, pose
obstacles to the peace process on the ground. China
calls on all the parties to exercise restraint and to
refrain from any action that could lead to an escalation
of the situation.
Through the mediation of Saudi Arabia, the Yemeni
Government and the southern groups are engaged in a
constructive dialogue, and we hope to see a positive
outcome as soon as possible. China expects the
countries of the region to continue working to create

19-3214711/20

S/PV.8642

The situation in the Middle East

conditions conducive to enabling the parties in Yemen
to ease tensions. We call on all parties to be guided
first and foremost by the interests of the country and
its people, to resolve differences through peace talks
and other political means and work to jointly safeguard
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Yemen.
Secondly, it is essential that the parties work
diligently and in good faith to fulfil existing
commitments and fully implement the agreements
already reached. The Stockholm Agreement, an
important achievement arrived at through the good
offices of the United Nations, has contributed to the
overall ceasefire situation in the Al-Hudaydah area.
On 14 October, in accordance with resolution 2481
(2019), the Secretary-General submitted a review of the
performance of the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hodeidah Agreement, in which he concludes
that the efforts of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee have made an effective contribution to the
reduction of violence, an acknowledgement that we
appreciate. The Mission has been assisting the United
Nations humanitarian agencies and cooperating with
the United Nations Development Programme on issues
such as port revenue management and mine action. We
appreciates its work and that of the Committee. We hope
that the Yemeni parties will continue consultations on
issues such as prisoner exchanges and the statement of
understanding on Taiz, using the good offices of the
United Nations, and make progress as soon as possible.
Thirdly, we must continue to advance a
comprehensive political settlement of the issue of
Yemen. The parties should seek a comprehensive
political settlement based on the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 2216 (2015),
the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative and its
Implementation Mechanism and the outcomes of the
Yemeni National Dialogue Conference. The United
Nations should continue to play its role as the chief
channel of good offices. The Security Council should
stay united and provide strong political support. China
supports Special Envoy Griffiths in preparing for a
resumption of comprehensive political negotiations. We
hope that he will maintain close communications with
all the parties, enhance their mutual understanding
and urge all to implement the commitments they have
already made in order to lay a solid foundation for the
next stage of political negotiations.
12/20

17/10/2019

Fourthly, we must continue to give more attention
and support to the humanitarian issue in Yemen. The
humanitarian situation in the country continues to
worsen, with the Yemeni people bearing the brunt of
the suffering due to famine, cholera, oil shortages and
soaring prices. China encourages the countries of the
region to continue helping to ease the humanitarian
situation in Yemen. We hope donor countries will
strengthen their coordination with the United Nations,
honour their pledging commitments and ensure that
humanitarian supplies reach all the people and regions
in need of them. China has provided a large amount of
support to Yemen in the areas of economy, education,
health care and food through bilateral and multilateral
channels and will continue to do so to the best of
its ability.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to thank Special
Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock for their briefings.
With regard to Al-Hudaydah, we welcome the
smooth operation of the de-escalation mechanism and
the joint operations centre. We once again call on all
the parties to implement the withdrawal agreement,
fully respect the ceasefire and resolve outstanding
points of disagreement. We welcome the release of
prisoners by the Houthis and urge all the parties to take
additional steps to implement the prisoner-exchange
agreement and the statement of understanding on Taiz.
The implementation of the Stockholm Agreement in its
entirety is paramount.
At the same time, Belgium continues to encourage
the Special Envoy to continue preparing for the next
steps in the political process. The process must be
inclusive, with the meaningful participation of women
and young people, and it should reflect the ethnic,
geographic and political diversity of the people of
Yemen. As the presidential statement of 29 August
(S/PRST/2019/9) underscored, a political agreement
negotiated following an inclusive dialogue is the
only way forward to resolve disputes and address the
legitimate concerns of all Yemenis, including those in
the south of the country. In that context, we welcome
the talks organized by Saudi Arabia in Jeddah to try
to find a solution to the situation there and call on all
parties to engage constructively in those talks.
However, it will be crucial to expand efforts to
improve the humanitarian situation, which remains
19-32147

17/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East

disastrous, as we have heard. We commend the
humanitarian agencies for their outstanding work
despite the difficult circumstances. It is essential
that all parties facilitate access to humanitarian aid
and respect international humanitarian law. We are
particularly concerned about the fuel shortages’ impact
on the situation, including the risk of rising food
prices and the repercussions for the operation of pump
systems, hospitals and clinics. We urge the parties to
the conflict to work with the Special Envoy to address
these economic challenges in a constructive manner.
We note with interest the announcement made by
Mr. Lowcock that several ships transporting fuel are
currently en route to Yemen.
We would like to draw the Council’s attention to
the excellent report on human rights violations by the
Group of Eminent International and Regional Experts
on Yemen (A/HRC/42/17), and we welcome the Human
Rights Council’s renewal of its mandate in September.
We call on all parties to respect their obligations and
commitments under international humanitarian law
and international human rights law.
The violence throughout the rest of the country
continues, as we heard again this morning, and is
exacerbating the lack of trust between the parties. In
addition, it is affecting access to humanitarian aid.
We therefore call on all the parties to cease hostilities
throughout the country. Belgium remains very
concerned about the large number of children who are
victims of air strikes and the fighting on the ground,
and demands that all parties take immediate measures
to protect children. Lastly, Belgium shares UnderSecretary-General Mark Lowcock’s disappointment
with the obstacles encountered by the United Nations
team of experts sent to assess the FSO SAFER tanker’s
situation, which forced them to abandon the mission.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes this meeting on the situation in
Yemen and commends Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, and Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their
detailed briefings.
Côte d’Ivoire notes with deep concern the extent
of the continuing deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in Yemen, which raises fears of widespread
famine. According to United Nations specialized
agencies, 80 per cent of the population, that is, 24 million

S/PV. 8642

people, are in need of humanitarian assistance and
protection. On top of that, approximately 17.8 million
of them lack drinking water and 19.7 million have no
access to adequate health care. This bleak picture is
further magnified by the 2 million Yemeni children who
are not being educated due to the closure or destruction
of their schools. Worse, 2,500 of them have been
forcibly recruited to participate in factional fighting.
My country also continues to be concerned about
the equally disastrous economic situation. In its report
Assessing the Impact of War in Yemen, published on
9 October, the United Nations Development Programme
underlines the continuing rise in the poverty rate,
which increased from 47 per cent in 2014 to 75 per cent
in 2019. The report also notes that a protracted conflict
would make Yemen the poorest country in the world in
a few years, with 79 per cent of the population living
below the poverty line, including 65 per cent living in
extreme poverty.
Given the aforementioned, my delegation reiterates
its urgent call for the support of the international
community, including bilateral and multilateral
partners, to rapidly reverse that vicious cycle and
for all parties to the conflict to respect international
humanitarian law, including the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War of 12 August 1949.
With regard to the political process, Côte d’Ivoire
believes that only an inclusive dialogue, with the
support of regional and international actors, will make
it possible to find a peaceful and lasting solution to the
Yemeni crisis. We therefore once again welcome the
adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2019/9, of
29 August, which supports the actions of Mr. Griffiths
towards resuming comprehensive negotiations. We
also urge the various actors to continue the steps taken
during September with a view to relaunching the
political process.
My country also welcomes the joint initiative of
Kuwait, Sweden, Germany and the United Kingdom,
which led to a meeting on 26 September between the
Yemeni parties, the permanent members of the Security
Council and the Special Envoy to discuss ways and
means of advancing the political process, taking into
account those in the south, in order to ensure the
success of the talks in Jeddah.
On the security front, my delegation strongly urges
the warring parties to fully implement the Stockholm

19-3214713/20

S/PV.8642

The situation in the Middle East

Agreement, signed in December 2018, including the
Agreement on the City of Hudaydah and the Ports of
Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa on the redeployment of
forces. It therefore urges the various parties to continue
the redeployment of forces from the ports, under the
aegis of the Redeployment Coordination Committee,
and to cooperate fully with the United Nations Mission
to support the Hodeidah Agreement in order to ensure
the unhindered and rapid deployment of its personnel
and equipment required for humanitarian assistance.
In addition, my delegation would like to reiterate
its call to all stakeholders to take further action so that
the warring factions expedite the process relating to the
exchange of 15,000 prisoners and the implementation of
the memorandum of understanding on the city of Taiz,
which would facilitate the opening of humanitarian
corridors. Those two initiatives are undeniably
important components of the peace process needed
to build trust between the parties. In that regard, we
welcome the declaration of a ceasefire by the Houthis
on 21 September, as well as the release of 290 prisoners
on 30 September, affirmed by the International
Committee of the Red Cross.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reaffirms its
conviction that, despite its complexity and gravity, the
Yemeni crisis can be sustainably resolved through bold
compromises between the parties to the conflict within
a constructive and inclusive dialogue, in particular
with the participation of those in the south, women and
civil society.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): Let me thank UnderSecretary-General Mark Lowcock and Special Envoy
Martin Griffiths for their briefings. Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock painted a very bleak picture of the
situation in Yemen, with an appalling number of civilian
casualties in September and continuing restrictions on
humanitarian access. However, as Mr. Griffiths pointed
out, there are signs of hope. We hope that such signs
of hope will sooner or later make a difference on the
ground for the Yemeni population, which is suffering
so much.
Despite the united position of the Council that the
conflict in Yemen cannot be resolved militarily, as a
number of colleagues have already said, the violence
continues unabated throughout numerous Yemeni
governorates. Poland is deeply concerned about the
unrelenting impact of such violence on the civilian
population, which continues to bear the brunt of the
14/20

17/10/2019

ongoing hostilities. We are appalled by the continued
violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law by the parties to the
conflict, including through bombardments in densely
populated areas, attacks on civilian infrastructure, the
denial and diversion of humanitarian aid, arbitrary
detentions and the use of torture. We are particularly
concerned about the recruitment and use of children as
soldiers and the widespread gender-based violence.
We urge all the parties involved in the conflict
in Yemen to prioritize the protection of civilians,
immediately cease violence and introduce a nation-wide
ceasefire in order to prevent further displacement,
casualties and damage to civilian infrastructure.
As humanitarian aid remains critically important
to millions of Yemenis, all restrictions on the flow
of humanitarian and commercial imports, including
shipments of fuel, must be urgently lifted. Guaranteeing
free, safe and unimpeded access for humanitarian
assistance and personnel to all parts of the country is
not a matter of choice but an obligation that the parties
must meet and respect at all times.
We take note of the positive developments that
have taken place since the Council’s last meeting on
Yemen (see S/PV.8619), including the unilateral release
of detainees by Ansar Allah. We hope that the parties
will build on that development to achieve meaningful
progress on the implementation of a prisoner exchange
agreement. We are also encouraged by the disbursement
of the financial pledge made by Saudi Arabia, which
will enable the United Nations agencies to continue
providing critical humanitarian assistance in Yemen.
Nonetheless, much still remains to be done to
set Yemen on the path to peace and stability. One
means to achieve that is to guarantee the successful
implementation of the Agreement on the City of
Hudaydah and the Ports of Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras
Isa and the remaining provisions of the Stockholm
Agreement, which can contribute to building trust
between the parties. However, the only way to restore
long-standing peace and stability in Yemen is to
urgently resume an inclusive, United Nations-led and
Yemeni-owned political process, which should be
conducted in parallel with other political and security
initiatives. We urge the parties to reject preconditions
and to engage constructively with the Special Envoy in
order to create conditions conducive to the resumption
of formal consultations.
19-32147

17/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, for their insightful briefings.
Having carefully followed the briefing by
the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy, with a
comprehensive overview of the conflict, allow me to
express our deep concern at not seeing the progress
envisaged under the Stockholm Agreement, signed
between the Government of Yemen and the Houthi
movement last December. I would also like to express
our concern over all the apparent complexities of the
trajectory of the conflict in recent months.
Despite that situation, on the one hand, the
delegation of Equatorial Guinea acknowledges the
ongoing joint efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, the United Nations Mission to
support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA), the
Redeployment Coordination Committee and all United
Nations partners currently in Yemen. On the other
hand, we also recognize the level of cooperation of the
Yemeni parties to the Stockholm Agreement, which has
enabled the progress to this stage.
We welcome the successful results achieved by the
Redeployment Coordination Committee at the July and
September meetings, including the final agreement on
the technical modalities for a redeployment of forces
from the city of Hodeidah and the ports of Hodeidah,
Saleef and Ras Isa in two redeployment phases, as well
as the implementation of the tripartite ceasefire and
de‑escalation mechanism, comprising liaison officers
from both sides and UNMHA.
We echo the Special Envoy’s praise for the parties’
openness to new measures, including periodic meetings
in areas along the front line of the city of Al-Hudaydah
and the opening of key humanitarian corridors. But
we also agree that it is important for this openness to
translate into concrete actions on the ground, as this
would improve access to the greatly needed humanitarian
and commercial imports for Yemeni population.
On 26 August, Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates issued a joint statement in which they
expressed their willingness to promote the ceasefire
agreement and facilitate constructive dialogue among
the Yemeni parties. As they are two countries from
the region, we hope that the initiative will contribute

S/PV. 8642

to the efforts of the United Nations by facilitating an
environment conducive to reconciling all parties to
the conflict.
The suffering of the Yemeni population to this
day is intolerable. A recent report by a group of
United Nations human rights experts (A/HRC/42/17)
denounces a number of possible war crimes, including
indiscriminate bombing, arbitrary killing and detention,
torture, the use of landmines, and sexual and genderbased violence. In this regard, my delegation calls on all
parties to take all necessary measures to ensure respect
for international humanitarian law and human rights.
I cannot conclude without calling on the Yemeni
Government, the Houthi movement, armed groups in
the south and all stakeholders in Yemen to seek to free
children, women and the population in general from
this five-year-long terror. Accordingly, we hope that
Security Council members will continue to support
the Special Envoy’s mediation efforts and that the
international community, and the States with an interest
and influence in Yemen, will put the necessary pressure
on all the parties to the conflict to find a sustainable
political solution.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, let me thank
our briefers, Martin Griffiths and Mark Lowcock, for
their comprehensive briefings.
We very much welcome the encouraging signs of
hope for the political process referred to by Martin
Griffiths, while we recognize that these signs are
still extremely fragile. We welcome the fact that
concrete steps have been taken in the last days and
weeks that have led to a positive change. We welcome
the announcement by the Houthis to suspend missile
attacks on Saudi Arabia, which has been followed by
a reduction in the number of attacks and by the release
of several hundred prisoners. These are steps in the
right direction, and we hope that they will contribute
to building confidence among the parties and open the
door for re-engagement in the political process.
We would also like to commend the ongoing talks
in Jeddah facilitated by Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates. We welcome the significant progress
achieved so far and hope for the swift and successful
conclusion of the talks. This dialogue is an important
contribution to the political process and underlines
the importance of an inclusive approach to a broader
political framework agreement. The preservation
of the territorial integrity of Yemen should be an

19-3214715/20

S/PV.8642

The situation in the Middle East

underlying principle of the talks. In addition, we
support the Special Envoy’s continued efforts to build
confidence among the parties, in particular with regard
to the port of Al-Hudaydah, the use of revenues and the
Sana’a airport.
With regard to the broader consultations, the
process must be inclusive, as many speakers have
mentioned before me, and involve women, youth, civil
society and different regional groups. The failure to
fully implement the Stockholm Agreement — a failure
that we deplore — must not prevent the parties from
participating in the Special Envoy’s process towards a
broader political settlement to finally end the conflict
without any further delay. We call on all actors to
engage constructively with the proposals presented by
the Special Envoy. Let me also mention that Germany
remains committed to playing its part in supporting
the political process wherever we can, for example, by
facilitating meetings at different levels.
Turning to the humanitarian and human rights
situation, which is obviously still extremely dire, I
would like to begin by referring to the report of the
Independent Group in Geneva, which shows that
basic human rights are constantly being violated by
all parties involved in the conflict. There is no excuse
for killing, torturing or abusing innocent people, and
all parties need to comply with their responsibilities
under human rights law. The perpetrators must be held
accountable for their crimes. In that context, we would
also find it useful to hear from the Group of Eminent
Experts directly.
As for the humanitarian situation, Mr. Lowcock’s
briefing was very clear, and we urge the parties to
the conflict to facilitate safe, rapid and unhindered
humanitarian
assistance
in
compliance
with
resolution 2451 (2018) and to fulfil their obligations
under international humanitarian law. Commenting
very briefly on the first three priorities outlined by
Mr. Lowcock, let me start by saying that, first and
foremost, we have to ensure the protection of civilians
and civilian infrastructure, for it is the most vulnerable,
in particular women and children, who feel the impact of
war the most. I do not want to go into further detail, but
the 30 active front lines Mr. Lowcock mentioned speak
for themselves. It is good that the situation in October
was slightly better than in previous months, but, of
course, the overall picture remains extremely grim.
16/20

17/10/2019

Secondly, on the issue of access, we are seeing an
increasingly restrictive environment, especially in the
north, to the extent that humanitarian actors are not able
to provide principled humanitarian assistance to people
in dire need. Over 5 million people cannot be reached
as a result of restrictions on access. For that reason,
we urge all parties to facilitate unhindered access
for humanitarian assistance and reduce bureaucratic
impediments. We call upon all parties to refrain from
interfering with humanitarian assistance in a way that
goes against the humanitarian principles of humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence.
Thirdly, on the funding of humanitarian operations,
we very much welcome the recent disbursements by the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates
and Kuwait of the funding pledged in Geneva. With
these generous contributions, further pipeline breaks
have been averted, and funding for the majority of
humanitarian programmes was secured at the very last
minute. In order to ensure reliable assistance, we call
upon all donors to provide funding that is as flexible
as possible, in a timely manner and without conditions.
Let me also touch upon on our concern that the
United Nations has still not been granted access to the
abandoned floating storage and offloading facility,
the FSO SAFER oil tanker, in Al-Hudaydah. We must
not allow a potential oil spill that would lead to an
unprecedented environmental disaster in the Red Sea
to happen, and we call on all actors, especially the
Houthis, to allow the United Nations assessment team
to access the tanker. On a more general note, Germany
calls on all parties involved in the conflict to ensure the
freedom of movement of all United Nations personnel
so that they can carry out their task.
Mr. Soemirat (Indonesia): Let me begin by
thanking Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock for their briefings. We commend their
efforts and attempts to ease the conflict and deliver
humanitarian assistance on the ground.
In responding to the briefings, Indonesia would
like to underscore three points. First, improving the
security situation and promoting de-escalation must be
the priority at this time. We welcome the positive signals
by all sides indicating their interest in de-escalation
and call upon them to transform these signals into
further positive, concrete actions. In that regard, we are
encouraged by the releasing of detainees, as stated by
Special Envoy Griffiths. It is our fervent hope that the
19-32147

17/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East

reduction of violence, particularly cross-border attacks,
will lead to the de-escalation of violence in other parts
of Yemen. In that regard, we are hopeful that we will be
able to reduce the number of casualties. Saving human
lives has always been Indonesia’s biggest interest, and
it remains so.
We also welcome the positive developments in
Aden, as they extend the reduction of violence to the
southern part of Yemen. In that regard, we commend the
ongoing good offices being conducted by the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia. We believe that such a de-escalation
would create space for the parties to enhance their
confidence and trust, which would be beneficial for the
prospects of resuming the second dialogue.
That brings me to my second point, which is that
the resumption of peace talks by the end of the year
should be made a priority. It is almost a year since the
first dialogue resulted in the Stockholm Agreement.
The Government of Yemen and the Houthis, as well as
other relevant parties, should resume dialogue with the
aim of committing to a wider ceasefire and to ending
the conflict. Inclusive intra-Yemeni dialogue with the
participation of all relevant stakeholders, including
representatives of civil society, non-governmental
organizations, women and youth, could chart the path
to a comprehensive political solution for the future
of Yemen. Key regional players should also support
the process.
Indonesia once again reiterates its support for the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen in
pursuing the resumption of the political process to end
the conflict in Yemen. We share the view expressed by
the briefers and some members of the Council who have
spoken before us that ending the conflict and improving
the country’s economic conditions are the only means
of stopping the humanitarian catastrophe in Yemen.
Thirdly, the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement should continue, in particular through the
full implementation of the Al-Hudaydah Agreement.
As has been repeated several times, Al-Hudaydah
is the centre of gravity of the crisis and progress in
Al-Hudaydah remains crucial to efforts to address the
conflict in Yemen. It is also the location of the corridor
for humanitarian assistance and, through its port, a
source of revenue for the Yemeni people. We call for
the implementation of both phases of the Agreement,
in accordance with the technical modalities of the
Agreement itself. We also welcome the activation of

S/PV. 8642

the tripartite ceasefire enhancement and de-escalation
mechanism in order to prevent incidents in Al-Hudaydah
governorate and as a direct channel of communication
among the parties, under the auspices of the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
(UNMHA). The works in progress in Al-Hudaydah
demonstrate the continued commitment of the parties to
the implementation of the Al-Hudaydah Agreement and
are a positive sign for extending the broader Agreement
beyond Al-Hudaydah.
Finally, we take note of the Secretary-General’s
positive assessment of UNMHA. Indonesia remains
committed to supporting the work of the United Nations
in Yemen, including by being part of UNMHA.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of South Africa.
We thank the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, and the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock,
for their briefings. South Africa wishes to express its
support for Special Envoy Griffiths and congratulates
him on the efforts he is undertaking to find a peaceful
solution to the situation in Yemen.
We also welcome Lieutenant General Abhijit Guha
and wish him well in his role as Head of the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
(UNMHA).
My delegation would like to address the following
two issues: the political situation in Yemen and the dire
humanitarian situation.
First, on the political situation in Yemen, we
continue to call on all parties involved in the conflict
in Yemen to de-escalate tensions and fully commit to
the implementation of the Stockholm Agreement. We
reiterate our support for a negotiated political settlement
that engages all parties in an inclusive Yemeni-led
dialogue in order to resolve differences and address the
legitimate concerns of all Yemenis, in accordance with
relevant Security Council resolutions. We also call on
the parties to engage in good faith with Special Envoy
Griffiths in order to resume an inclusive political
process with a view to reaching a comprehensive,
negotiated settlement to end the conflict, including
with the meaningful participation of women and youth,
in parallel with continued efforts to implement the
Stockholm Agreement.

19-3214717/20

S/PV.8642

The situation in the Middle East

South Africa urges those who have influence
over the protagonists in the Yemeni conflict to apply
maximum pressure so that the parties may sustain
ongoing peace processes, make necessary compromises,
release political prisoners, maintain the ceasefire and
relaunch meaningful and sustained all-party talks, as
contained in the Stockholm Agreement. Special Envoy
Griffiths has just briefed the Council, and we join others
in thanking the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for urging the
current promising Yemeni negotiations.
On the humanitarian situation, South Africa
remains extremely concerned about the dire crisis in
Yemen, which has caused immeasurable suffering for
millions of civilians. According to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the humanitarian
crisis in Yemen remains the worst in the world. Nearly
four years of conflict and severe economic decline
are driving the country to the brink of famine and
exacerbating needs in all sectors. An estimated 80 per
cent of the population — 24 million people — require
some form of humanitarian or protection assistance,
including 14.3 million who are in acute need. The
severity of their needs is deepening, with the number
of people in acute need a staggering 27 per cent higher
than last year. Two-thirds of all districts in the country
are already suffering pre-famine, and one-third face
the convergence of multiple acute vulnerabilities. An
estimated 85,000 Yemeni children under the age of five
may have died of starvation.
About 2 million Yemeni children have stopped
attending school since the start of the war and,
according to UNICEF, many schools are damaged, not
in use or have become shelters for displaced persons.
Furthermore, about 2,500 boys have joined the fighting,
and more than half of all Yemeni girls are now married
before they reach the age of 15. The armed conflict
in Yemen has killed and injured thousands of Yemeni
civilians since it began. According to the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, about 7,000 civilians have been killed and more
than 10,000 wounded. The actual number of civilian
casualties is likely to be much higher. Thousands more
have been displaced by the fighting and millions suffer
from shortages of food and medical care. In that regard,
we urge donors to disburse the pledges they made to
the United Nations humanitarian response plan as
a matter of urgency in order to help address the dire
humanitarian situation. South Africa thanks all those
donors who have generously disbursed their funds as
18/20

17/10/2019

pledged, including Saudi Arabia, the United States of
America, the United Kingdom, Kuwait and the United
Arab Emirates, and we are grateful for the many other
donations, such as that announced by China today.
We further call on the parties to the conflict to allow
for the free, regular and undisputed passage of food and
other humanitarian relief and not to take actions that
could deprive civilians of their rights to food and health
care. We also call on all parties to facilitate access to
the humanitarian relief that the people of Yemen so
desperately need. In that regard, we remind parties
to the conflict that all necessary measures should be
taken to respect the Geneva Conventions. We further
call on all parties to the conflict to abide by their
obligations under international law, including human
rights law. This unprecedented humanitarian crisis is a
strong indicator of the human toll of continued military
action and conflict in Yemen, which necessitates an
urgent commitment to a ceasefire and the pursuit of a
negotiated, peaceful and inclusive solution to the crisis.
In conclusion, we wish to reiterate that the only
sustainable solution to this conflict will be through
a negotiated, Yemeni-led political settlement that is
inclusive and fair and puts the interests of all citizens of
Yemen first. South Africa appreciates the initiatives of
all players that have brought about the current improved
security environment and increased the prospects for
peace in Yemen.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for this month, and to wish you and the delegation of
your friendly country every success. I would also like
to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock and Mr. Martin Griffiths
for their briefings.
The Yemeni Government has, by various ways and
means, tried to achieve sustainable peace and to put an
end to the suffering of the Yemeni people as a result of
the unjust war waged by the armed Houthi militias. We
have shown maximum flexibility in the implementation
of the Stockholm Agreement and accepted all proposals
offered by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Martin Griffiths, to reach an inclusive political
solution to the conflict in Yemen based on the three
19-32147

17/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East

agreed benchmarks: the Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, the
outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
resolution 2216 (2015).
However, the Houthi militias thrive on war and
instability, adopting the same approach as Iran, which
supports them and is the main driver of instability in
Yemen and the region.
The Yemeni Government emphasizes the
importance of the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement, which is a positive step towards
comprehensive and sustainable peace and ending the
suffering of our Yemeni people. The Government has
expressed its full commitment to the implementation
of the agreement and underscored the importance of
the issues of security and local authority, which are
key to making progress in the implementation of the
Al-Hudaydah Agreement.
At the same time, we appreciate the tireless efforts
of Lieutenant General Abhijit Guha, Head of the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
and Chair of the Redeployment Coordination Committee
(RCC), to establish ceasefire and calm in Al-Hudaydah
governorate and to deploy observers on the front lines
and checkpoints, in accordance with the agreement
reached at the sixth joint meeting of the RCC. The
Governmental panel has reported to him that it is ready
to deploy observers starting the week following that
meeting, given its importance in ensuring continued
de-escalation and preventing violations, as well as in
facilitating redeployment and humanitarian assistance.
The Yemeni Government reiterates that all political
consultations on the comprehensive dispute settlement
hinge on the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement. The Council and the international
community should work towards that end, as those
who failed to observe previous agreements will never
comply with them this time.
The Yemeni Government commends and highly
values the efforts made by our brothers in the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia to ensure the success of the Jeddah talks,
which should eventually restore the presence of the State
and all of its institutions to the temporary capital, Aden,
and to promote the unification of security and military
systems, ultimately preserving the security, stability,
unity and territorial integrity of Yemen and leading to
joint efforts to achieve the ultimate goal of putting an

S/PV. 8642

end to the coup of Houthi armed militias, countering
Iran’s influence in Yemen and the region and restoring
and bolstering the kidnapped State institutions.
Exploiting the Yemeni people as a means of
achieving political gains is unacceptable and totally
rejected. The Houthi militias continue to reject the
proposal to reopen the Sana’a airport for domestic
flights and to facilitate the travel of citizens who must
suffer and struggle through long hours of journeying
by land. The Yemeni Government, on the direction of
the President of the Republic of Yemen, His Excellency
Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi, during the Stockholm
consultations round and thereafter, has proposed an
initiative to reopen the Sana’a airport. The Government
has made concessions in order to mitigate the suffering
of Yemeni citizens by resuming domestic flights,
and taken all necessary measures to also address any
potential security threats, since international flights
cannot be resumed as long as the airport is controlled
by Houthi militias.
The Yemeni Government renews its commitment
to implementing the agreement on the exchange of
prisoners, detainees, abductees and those forcibly
disappeared in the prisons of the militias, in accordance
with the all-for-all principle agreed in Stockholm and
upon the instructions of the President of the Republic.
The Houthis have released a number of civilians, but
that is not sufficient. That is why we reiterate that the
release of prisoners and detainees pursuant to the allfor-all principle is a purely humanitarian issue that
should not be subject to considerations of political
advantage. In the same vein, we stress the importance
of lifting the unfair blockade imposed by the Houthi
militias on Taiz and of putting an end to the suffering
of its people.
The Yemeni Government continues to take
the necessary economic measures to support the
national currency and ensure economic stability,
as humanitarian relief alone cannot resolve the
humanitarian crisis, despite the great concern shown by
the international community regarding Decree 75, on
fuel imports. Today, after almost a year, we recognize
the effectiveness of that Decree, as it has relaunched
the financial cycle through the control of monitored
Yemeni and international banks. That has led to the
improvement and stabilization of the national currency
without creating any fuel shortages in local markets.

19-3214719/20

S/PV.8642

The situation in the Middle East

Similarly, Decree 49 is aimed at enhancing State
functions and responsibilities to increase revenues
and respond to the needs of the Yemeni citizens in all
governorates. Since it started to implement the Decree
on 8 August, the Government has increased revenues in
the liberated areas without any significant increase in
fuel prices or causing crises. In fact, private businesses
have expressed their readiness to comply with the
provisions of the Decree were it not for the pressure of
Houthi militias exerted against them. The Government
has expressed its readiness to transfer all types of fuel
to all areas, including those under the control of the
Houthi militias, as necessary and for lower prices than
those imposed by the militias. The United Nations
would be responsible for controlling the customs and
tax revenues due on those oil derivatives. Owners of
oil tankers will be obliged to deposit oil revenues at
the Al-Hudaydah branch of the Central Bank while
ensuring that they will not be withdrawn or used by the
militias. They will be used only to pay the salaries of
civil servants. Militias may not impose taxes on traders
or collect other fees, in order to ensure that they do not
affect market fuel prices. As Mr. Lowcock mentioned
earlier, the Yemeni Government has allowed 10 ships
access to Al-Hudaydah port in order to unload their oil
contents, in accordance with Decree 75.
Since November 2018 the Yemeni Government has
succeeded in paying 63 per cent of its civil servants,
nearly 82,000 of whom live in Houthi-controlled
areas, as well as more than 123,000 retirees who also
reside in those areas. The Government emphasizes that
customs and tax revenues on fuel will help to continue
funding those salaries, as well as those of civil servants
in other sectors. Despite the stability of the national
currency and its positive impact at the economic and
humanitarian levels, further measures must be taken
in cooperation with the international community to
increase the foreign currency reserves at the Central
Bank and fill the funding gap in order to pay salaries.
The Yemeni Government looks forward to cooperating
with our brothers, donor friends and development
partners to overcome our economic, humanitarian and
development challenges and begin the preparations for
reconstruction and the economic recovery phase, while
charting a brighter future for Yemen and Yemenis in
which peace prevails.
We would like to express our gratitude to the
brotherly and friendly countries and the international
donor organizations that have supported us in funding

20/20

17/10/2019

the 2019 humanitarian response plan for Yemen. We
particularly want to thank the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, the State of Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates,
the United States, Germany, the United Kingdom, the
European Union and China.
The Yemeni Government condemns the obstruction
of the work of the international organizations in
Yemen by the Houthi militias, who recently expelled
the representative of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, confiscated his
travel permit and ultimately forced him to leave Sana’a.
Such practices and actions demonstrate to the world the
role that these militias play in undermining the work
of such organizations. We also call on the international
community and the United Nations to condemn in the
strongest terms all such practices and violations, whose
sole aim is to hinder access to humanitarian aid and
intimidate humanitarian workers in areas that continue
to languish under the control of the terrorist militias.
We also call for taking strict measures to ensure the
inviolability, neutrality and safety of the personnel of
international organizations and agencies in Yemen.
In that regard, we would be remiss if we did not
bring up the situation concerning the FSO SAFER
oil tanker and the risk that we run should its current
technical status continue without an evaluation. We
reiterate our call to the international community and
the Security Council to continue to exert pressure on
the Houthi militias without delay in order to prevent
a potentially devastating environmental disaster that
according to United Nations reports would represent
four times the amount of oil released from the Exxon
Valdez tanker in 1989.
In conclusion, the Yemeni State will eventually
return, and every manifestation of the coup, the
insurgency and the chaos will disappear from every
square inch of our beloved land. The Yemeni people
will enjoy a safe, stable and cherished homeland in
a just federal State, representing their aspirations,
safeguarding their rights to partnership, development
and a decent life while glorifying the present and future
of Yemen, founded on the civilization of a proud and
dignified people and a great human history.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

19-32147
