United Nations

S/PV.4692

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-eighth year

4692

nd meeting
Monday, 27 January 2003, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De La Sablière . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (France)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Tafrov
Mr. Belinga-Eboutou
Mr. Valdés
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Mr. Pleuger
Mr. Traoré
Mr. Aguilar Zinser
Mr. Akram
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Arias
Mr. Wehbe
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Negroponte

Agenda
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

03-22461 (E)

*0322461*

S/PV.4692

The meeting was called to order at 10:40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Iraq, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Aldouri
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Hans Blix,
Executive Chairman of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Blix to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei, Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. ElBaradei to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan, at this meeting.

2

I now give the floor to Mr. Hans Blix, Executive
Chairman of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission.
Mr. Blix: Resolution 1441 (2002), adopted by the
Security Council on Iraq in November last year, asks
the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to
“update” the Council 60 days after the resumption of
inspections. This is today. The updating, it seems,
forms part of an assessment by the Council and its
members of the results, so far, of the inspections and of
their role as a means to achieve verifiable disarmament
in Iraq.
As this is an open meeting of the Council, it may
be appropriate briefly to provide some background for
a better understanding of where we stand today. With
the Council’s permission, I shall do so.
I begin by recalling that inspections as a part of a
disarmament process in Iraq started in 1991,
immediately after the Gulf War. They went on for eight
years, until 1998, when inspectors were withdrawn.
Thereafter, for nearly four years there were no
inspections. They were resumed only at the end of
November last year.
While the fundamental aim of inspections in Iraq
has always been to verify disarmament, the successive
resolutions adopted by the Council over the years have
varied somewhat in emphasis and approach. In 1991,
resolution 687 (1991), adopted unanimously as a part
of the ceasefire after the Gulf war, had five major
elements. The first three related to disarmament. They
called for declarations by Iraq of its programmes of
weapons of mass destruction and long-range missiles,
verification of the declarations through the United
Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the
IAEA, and supervision by these organizations of the
destruction or the elimination of proscribed items and
programmes. After the completion of the disarmament,
the Council would have the authority to proceed to a
lifting of the sanctions and the inspecting organizations
would move to long-term ongoing monitoring and
verification.
Resolution 687 (1991), like the subsequent
resolutions to which I shall refer, required cooperation
by Iraq, but this was often withheld or given
grudgingly. Unlike South Africa, which decided on its
own to eliminate its nuclear weapons and welcomed

S/PV.4692

inspection as a means of creating confidence in its
disarmament, Iraq appears not to have come to a
genuine acceptance — not even today — of the
disarmament that was demanded of it and that it needs
to carry out to win the confidence of the world and to
live in peace.
As we know, the twin operation “declare and
verify”, which was prescribed in resolution 687 (1991),
too often turned into a game of hide-and-seek. Rather
than just verifying declarations and supporting
evidence, the two inspecting organizations found
themselves engaged in efforts to map the weapons
programmes and to search for evidence through
inspections, interviews, seminars, inquiries with
suppliers and intelligence organizations. As a result,
the disarmament phase was not completed in the short
time expected. Sanctions remained and took a severe
toll until Iraq accepted the oil for food programme and
the gradual development of that programme mitigated
the effects of the sanctions.
The implementation of resolution 687 (1991)
nevertheless brought about considerable disarmament
results. It has been recognized that more weapons of
mass destruction were destroyed under this resolution
than were destroyed during the Gulf War: large
quantities of chemical weapons were destroyed under
UNSCOM supervision before 1994. While Iraq
claims — with little evidence — that it destroyed all
biological weapons unilaterally in 1991, it is certain
that UNSCOM destroyed large biological weapons
production facilities in 1996. The large nuclear
infrastructure was destroyed and the fissionable
material was removed from Iraq by the IAEA.
One of three important questions before us today
is how much might remain undeclared and intact from
before 1991 and, possibly, thereafter; the second
question is what, if anything, was illegally produced or
procured after 1998, when the inspectors left; and the
third question is how we can prevent any weapons of
mass destruction from being produced or procured in
the future.
In December 1999 — after one year without
inspections in Iraq — resolution 1284 (1999) was
adopted by the Council, with four abstentions.
Supplementing the basic resolutions of 1991 and of the
following years, it provided Iraq with a somewhat less
ambitious approach: in return for “cooperation in all
respects” for a specified period of time, including

progress in the resolution of “key remaining
disarmament tasks”, it opened the possibility, not for
the lifting, but for the suspension of sanctions.
For nearly three years, Iraq refused to accept any
inspections by UNMOVIC. It was only after appeals by
the Secretary-General and Arab States, and pressure by
the United States and other Member States, that Iraq
declared, on 16 September last year, that it would again
accept inspections without conditions.
Resolution 1441 (2002) was adopted on 8
November last year and emphatically reaffirmed the
demand on Iraq to cooperate. It required this
cooperation to be immediate, unconditional and active.
The resolution contained many provisions that we
welcome as enhancing and strengthening the inspection
regime. The unanimity by which it was adopted sent a
powerful signal that the Council was of one mind in
creating a last opportunity for peaceful disarmament in
Iraq through inspection.
UNMOVIC shares the sense of urgency felt by
the Council to use inspection as a path to attain, within
a reasonable time, verifiable disarmament of Iraq.
Under the resolutions I have cited, it would be
followed by monitoring for such time as the Council
feels would be required. The resolutions also point to a
zone free of weapons of mass destruction as the
ultimate goal.
As a subsidiary body of the Council, UNMOVIC
is fully aware of and appreciates the close attention that
the Council devotes to the inspections in Iraq. While
today’s “updating” is foreseen in resolution 1441
(2002), the Council can and does call for additional
briefings whenever it wishes. One was held on 19
January, and a further such briefing is tentatively set
for 14 February.
I turn now to the key requirement of cooperation
and Iraq’s response to it. Cooperation might be said to
relate to both substance and process. It would appear
from our experience so far that Iraq has decided in
principle to provide cooperation on process, notably
access. A similar decision is indispensable to provide
cooperation on substance in order to bring the
disarmament task to completion through the peaceful
process of inspection and to set the monitoring task on
a firm course. An initial minor step would be to adopt
the long-overdue legislation required by the
resolutions.

3

S/PV.4692

I shall deal first with cooperation on process. This
relates to the procedures, mechanisms, infrastructure
and practical arrangements to pursue inspections and
seek verifiable disarmament. While inspection is not
built on the premise of confidence but may lead to
confidence if it is successful, there must nevertheless
be a measure of mutual confidence from the very
beginning in running the operation of inspection.
Iraq has, on the whole, cooperated rather well so
far with UNMOVIC in this field. The most important
point to make is that access has been provided to all
sites we have wanted to inspect, and, with one
exception, it has been prompt. We have further had
great help in building up the infrastructure of our office
in Baghdad and the field office in Mosul.
Arrangements and services for our plane and our
helicopters have been good. The environment has been
workable. Our inspections have included universities,
military bases, presidential sites and private residences.
Inspections have also taken place on Fridays, the
Muslim day of rest; on Christmas Day; and on New
Year’s Day. These inspections have been conducted in
the same manner as all other inspections. We seek to be
both effective and correct.
In this updating, I am bound, however, to register
some problems, the first relating to two kinds of air
operations. While we now have the technical capability
to send a U-2 plane placed at our disposal for aerial
imagery and for surveillance during inspections and
have informed Iraq that we planned to do so, Iraq has
refused to guarantee its safety unless a number of
conditions are fulfilled. As these conditions went
beyond what is stipulated in resolution 1441 (2002)
and what was practiced by UNSCOM and Iraq in the
past, we note that so far Iraq is not complying with our
request. I hope this attitude will change.
Another air operation problem, which was solved
during our recent talks in Baghdad, concerned the use
of helicopters flying into the no-fly zones. Iraq had
insisted on sending helicopters of its own to
accompany ours. This would have raised a safety
problem. The matter was solved by an offer on our part
to take the accompanying Iraqi minders in our
helicopters to the sites, an arrangement that had been
practiced by UNSCOM in the past.
I am obliged to note some recent disturbing
incidents and harassment. For instance, for some time,
far-fetched allegations have been made publicly that

4

questions posed by inspectors were of an intelligence
character. While I might not defend every question that
inspectors might have asked, Iraq knows that they do
not serve intelligence purposes, and Iraq should not say
so.
On a number of occasions, demonstrations have
taken place in front of our offices and at inspection
sites. The other day, a sightseeing excursion by five
inspectors to a mosque was followed by an
unwarranted public outburst. The inspectors went
without United Nations insignia and were welcomed in
the kind manner that is characteristic of the normal
Iraqi attitude to foreigners. They took off their shoes
and were taken around. They asked perfectly innocent
questions and parted with the invitation to come again.
Shortly thereafter, we received protests from the Iraqi
authorities about an unannounced inspection and about
questions not relevant to weapons of mass destruction.
Indeed, they were not.
Demonstrations and outbursts of this kind are
unlikely to occur in Iraq without initiative or
encouragement from the authorities. We must ask
ourselves what the motives may be for these events.
They do not facilitate an already difficult job, in which
we try to be effective, professional and, at the same
time, correct. When our Iraqi counterparts have some
complaint, they can take it up in a calmer and less
unpleasant manner.
The substantive cooperation required relates
above all to the obligation of Iraq to declare all
programmes of weapons of mass destruction and either
to present items and activities for elimination or else to
provide evidence supporting the conclusion that
nothing proscribed remains.
Paragraph 9 of resolution 1441 (2002) states that
this cooperation shall be “active”. It is not enough to
open doors. Inspection is not a game of catch as catch
can. Rather, as I noted, it is a process of verification for
the purpose of creating confidence. It is not built upon
the premise of trust. Rather, it is designed to lead to
trust, if there is both openness to the inspectors and
action to present them with items to destroy, or credible
evidence about the absence of any such items.
On 7 December 2002, Iraq submitted a
declaration of some 12,000 pages in response to
paragraph 3 of resolution 1441 (2002), and within the
time stipulated by the Security Council. In the fields of
missiles and biotechnology, the declaration contains a

S/PV.4692

good deal of new material and information covering the
period from 1998 and onward. This is welcome.
One might have expected that in preparing the
declaration, Iraq would have tried to respond to, clarify
and submit supporting evidence regarding the many
open disarmament issues, with which the Iraqi side
should be familiar from the UNSCOM document
S/1999/94 and the so-called Amorim report of March
1999 (S/1999/356). These are questions that
UNMOVIC,
Governments
and
independent
commentators have often cited.
While UNMOVIC has been preparing its own list
of current unresolved disarmament issues and key
remaining disarmament tasks in response to
requirements in resolution 1284 (1999), we find the
issues listed as unresolved in the two reports that I
mentioned professionally justified. These reports do
not contend that weapons of mass destruction remain in
Iraq, nor do they exclude that possibility. They point to
a lack of evidence and to inconsistencies, which raise
question marks and which must be straightened out if
weapons dossiers are to be closed and confidence is to
arise.
Those issues deserve to be taken seriously by
Iraq, rather than being brushed aside as evil
machinations of UNSCOM. Regrettably, the 12,000
page declaration, most of which is a reprint of earlier
documents, does not seem to contain any new evidence
that would eliminate the questions or reduce their
number. Even Iraq’s letter sent, in response to our
recent discussions in Baghdad, to the President of the
Security Council on 24 January does not lead us to the
resolution of those issues.
I shall only give some examples of issues and
questions that need to be answered, and I turn first to
the sector of chemical weapons.
The nerve agent VX is one of the most toxic ever
developed. Iraq has declared that it only produced VX
on a pilot scale, just a few tonnes, and that the quality
was poor and the product unstable. Consequently, it
was said that the agent was never weaponized. Iraq
said that the small quantity of agent remaining after the
Gulf War was unilaterally destroyed in the summer of
1991.
UNMOVIC, however, has information that
conflicts with this account. There are indications that
Iraq had worked on the problem of purity and

stabilization and that more had been achieved than has
been declared. Indeed, one of the documents provided
by Iraq even indicates that the purity of the agent, at
least in laboratory production, was higher than
declared. There are also indications that the agent was
weaponized.
In addition, there are questions to be answered
concerning the fate of the VX precursor chemicals,
which Iraq states were lost during bombing in the Gulf
War or were unilaterally destroyed by Iraq.
I would now like to turn to the so-called Air
Force document that I have discussed with the Council
before. This document was originally found by an
UNSCOM inspector in a safe in Iraqi Air Force
headquarters in 1998 and taken from her by Iraqi
minders. It gives an account of the expenditure of
bombs, including chemical bombs, by Iraq in the IraqIran war. I am encouraged by the fact that Iraq has now
provided this document to UNMOVIC.
The document indicates that 13,000 chemical
bombs were dropped by the Iraqi Air Force between
1983 and 1988, while Iraq has declared that 19,500
bombs were consumed during this period. Thus, there
is a discrepancy of 6,500 bombs. The amount of
chemical agent in these bombs would be in the order of
about 1,000 tonnes. In the absence of evidence to the
contrary, we must assume that these quantities are now
unaccounted for.
The discovery of a number of 122 millimetre
chemical rocket warheads in a bunker at a storage
depot 170 kilometre southwest of Baghdad was much
publicized. This was a relatively new bunker, and
therefore the rockets must have been moved there in
the past few years, at a time when Iraq should not have
had such munitions.
The investigation of these rockets is still
proceeding. Iraq states that they were overlooked from
1991 from a batch of some 2,000 that were stored there
during the Gulf War. That could be the case. They
could also be the tip of a submerged iceberg. The
discovery of a few rockets does not resolve, but rather
points to, the issue of several thousands of chemical
rockets that are unaccounted for.
The finding of the rockets shows that Iraq needs
to make more effort to ensure that its declaration is
currently accurate. During my recent discussions in
Baghdad, Iraq declared that it would make new efforts

5

S/PV.4692

in this regard and had set up a committee of
investigation. Since then it has reported that it has
found four more chemical rockets at a storage depot in
Al-Taji.
I might further mention that inspectors have
found at another site a laboratory quantity of
thiodiglycol, a mustard gas precursor.
While I am addressing chemical issues, I should
mention a matter, which I reported on 19 December
2002, concerning equipment at a civilian chemical
plant at Al Fallujah. Iraq has declared that it had
repaired chemical processing equipment previously
destroyed under UNSCOM supervision and had
installed it at Fallujah for the production of chlorine
and phenols. We have inspected this equipment and are
conducting a detailed technical evaluation of it. On
completion, we will decide whether this and other
equipment that has been recovered by Iraq should be
destroyed.
I turn to biological weapons. I mentioned the
issue of anthrax to the Council on previous occasions
and I come back to it, as it is an important one. Iraq has
declared that it produced about 8,500 litres of this
biological warfare agent, which it states it unilaterally
destroyed in the summer of 1991. Iraq has provided
little evidence of that production and no convincing
evidence of its destruction.
There are strong indications that Iraq produced
more anthrax than it declared and that at least some of
this was retained after the declared destruction date. It
might still exist. Either it should be found and be
destroyed under UNMOVIC’s supervision, or
convincing evidence should be produced to show that it
was indeed destroyed in 1991.
As I reported to the Council on 19 December last
year, Iraq did not declare a significant quantity, some
650 kilograms, of bacterial growth media, which was
acknowledged, as reported in Iraq’s submission to the
Amorim panel in February 1999. As part of its 7
December 2002 declaration, Iraq resubmitted the
Amorim panel document, but the table showing this
particular import of media was not included. The
absence of this table would appear to be deliberate, as
the pages of the resubmitted document were
renumbered.
In the letter of 24 January of this year to the
President of the Security Council, Iraq’s Foreign

6

Minister stated that “all imported quantities of growth
media were declared”. This is not evidence. I note that
the quantity of media involved would suffice to
produce, for example, about 5,000 litres of
concentrated anthrax.
I turn now to the missile sector. There remain
significant questions as to whether Iraq retained
SCUD-type missiles after the Gulf War. Iraq declared
the consumption of a number of SCUD missiles as
targets in the development of an anti-ballistic missile
defence system during the 1980s. Yet no technical
information has been produced about that programme
or data on the consumption of the missiles.
There has been a range of developments in the
missile field during the past four years, presented by
Iraq in the declaration, as non-proscribed activities. We
are trying to gather a clear understanding of them
through inspections and on-site discussions.
Two projects in particular stand out. They are the
development of a liquid-fuelled missile, named
Al Samoud 2, and a solid propellant missile, called
Al Fatah. Both missiles have been tested to a range in
excess of the permitted range of 150 kilometres, with
the Al Samoud 2 being tested to a maximum of 183
kilometres and the Al Fatah to 161 kilometres. Some of
both types of missiles have already been provided to
the Iraqi Armed Forces, even though it is stated that
they are still undergoing development.
The Al Samoud’s diameter was increased from an
earlier version to the present 760 millimetres. This
modification was made despite a 1994 letter from the
Executive Chairman of UNSCOM directing Iraq to
limit its missile diameters to less than 600 millimetres.
Furthermore, a November 1997 letter from the
Executive Chairman of UNSCOM to Iraq prohibited
the use of engines from certain surface-to-air missiles
for use in ballistic missiles.
During my recent meeting in Baghdad, we were
briefed on these two programmes. We were told that
the final range for both systems would be less than the
permitted maximum of 150 kilometres.
These missiles might very well represent prima
facie cases of proscribed systems. The test ranges in
excess of 150 kilometres are significant, but some
further technical considerations need to be made before
we reach a conclusion on this issue. In the meantime,

S/PV.4692

we have asked Iraq to cease flight tests of both
missiles.
In addition, Iraq has refurbished its missile
production
infrastructure.
In
particular,
Iraq
reconstituted a number of casting chambers, which had
previously
been
destroyed
under
UNSCOM
supervision. They had been used in the production of
solid-fuel missiles. Whatever missile system these
chambers are intended for, they could produce motors
for missiles capable of ranges significantly greater than
150 kilometres.
Also associated with these missiles and related
developments is the import, which has been taking
place during the last few years, of a number of items,
despite the sanctions, including as late as December
2002. Foremost among these is the import of 300
rocket engines that may be used for the Al Samoud 2.
Iraq has also declared the recent import of
chemicals used in propellants, test instrumentation and
guidance and control systems. These items may well be
for proscribed purposes; that is yet to be determined.
What is clear is that they were illegally brought into
Iraq; that is, Iraq or some company in Iraq
circumvented the restrictions imposed by various
resolutions.
I have touched upon some of the disarmament
issues that remain open and that need to be answered if
dossiers are to be closed and confidence is to arise.
Which are the means at the disposal of Iraq to answer
these questions? I have pointed to some during my
presentation of the issues. Let me be a little more
systematic. Our Iraqi counterparts are fond of saying
that there are no proscribed items, and if no evidence is
presented to the contrary, they should have the benefit
of the doubt, be presumed innocent. UNMOVIC, for its
part, is not presuming that there are proscribed items
and activities in Iraq, but nor does it or anyone else,
after the inspections between 1991 and 1998, presume
the opposite — that no such items and activities exist
in Iraq. Presumptions do not solve the problem.
Evidence and full transparency may help. Let me be
specific.
Information provided by Member States tells us
about the movement and concealment of missiles and
chemical weapons and mobile units for biological
weapons production. We shall certainly follow up any
credible leads given to us and report what we might
find, as well as any denial of access.

So far, we have reported on the recent find of a
small number of empty 122-millimetre warheads for
chemical weapons. Iraq declared that it appointed a
commission of inquiry to look for more. Fine. Why not
extend the search to other items, declare what may be
found and destroy it under our supervision?
When we have urged our Iraqi counterparts to
present more evidence, we have all too often met the
response that there are no more documents. All existing
relevant documents have been presented, we are told.
All documents relating to the biological weapons
programme were destroyed together with the weapons.
However, Iraq has all the archives of the
Government and its various departments, institutions
and mechanisms. It should have budgetary documents,
requests for funds and reports on how they have been
used. It should also have letters of credits, bills of
lading and reports on production and losses of material.
In response to a recent UNMOVIC request for a
number of specific documents, the only new documents
Iraq provided was a ledger of 193 pages, which Iraq
stated included all imports from 1983 to 1990 by the
Technical and Scientific Importation Division, the
importing authority for the biological weapons
programme. Potentially, it might help to clear some
open issues.
The recent inspection find in the private home of
a scientist of a box of some 3,000 pages of documents,
much of them relating to the laser enrichment of
uranium, supports a concern that has long existed that
documents might be distributed to the homes of private
individuals. This interpretation is refuted by the Iraqi
side, which claims that research staff sometimes may
bring home papers from their work places. On our side,
we cannot help but think that the case might not be
isolated and that such placements of documents is
deliberate to make discovery difficult and to seek to
shield documents by placing them in private homes.
Any further sign of the concealment of
documents would be serious. The Iraqi side committed
itself at our recent talks to encourage persons to accept
access also to private sites. There can be no sanctuaries
for proscribed items, activities or documents. A denial
of prompt access to any site would be a very serious
matter.
When Iraq claims that tangible evidence in the
form of documents is not available, it ought at least to

7

S/PV.4692

find individuals, engineers, scientists and managers to
testify about their experience. Large weapons
programmes are moved and managed by people.
Interviews with individuals who may have worked in
programmes in the past may fill blank spots in our
knowledge and understanding. It could also be useful
to learn that they are now employed in peaceful
sectors. These are the reasons why UNMOVIC asked
for a list of such persons, in accordance with resolution
1441 (2002).

operations staff, as well as security personnel,
communications, translation and interpretation staff,
medical support, and other services at our Baghdad
office and Mosul field office. All serve the United
Nations and report to no one else. Furthermore, our
roster of inspectors will continue to grow as our
training programme continues — even at this moment
we have a training course in session in Vienna. At the
end of that course, we shall have a roster of about 350
qualified experts from which to draw inspectors.

Some 400 names for all biological and chemical
weapons programmes, as well as for their missile
programmes, were provided by the Iraqi side. This can
be compared to over 3,500 names of people associated
with those past weapons programmes that UNSCOM
either interviewed in the 1990s or knew from
documents and other sources. At my recent meeting in
Baghdad, the Iraqi side committed itself to
supplementing the list, and some 80 additional names
have been provided.

A team supplied by the Swiss Government is
refurbishing our office in Baghdad, which had been
empty for four years. The Government of New Zealand
has contributed both a medical team and a
communications team. The German Government will
contribute unmanned aerial vehicles for surveillance
and a group of specialists to operate them for us within
Iraq. The Government of Cyprus has kindly allowed us
to set up a field office in Larnaka. All of these
contributions have been of assistance in quickly
starting up our inspections and enhancing our
capabilities. So has help from the United Nations in
New York and from sister organizations in Baghdad.

In the past, much valuable information came from
interviews. There were also cases in which the
interviewee was clearly intimidated by the presence of,
and interruption by, Iraqi officials. This was the
background of the provision of resolution 1441 (2002)
for a right for UNMOVIC and the IAEA to hold private
interviews “in the mode or location” of our choice, in
Baghdad or even abroad.
To date, we have asked 11 individuals for
interviews in Baghdad. The replies have invariably
been that the individual will speak only at Iraq’s
monitoring directorate or, at any rate, in the presence
of an Iraqi official. This could be due to a wish on the
part of the invited to have evidence that they have not
said anything that the authorities did not wish them to
say. At our recent talks in Baghdad, the Iraqi side
committed itself to encouraging persons to accept
interviews “in private” — that is to say, alone with us.
Despite this, the pattern has not changed. However, we
hope that, with further encouragement from the
authorities, knowledgeable individuals will accept
private interviews, in Baghdad or abroad.
I must not conclude this update without some
notes on the growing capability of UNMOVIC.
In the past two months, UNMOVIC has built up
its capabilities in Iraq from nothing to 260 staff
members from 60 countries. This includes
approximately 100 new UNMOVIC inspectors, 60 air

8

In the past two months, during which we have
built up our presence in Iraq, we have conducted about
300 inspections to more than 230 different sites. Of
these, more than 20 were sites that had not been
inspected before. By the end of December, UNMOVIC
began using helicopters both for the transport of
inspectors and for actual inspection work. We now
have eight helicopters. They have already proved
invaluable in helping to “freeze” large sites by
observing the movement of traffic in and around the
area.
The setting up of a field office in Mosul has
facilitated rapid inspections of sites in northern Iraq.
We plan to establish soon a second field office in the
Basra area, where we have already inspected a number
of sites.
We now have an inspection apparatus that permits
us to send multiple inspection teams every day all over
Iraq, by road or by air. Let me end by simply noting
that that capability, which has been built up in a short
time and which is now operating, is at the disposal of
the Security Council.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Blix for his briefing.

S/PV.4692

I now give the floor to Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei,
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency.
Mr. ElBaradei: For the past 60 days, the
inspectors of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) have been engaged in the process of verifying
the existence or absence of a nuclear-weapon
programme in Iraq. Today, pursuant to paragraph 5 of
resolution 1441 (2002), I have submitted to the
President of the Security Council an update report on
our progress since we resumed our nuclear-verification
activities in Iraq — in terms of the approach we have
adopted, the tools we have used, the specific results
achieved, the degree of cooperation we have received,
and, finally, our view on how we should proceed.
Copies of the report are available in this Chamber. Let
me in this statement outline the key aspects of this
report.
To understand the approach of IAEA inspections
over the past two months, it is important first to recall
what was accomplished during our inspections from
1991 to 1998, in fulfilment of our Security Council
mandate
to
eliminate
Iraq’s
nuclear-weapon
programme. In September 1991, the IAEA seized
documents in Iraq that demonstrated the extent of its
nuclear-weapon programme. By the end of 1992, we
had largely destroyed, removed or rendered harmless
all Iraqi facilities and equipment relevant to nuclearweapon production. We confiscated Iraq’s nuclearweapon-usable material — highly enriched uranium
and plutonium — and by early 1994 we had removed it
from the country. By December 1998, when the
inspections were brought to a halt with a military strike
imminent, we were confident that we had not missed
any significant components of Iraq’s nuclear
programme.
While we did not claim absolute certainty, our
conclusion at that time was that we had neutralized
Iraq’s nuclear-weapon programme and that there were
no indications that Iraq retained any physical capability
to produce weapon-usable nuclear material.
During the intervening four years of our absence
from Iraq, we continued our analytical work to the best
of our ability, using satellite imagery and other
information. But no remote analysis can replace on-site
inspection, and we were therefore not able to reach any
conclusions about Iraq’s compliance with its Security

Council obligations in the nuclear field after December
1998.
Against this backdrop, when Iraq agreed last
September to reopen its doors to inspection, and
following the subsequent adoption by the Security
Council of resolution 1441 (2002), which strengthened
the IAEA’s authority and the inspection process, the
first goal of our inspection activities was
reconnaissance. In this phase, we sought to re-establish
rapidly our knowledge base of Iraq’s nuclear
capabilities, to ensure that key facilities had not been
reopened, to verify the location of nuclear material and
relevant non-nuclear material, and to identify and begin
interviewing key Iraqi personnel.
Over these first two months of inspection, we
have made good progress in our knowledge of Iraq’s
nuclear capabilities, with a total of 139 inspections at
some 106 locations to date. The bulk of these
inspections have taken place at State-run or private
industrial facilities, research centres and universities —
either at locations where Iraq’s significant technical
capabilities were known to have existed in the past, or
at new locations suggested by remote monitoring and
analysis. All inspection activities have been carried out
without prior notification to Iraq, except where
notification was needed to ensure the availability of
required support. IAEA inspectors have taken — and
will continue to take — full advantage of the
inspection authority granted by resolution 1441 (2002).
In doing so, the inspectors have been instructed to
make every effort to conduct their activities with
appropriate professionalism and sensitivity.
While we are continuing to some extent with this
reconnaissance work, our inspections are now well into
the investigative phase — with particular emphasis on
determining what, if anything, has occurred in Iraq
over the past four years that is relevant to the
re-establishment of Iraq’s nuclear capabilities. These
investigative inspections focus on areas of concern
identified by other States; facilities identified through
satellite images as having been modified or constructed
since 1998; and other inspection leads identified
independently by the IAEA.
In parallel with these inspection activities, the
IAEA has been conducting an exhaustive analysis of
supporting information obtained from various sources.
In this context, we have integrated the new information
submitted by Iraq, including the declaration submitted

9

S/PV.4692

on 7 December in response to resolution 1441 (2002),
with the records we had accumulated between 1991
and 1998 and the additional information we had
compiled through remote monitoring since 1998. The
Iraqi declaration was consistent with our existing
understanding of Iraq’s pre-1991 nuclear programme;
however, it did not provide any new information
relevant to certain questions that have been outstanding
since 1998, in particular regarding Iraq’s progress prior
to 1991 related to weapons design and centrifuge
development. While these questions do not constitute
unresolved disarmament issues, they nevertheless need
further clarification.
In addition to on-site inspection and offsite
analysis, IAEA inspectors have employed a variety of
tools to accomplish their mission. Taking advantage of
the signature of radioactive materials, we have resumed
the monitoring of Iraq’s rivers, canals and lakes to
detect the presence of certain radioisotopes. A broad
variety of environmental samples and surface swipe
samples have been collected from locations across Iraq
and taken to IAEA laboratories for analysis, and we
have reinstituted routine car-borne and hand-held
gamma surveys for the detection of undeclared nuclear
material.
The inspectors have also conducted a great
number of interviews of Iraqi scientists, managers and
technicians — primarily in the workplace in the course
of unannounced inspections — as a valuable source of
information about past and present programmes and
activities. The information gained has been helpful in
assessing the completeness and accuracy of Iraq’s
declarations.
Resolution 1441 (2002) also clearly gave IAEA
and the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission the authority to determine the
modalities and venues for conducting interviews with
Iraqi officials and other persons. The first two
individuals whom the IAEA requested to see privately
declined to be interviewed without the presence of an
Iraqi Government representative. This has been a
restricting factor. Although the Iraqi Government
recently committed itself to encouraging Iraqi officials
and other personnel to be interviewed in private when
requested, regrettably the third request, made two days
ago, for a private interview was again turned down by
the interviewee.

10

The IAEA will continue to determine the
modalities and locations of the interviews, including
the possibility of interviewing Iraqi personnel abroad.
We will continue to report to the Security Council on
our efforts to conduct interviews according to our
preferred modalities and venues and our degree of
success in that regard.
Let me summarize briefly a number of the
findings that have resulted from our inspection
activities thus far.
First, we have inspected all of those buildings and
facilities that were identified, through satellite imagery,
as having been modified or constructed over the past
four years. IAEA inspectors have been able to gain
ready access and to clarify the nature of the activities
currently being conducted in these facilities. No
prohibited nuclear activities have been identified
during these inspections.
A particular issue of focus has been the attempted
procurement by Iraq of high-strength aluminium tubes
and the question of whether these tubes, if acquired,
could be used for the manufacture of nuclear
centrifuges. Iraqi authorities have indicated that their
unsuccessful attempts to procure the aluminium tubes
related to a programme to reverse engineer
conventional rockets. To verify this information, IAEA
inspectors have inspected the relevant rocket
production and storage sites, taken tube samples,
interviewed relevant Iraqi personnel and reviewed
procurement contracts and related documents. From
our analysis to date, it appears that the aluminium
tubes would be consistent with the purpose stated by
Iraq and, unless modified, would not be suitable for
manufacturing centrifuges. However, we are still
investigating this issue. It is clear, however, that the
attempt to acquire such tubes is prohibited under
Security Council resolution 687 (1991).
Another area of focus has been to determine how
certain other dual-use materials have been relocated or
used — that is, materials that could be used in nuclearweapons production but also have other legitimate
uses. A good example is the Iraqi declaration
concerning high-explosive HMX, which states that, of
the HMX under IAEA seals in Iraq at the end of 1998,
some had been supplied to cement plants as an
industrial explosive for mining. The whereabouts and
final use of the removed material are matters that will
require further investigation, although it will be

S/PV.4692

difficult to verify the disposition of the HMX that is
declared to have been used.
A fourth focal point has been the investigation of
reports of Iraqi efforts to import uranium after 1991.
The Iraqi authorities have denied any such attempts.
The IAEA will continue to pursue this issue. At this
stage, however, we do not have enough information
and we would appreciate receiving more.
We are also making progress on a number of
other issues related, for example, to the attempted
importation of a magnet production facility.
In addition to the new authorities granted by
resolution 1441 (2002), I believe that the unified
resolve of the Council to support the inspection process
has been a vital ingredient and must remain so if we
are to achieve a peaceful resolution of the situation in
Iraq. I trust that the Council will continue its unified
and unequivocal support for the inspection process in
Iraq.
Over the next several months, inspections will
focus ever more closely on follow-up of specific
concerns as we continue to conduct visits to sites and
interviews with key Iraqi personnel. We have begun
helicopter operations, which increase the inspectors’
mobility and their ability to respond rapidly to new
information and allow wide-scale radiation detection
surveys. Laboratory analysis of environmental samples
is continuing and we will be reinstalling air samplers
for wide-area environmental monitoring. We also will
reintroduce surveillance systems with video cameras in
key locations to allow near-real-time remote
monitoring of dual-use equipment.
By its very nature, the inspection process, both in
Iraq and elsewhere, is based not on trust, but on a
thorough process of fact-finding supported by access to
all available information. Where applicable, this should
include information available to States that may be
relevant to the purpose of the inspection. We have
begun in the last few weeks to receive more actionable
information from States — that is, information of
direct and current value for inspection follow-up. I
would continue to call on States that have access to
such information to provide it to the inspecting
organizations so that the inspection process can be
accelerated and additional assurances can be generated.
Finally, we have urged Iraq once again to increase
the degree of its cooperation with the inspection

process. In support of the IAEA inspections to date, the
Iraqi authorities have provided access to all facilities
visited, including presidential compounds and private
residences, without conditions and without delay. The
Iraqi authorities also have been cooperative in making
available additional original documentation in response
to requests by IAEA inspectors.
In our discussions with Iraqi officials last week in
Baghdad, we emphasized the need to shift from passive
support — that is, responding as needed to inspectors’
requests — to proactive support — that is, voluntarily
assisting inspectors by providing documentation,
people and other evidence that will assist in filling in
the remaining gaps in our information.
One example of how Iraq could be more
proactive was illustrated by the inspection of a private
residence just two weeks ago, which resulted in the
retrieval of a sizeable number of documents, some of
which were classified and related, in part, to Iraq’s pre1991 efforts to use laser technology for enriching
uranium. While these documents do not appear to
reflect new or current activities related to nuclear
weapons in Iraq, they may enhance our detailed
understanding of certain aspects of Iraq’s pre-1991
nuclear programme. It is urgent and essential,
therefore, that Iraq, on its own initiative, identify and
provide any additional evidence that would assist the
inspectors in carrying out their mandate.
This proactive engagement on the part of Iraq
would be — as we have told them — in its own best
interest and is a window of opportunity that may not
remain open for very much longer. Iraq should make
every effort to be fully transparent — with a
demonstrated willingness to resolve issues rather than
requiring pressure to do so. The international
community will not be satisfied when questions remain
open with regard to Iraq’s weapons of mass
destruction; the world is asking for a high level of
assurance that Iraq is completely free from all such
weapons and is already impatient to receive it. The
sooner such assurance can be provided by the
inspecting organizations, the sooner the prospects that
a peaceful resolution will translate into a plausible
reality.
Inspections are time-consuming. I should mention
that even in the case of South Africa, where full and
active cooperation was forthcoming, it took the IAEA
approximately two years to complete the process in

11

S/PV.4692

that country. However, if inspection is successful, it
can ensure disarmament through peaceful means. It is
worth recalling that in our past experience in Iraq, the
elimination of its nuclear weapons programme was
accomplished mostly through intrusive inspections. It
is also worth recalling that the presence of international
inspectors in Iraq today continues to serve as an
effective deterrent to, and insurance against,
resumption of programmes to develop weapons of mass
destruction, even as we continue to look for possible
past activities.
To conclude, we have to date found no evidence
that Iraq has revived its nuclear weapons programme
since the elimination of the programme in the 1990s.
However, our work is steadily progressing and should
be allowed to run its natural course. With our
verification system now in place, barring exceptional
circumstances and provided there is sustained,
proactive cooperation by Iraq, we should be able within

12

the next few months to provide credible assurance that
Iraq has no nuclear weapons programme. These few
months, in my view, would be a valuable investment in
peace because they could help us avoid a war. We trust
that we will continue to have the support of the Council
as we make every effort to verify Iraq’s nuclear
disarmament through peaceful means and to
demonstrate that the inspection process can and does
work as a central feature of the international nuclear
arms control regime.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. ElBaradei for his briefing.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall now like to
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.
