A/RES/61/1

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
27 September 2006

Sixty-first session
Agenda item 56 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 19 September 2006
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/61/L.2)]

61/1. Declaration of the high-level meeting of the sixty-first
session of the General Assembly on the midterm
comprehensive global review of the implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for
the Decade 2001–2010
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the preparatory meeting of experts on the
midterm comprehensive global review of the implementation of the Programme of
Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001–2010, 1 held in
New York from 5 to 7 September 2006,
Noting with appreciation the contribution made by the least developed
countries and their development partners, the organizations of the United Nations
system and other intergovernmental organizations, as well as non-governmental
organizations, to the process of the midterm review of the Programme of Action, 2
Adopts the following Declaration:

Declaration of the high-level meeting of the sixty-first session
of the General Assembly on the midterm comprehensive global
review of the implementation of the Programme of Action for
the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001–2010
We, Heads of State and Government and heads of delegations participating in
the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the midterm comprehensive
global review of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least
Developed Countries for the Decade 2001–2010,2 held on 18 and 19 September
2006:
1.
Recommit ourselves to meeting the special needs of the least developed
countries by making progress towards the goals of poverty eradication, peace and
development through the improvement of the quality of lives of people in the least
_______________
1
2

06-49449

A/61/323.
A/CONF.191/13, chap. II.

A/RES/61/1

developed countries and the strengthening of their abilities to build a better future
for themselves and develop their countries, as committed to in the Programme of
Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001–2010;
2.
Reaffirm that the Programme of Action constitutes a fundamental
framework for a strong global partnership whose goal is to accelerate sustained
economic growth, sustainable development and poverty eradication in the least
developed countries;
3.
Also reaffirm that the primary responsibility for development in the least
developed countries rests with those countries themselves, but that their efforts need
to be given concrete and substantial international support from Governments and
international organizations in a spirit of shared responsibility through genuine
partnerships, including with civil society and the private sector;
4.
Support the smooth transition strategy developed for the graduation of
countries from the list of least developed countries and, in this regard, affirm the
need for the international community to render necessary support to the graduation
of the least developed countries with a view to averting the disruption of their
development projects and programmes and allowing them to continue developing;
5.
Stress that the internationally agreed development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals, can be effectively achieved in the least developed
countries through, in particular, the timely fulfilment of the seven commitments of
the Programme of Action;
6.
Note that, while the Programme of Action has, since its adoption,
registered some progress in its implementation, at the same time the overall socioeconomic situation in the least developed countries continues to be precarious;
7.
Stress that, given current trends, many least developed countries are
unlikely to achieve the goals and objectives set out in the Programme of Action;
8.
Emphasize, however, that many least developed countries, with the
support of their development partners, have, despite many difficulties, produced
notable achievements through wide-ranging and far-reaching reforms;
9.
Acknowledge the significant efforts by development partners in the
implementation of the Programme of Action, also acknowledge that there is more to
be done to implement the Programme of Action, in particular in the area of poverty
eradication, and recognize that the situation in the least developed countries requires
continued attention;
10. Recognize that it is important to achieve the goals and targets of the
Programme of Action in a timely manner and, in this regard, welcome the
elaboration of the Cotonou Strategy for the Further Implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001–2010 3
as an initiative owned and led by least developed countries;
11. Welcome the measures taken by developed and developing countries, as
well as by multilateral organizations, to promote South-South cooperation and call
upon them to continue to enhance their resources and efforts for capacity-building
and development in the least developed countries, including the sharing of best
practices in the sustainable development of the least developed countries;

_______________
3

2

A/61/117, annex I.

A/RES/61/1

12. Call upon the international community and the United Nations system
and its agencies to continue to assist in the implementation of the Programme of
Action, taking into account the conclusions of the midterm comprehensive global
review;
13. Invite the Economic and Social Council to continue to ensure the annual
review of the implementation of the Programme of Action, taking into account the
concrete and quantifiable achievements produced in the realization of the agreed
objectives.
9th plenary meeting
19 September 2006

3
