24

General A11embly-Twenty-fi.fth Se11ion

21. Emphasizes the need for the United Nations to

exert continuous efforts for the strengthening of international peace aud security and requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session on steps taken in
pursuance of the present Declaration.
1932nd plenary meeting,
16 December 1970.

2749 (XXV). Declaration of Principles Govern•
ing the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor, and the
Subsoil Thereof, beyond the Limits of National Jurisdiction
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2340 (XXII) of 18 December 1967, 2467 (XXIII) of 21 December 1968
and 2574 (XXIV) of 15 December 1969, concerning
the area to which the title of the item refers,
Affirming that there is an area of the sea-bed and
the ocean floor, and the subsoil thereof, beyond the
limits of national jurisdiction, the precise limits of which
are yet to be determined,
Recognizing that the existing le$al r6gime of the
bi~ seas does not _provide substantive rules for regulatmg the exploration of the aforesaid area and the
exploitation of its resources,
Convinced that the area shall be reserved exclusively
for peaceful purposes and that the exploration of the
area and the exploitation of its resources shall be
carried out for the benefit of mankind as a whole,
Believing it essential that an international r6gime
applyin• to the area and its resourc.es and including
appropnate international machinery should be established as soon as possible,
Bearing in mind that the development and use of
the area and its resources shall be undertaken in such
a manner as to foster the healthy development of the
world economy and balanced growth of international
trade, and to minimize any adverse economic effects
caused by the fluctuation of prices of raw materials
resulting from such activities,
Solemnly declares that:
1. The sea-bed and ocean floor, and the subsoil
thereof, beyond the limits of national jurisdiction
(hereinafter referred to as the area), as well as the
resources of the area, are the common heritage of
mankind.
2. The area shall not be subject to appropriation
by any means by States or persons, natural or juridical, an~ no ~tate shall claim or exercise sovereignty
or sovereign rights over any part thereof.
3. No State or person, natural or juridical, shall
claim, exercise or acquire rights with respect to the
area or its resources incompatible with the international regime to be established and the principles
of this Declaration.
4. All activities regarding the exploration and
exploitation of the resources of the area and other
related activities shall be governed by the international regime to be established.
5. The area shall be open to use exclusively for
peaceful purposes by all States, whether coastal or
land-locked, without discrimination, in accordance
with the international regime to be established.
6. States shall act in the area in accordance with
the applicable principles and rules of international

law, including the Charter of the United Nations
and the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, adofited by the General Assembly
on 24 October 1970, 8 in the interests of maintaining
international peace and security and promoting international co-operation and mutual understanding.
7. The exploration of the area and the exploitation of its resources shall be carried out for the
benefit of mankind as a whole, irrespective of the
geographical location of States, whether land-locked
or coastal, and taking into particular consideration
the interests and needs of the developing countries.
8. The area shall be reserved exclusively for
peaceful purposes, without prejudice to any measures which have been or may be agreed upon in
the context of international negotiations undertaken
in the field of disarmament and which may be applicable to a broader area. One or more international agreements shall be concluded as soon as
possible in order to implement effectively this principle and to constitute a step towards the exclusion
of the sea-bed, the ocean floor and the subsoil thereof
from the arms race.
9. On the basis of the _Principles of this Declaration, an international r6gime applying to the area
and its resources and including a~propriate international machinery to give effect to its provisions shall
be established by an international treatv of a universal character, generally agreed upon. "The r6gime
shall, inter alia, provide for the orderly and safe
development and rational management of the area
and its resources and for expanding opportunities in
the use thereof, and ensure the equitable sharin• by
States in the benefits derived therefrom, taking mto
particular consideration the interests and needs of
the developing countries, whether land-locked or
coastal.
10. States shall promote international co-operation in scientific research exclusively for peaceful
purposes:
(a) By participation in international programmes
and by encouraging co-operation in scientific research
by personnel of different countries;
(b) Through effective J?Ublication of research
programmes and dissemination of the results of research through international channels;
( c) By co-orc::ration in measures to strengthen
research capabilities of developing countries, including the participation of their nationals in research
programmes.
No_ such _activity shall form the legal basis for any
clauns with respect to any part of the area or its
resources.
11. With respect to activities in the area and
acting in conformity with the international regime to
be established, States shall take appropriate measures
for and shall co-operate in the adoption and implementation of international rules, standards and
procedures for, inter alia:
. (a) The prevention of pollution and contamina!Jon, ~nd other haz:3rds to the ~arine environment,
mcluding the coastline, and of mterference with the
ecological balance of the marine environment;
as Resolution 2625 (XXV).

Reeolution1 adopted on the reportl of the Flnt Committee

25

(b) The protection and conservation of the na-

minimize any adverse economic effects caused by the

tura1 resources of the area and the prevention of

fluctuation of prices of raw materials resulting from
such activities,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to co-operate
with the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, specialized agencies and other competent
organizations of the United Nations system in order to:
(a) Iden~ the problems arising from the production of certam minerals from the area beyond the
limits of national jurisdiction and examine the impact
they will have on the economic well-being of the developing countries, in particular on prices of mineral
exports on the world market;
(b) Study these problems in the light of the scale of
possible exploitation of the sea-bed, taking into account
the world demand for raw materials and the evolution
of costs and prices;
(c) Propose effective solutions for dealing with
these problems;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit his
report thereon to the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor beyond the Limits
of National Jurisdiction for consideration during one
of its sessions in 1971 and for makina its recommendations, as appropriate, to foster the healthy development of the world economy and balanced growth
of international trade and to minimi:m any adverse
economic effects caused by the fluctuation of prices
of raw materials resulting from such activities;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, specialized agencies and other competent
orJanizations of the United Nations system, to keep
this matter under constant review so as to submit
supplementary information annually or whenever it is
necessary and recommend additional measures in the
light of economic, scientific and technological developments;
4. Calls upon the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor beyond the Limits
of National Jurisdiction to submit a report on this question to the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session.
1933rd plenary meeting,
17 December 1970.

damage to the flora and fauna of the marine environment.
12. In their activities in the area, including those
relating to its resources, States shall pay due regard
to the rights and legitimate interests of coastal States
in the region of such activities, as well as of all
other States, which may be affected by such activities.
Consultations shall be maintained with the coastal
States concerned with respect to activities relating
to the exploration of the area and the exploitation
of its resources with a view to avoiding infringement of such rights and interests.
13. Nothing herein shall affect:
(a) The legal status of the waters superjacent to
the area or that of the air space above those waters;
(b) The rights of coastal States with respect to
measures to prevent, mitigate or eliminate grave and
imminent danger to their coastline or related interests
from pollution or threat thereof or from other
hazardous occurrences resulting from or caused by
any activities in the area, subject to the international
r6jme to be established.
14. Every State shall have the responsibility to
ensure that activities in the area, including those relating to its resources, whether undertaken by govemmental agencies, or non-governmental entities or
persons under its jurisdiction, or acting on its behalf,
shall be carried out in conformity with the intemational r6gime to be established. The same responsibility applies to international organizations and
their members for activities undertaken by such
oraanlzations or on their behalf. Damage caused by
such activities shall entail liability.
15. The parties to any dispute relating to activities
in the area and its resources shall resolve such dispute by the measures mentioned in Article 33 of
the Charter of the United Nations and such procedures for settling disputes as may be a,reed upon
in the international r6gime to be established.
1933,d plenary meeting,
17 December 1970.

2750 (XXV), Reservation exclusively for peaceful purposes of the 1ea-bed and the ocean
floor, and the 1ubsoil thereof, underlying
the high 1eas beyond the limits of present
national jurildiction and use of tlielr re10urce1 in the interests of mankind, and convening of a conference on the law of the sea
A

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that the area of the sea-bed and the
ocean floor, and the subsoil thereof, beyond the limits
of national jurisdiction and its resources are the common heritaae of mankind,
Convinced that the exploration of the area and the
exploitation of its resources should be carried out for
the benefit of mankind as a whole, takina into account
the special interests and needs of the developing countries,
Reaffirming that the development of the area and
its resources shall be undertaken in such a manner as
to foster the healthy develoement of the world economy
and balanced growth of international trade, and to

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1028 (XI) of 20 February
1957 and 1105 (XI) of 21 February 1957 concerning
the problems of land-locked countries,
Bearing in mind the replies to the inquiries made
by the Secretary-General89 in accordance with paragraph 1 of resolution 2574 A (XXIV) of 15 December 1969, which indicate wide support for the
idea of convening a conference relating to the law of
the sea, at which the interests and needs of all States,
whether land-locked or coastal, could be reconciled,
Noting that many of the present land-locked States
Members of the United Nations did not participate in
the previous United Nations conferences on the law
of the sea,
Reaffirming that the area of the sea-bed and the
ocean floor, and their subsoil, lying beyond the limits
of national jurisdiction together with the resources
thereof are the common heritage of mankind,
89 See A/7925 and Add.1-3.
