S/2015/229*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 April 2015
Original: English

Partnering for peace: moving towards partnership peacekeeping
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
In its resolution 2167 (2014), the Security Council requested that I prepare, in
close consultation with the African Union Commission and the European Union, and
no later than 31 March 2015, an assessment report and recommendations on the
progress of the partnerships between the United Nations and relevant regional
organizations in peacekeeping operations. Within the framework of Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations, the assessment and recommendations included in
the present report build on and complement my previous reports on cooperation with
regional organizations, including, more recently, my reports on United Nat ionsAfrican Union cooperation in peace and security (S/2011/805) and on cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and other organizations ( S/2014/560) and
my letter to the President of the Security Council on the transitions from the African
Union peace operations to United Nations peacekeeping operations in Mali and the
Central African Republic (S/2015/3). They are also guided by the positions and
areas of interest of the Council as outlined in resolution 2167 (2014) and in its
presidential statements on cooperation with the African Union ( S/PRST/2014/27)
and the European Union (S/PRST/2014/4).
2.
The scope of the present report covers primarily the partnership with regional
organizations and arrangements in peacekeeping, rather than the whole spectrum of
peace and security actions. It is focused largely on the partnerships with the African
Union and the European Union, the two organizations that are explicitly mentioned
in paragraph 28 of resolution 2167 (2014) and are currently the closest partners of
the United Nations in respect of peacekeeping efforts. Other regional and
subregional organizations and arrangements are mentioned in relevant areas, where
they have engaged on peacekeeping issues and in peacekeeping operations.

II. Trends related to peacekeeping partnerships
3.
The demand for peacekeeping has grown over the past decade. The bulk of the
peacekeeping efforts are undertaken in Africa, with over 87 per cent of United
Nations peacekeepers deployed on the continent. At the same time, peacekeeping is
* Reissued for technical reasons on 21 April 2015.

15-05045* (E)

220415

*1505045*

S/2015/229

facing a shifting conflict dynamic, characterized by increasing regionalization and
globalization, as well as, at times, the presence of unconventional threats, in
particular from extremist groups operating side by side with criminal groups and
parties to the conflict. Recently, a majority of peacekeepers have been operating in
places where there is little peace to keep and where robust action is often required to
implement mandates on the protection of civilians.
4.
In that context, the engagement of regional partners in peacekeeping alongside
United Nations operations has become the norm rather than the exception. Nowhere
is this fact more evident than in Africa, where the engagement of the African Un ion
and subregional mechanisms, as well as the European Union, alongside United
Nations operations, is present throughout all phases of the conflict. At the moment,
there are nine United Nations peacekeeping operations on the continent, six peace
support operations led by the African Union and regional economic communities/
regional mechanisms, one hybrid United Nations-African Union operation, and nine
European Union civilian missions and military operations. The models of such
multilateral engagement are each time adapted to fit the specific circumstances of
the crisis in question.
5.
Over the years, those models have shaped a shared understanding of the
comparative advantages of each organization and a desired division of labour among
them. In the recent cases of Mali and the Central African Republic, the African
Union took over the operations initiated by subregional actors, to be later rehatted as
United Nations operations. In both cases, the United Nations and the European
Union were engaged in supporting the deployment of the African Union-led
operations. In Mali, following the transfer of authority from the African -led
International Support Mission in Mali (AFISMA) to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), the
African Union has retained a political role with the establishment of the African
Union Mission for Mali and the Sahel (MISAHEL), which has continued supporting
the inter-Malian inclusive dialogue. In the Central African Republic, following the
transfer of authority from the African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic (MISCA) to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), the
African Union, through MISAC, and the Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS) have continued to play a key role in the ongoing transition and
stabilization of the country. Also in both cases, the European Union has deployed its
own, smaller and well-targeted common security and defence policy presences,
alongside African Union or United Nations-led operations, with either a training and
advisory mandate or a mandate that serves to bridge the gap between missions.
6.
Those patterns, as well as other successful cases of cooperation, such as in
Somalia, may provide a framework for a further rationalization of efforts in future
cases. For example, the numerous cases of simultaneous United Nations, African
Union and European Union engagements on the continent demonstrate that all three
organizations can contribute necessary peacekeeping capacities and solutions to
crises and post-conflict situations. In many cases, all three also play important roles
in support of the political and mediation processes, along with other actors.
Nevertheless, the potential for closer trilateral engagement and cooperation among
the United Nations, the African Union and the European Union has yet to be fully
explored and exploited.

2/18

15-05045

S/2015/229

7.
There is little question that United Nations partnerships with regional actors in
peacekeeping have reached a considerable level of maturity and complexity in
recent years. The proliferation of actors and models of engagement has presented
both a challenge, in respect of avoiding a fragmentation of efforts, duplicatio n or
competition, and an opportunity, in respect of mobilizing as efficiently as possible
the collective leverage and comparative advantages of different organizations in
attaining shared peace and security objectives. The sections below provide a review
of the institutional mechanisms and initiatives in place, which are aimed at
maximizing that opportunity, as well as a review of the ways in which the
mechanisms have worked in practice in various countries and thematic areas.

III. Coordination and consultation mechanisms
Strategic-level mechanisms
8.
Effective and efficient partnerships in peacekeeping depend on the alignment
of strategic and political objectives between different peacekeeping actors, from the
early planning and pre-mandate stages of their operations to their transition or exit.
This in turn is dependent on effective cooperation between their decision -making
organs. In some challenging cases, it may be difficult to achieve a clear strategic
direction within one organization, let alone among a number of organizations with
different memberships and perspectives, and whose relationships are only loosely
defined, in the overall context of the primary responsibility of the Security Council
for peace and security.
The United Nations and the African Union
9.
The entry into force of the Protocol relating to the Establishment of the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union in December 2003 substantially
strengthened the powers of the African Union in matters of conflict prevent ion and
resolution. Since then, the African Union and the regional economic communities/
regional mechanisms have been increasingly taking initiatives on peace and security,
and their role in those areas has grown, both qualitatively and quantitatively. As a
result, the partnership between the United Nations and the African Union has evolved
from a capacity-building model to a partnership based on strategic convergence.
10. Article 17 of the Protocol relating to the Establishment of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union recognizes the primary responsibility of the
Security Council for the maintenance of peace and security. In practice, since 2007
the Security Council and the Peace and Security Council of the African Union have
established closer links, including through the holding of annual joint consultative
meetings. Both organs have underlined their commitment to the development of a
stronger and more structured relationship, through enhanced information -sharing,
synergies in planning and monitoring, joint assessments and strategies to increase
the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations. The practical implementation of those
commitments, however, has materialized slowly.
11. The consultative meetings have yet to lead to more aligned polit ical decisions
on specific issues between the two organizations, whose processes for decision making differ significantly. The challenge of reaching institutional synchronization
and a clear understanding on the level of consultation required between the t wo

15-05045

3/18

S/2015/229

bodies has sometimes led to incoherent political responses. That challenge has been
compounded by the lack of a clear division of labour between the regional economic
communities/regional mechanisms and the African Union with regard to peace and
security issues in Africa. In my recent letter to the President of the Security Council
on the lessons learned exercise on transitions (S/2015/3), I underscored the
importance of political coherence and the harmonizatio n of policy and strategies at
the highest levels.
12. In the Central African Republic, the strategic convergence among the partners
involved was facilitated to a large extent by the common vision that was provided
by the Security Council at an early stage and in several resolutions, in which the
Secretariat was requested to undertake, in consultation with the African Union and
other regional partners, contingency planning for the transformation of the African
Union peace operation into a United Nations peacekeeping mission. By contrast, in
Mali, divisions among Member States and the relevant organs at the international,
regional and subregional levels, and within the Secretariat, on the appropriate way
forward weakened the ability of the peacekeeping partners to jointly establish a
clear and commonly acceptable road map for the resolution of the crisis.
13. A harmonized strategic approach, including a shared strategic vision of the
objectives for the deployment of a peacekeeping mission from the outset, is also
critical in the case of a hybrid mission such as the African Union -United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). Whereas views regarding the desirability of
the hybrid models may differ, it is clear that they should be anchored in close formal
and informal consultations between the United Nations and the African Union at the
inception and throughout the life of such missions. When the strategic objectives
and visions of the two organizations on the resolution of the conflict or on the required
engagement with the parties start to differ, a hybrid mission such as UNAMID loses
its political leverage on the parties and its ability to implement its mandate.
14. The lessons learned exercise on the transitions in the Central African Republic
and in Mali has demonstrated that the African elected members of the Security
Council (the African three) can play a pivotal role in enhancing coordination and
synergy between the two Councils. In February 2014, the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union formally endorsed the establishment of that mechanism
in New York and the Permanent Observer Mission of the African Union to the United
Nations as the secretariat of the mechanism. The mechanism can help to ensure that
the voices of the African Union and of relevant regional economic communities are
heard in the debates and decisions of the Security Council and therefore support the
creation of a unified vision among the Security Council, the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union and relevant regional economic communities.
15. The United Nations Secretariat and the African Union Commission have
deepened their partnership. The United Nations-African Union Joint Task Force on
Peace and Security has proved to be an important instrument in fostering gre ater
coherence, allowing the Secretariat and the Commission to coordinate immediate and
long-term strategic issues of common interest and identify areas for concerted action.
16. The establishment of the United Nations Office to the African Union (UNOAU)
in 2010 has also been instrumental in advancing the peacekeeping partnership
between the two organizations. It has been carrying out a dual role of working with
the African Union in supporting the planning and management of current operations
and the development of policies, while supporting the development of institutional

4/18

15-05045

S/2015/229

capacities in the service of the partnership, with a particular focus on the
operationalization of the African Peace and Security Architecture.
17. At the political level, close and consistent consultation mechanisms between
the United Nations and regional actors are also essential in achieving greater
strategic and political convergence, including in support of peacekeeping mandates.
The Support and Follow-up Group on the Situation in Mali, co-chaired by the
African Union, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
United Nations, and comprising the European Union and the International Contact
Group on the Central African Republic, co-chaired by the African Union and the
Congo, have been effective in ensuring coordination among stakeholders in support
of the peace process in those countries. They have also helped to create an enabling
environment for the implementation of the mandates of MINUSMA and MINUSCA.
18. Other political and mediation arrangements being carried out in conjunction
with United Nations peacekeeping activities include the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel, which leads the engagement and mediation efforts on the
Sudan and between the Sudan and South Sudan, and is supported by the United
Nations Special Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan and the African Union United Nations Joint Special Representative for Darfur. The teams jointly strategize,
undertake joint missions and, when necessary, jointly address the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union and the Security Council of the United Nations.
Similarly, in South Sudan, my Special Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan and
my Special Representative for South Sudan work in close consul tation with the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development in the mediation process and engage
the African Union Commission senior leadership and Member States in support of
the Authority on a regular basis.
The United Nations and the European Union
19. Strategic-level communication and coordination between the United Nations
and the European Union on peacekeeping and crisis management is carried out in
various formats. The Security Council holds biannual informal meetings with the
Political and Security Committee of the European Union, at which peacekeeping
and other peace and security issues are discussed. These serve as important forums
for the exchange of information, but usually fall short of establishing a convergence
of views on appropriate action in particular peacekeeping contexts. With regard to
mandates, when the Common Security and Defence Policy operations of the
European Union deploy in United Nations peacekeeping contexts, coordination
usually takes place through members of the Security C ouncil. The members help to
ensure that such missions are referred to in Security Council resolutions and are
complementary to the broader mandates of peacekeeping operations, whether led by
the United Nations or by the African Union.
20. A number of other high-level United Nations-European Union strategic
discussions are held, which involve the Secretariat and complement efforts in this
regard, including the regular briefings by the High Representative of the Union of
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy to the Security Council and briefings by senior
United Nations officials to the Political and Security Committee in Brussels and the
biannual United Nations-European Union Steering Committee on Crisis Management,
co-chaired by the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping and the Deputy
Secretary-General of the European External Action Service. The latter allows for

15-05045

5/18

S/2015/229

more detailed discussions on peacekeeping issues while providing opportunities for
strategic alignment on such issues as the division of labour, political messaging and
exit strategies. Strategic-level communication is further facilitated by the European
Union delegation to the United Nations in New York and the establishment, in 2011,
of the United Nations Liaison Office for Peace and Security in Brussels.
21. Three important documents have also continued to provide a cross -cutting
strategic framework for the relationship with the European Union in peacekeeping
and crisis management: the 2003 Joint Declaration on United Nations -European
Union Cooperation in Crisis Management; the 2007 joint statement on United
Nations-European Union Cooperation in Crisis Management; and the plan of action
to enhance European Union Common Security and Defence Policy support to United
Nations peacekeeping (European Union plan of action), adopted by the Political and
Security Committee of the European Union in 2012. The latter identified the
priorities for United Nations-European Union cooperation in peacekeeping that had
been pursued jointly by the two organizations over the past two years, including
seeking enhanced uniformed contributions by European Union member States;
coordination during planning; cooperation in respect of policy and guidance; and
lessons learned and training. Discussions are under way on the ado ption of a followup framework on cooperation, based on the previous framework, but renewing the
commitment and re-establishing related priorities, in line with more recent
experiences.
The United Nations and other regional organizations and arrangements
22. Besides the African Union, subregional organizations in Africa and the
European Union, there have been few cases in recent years in which strategic
coordination has taken place in the context of the deployment of a peacekeeping
operation. A notable example is the Syrian Arab Republic, where, following the
escalation of the crisis, the United Nations cooperated with the League of Arab
States (LAS), primarily at the political and mediation levels, leading up to the
deployment of the United Nations Supervision Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic
(UNSMIS). In particular, in February 2012 agreement was reached on a joint
diplomatic effort between LAS and the United Nations, with the appointment of the
first Joint United Nations-League of Arab States Special Envoy to Syria. The efforts
of the Joint Special Envoy led to the adoption by the Security Council of resolution
2042 (2012), which sets out the six-point plan. The plan provided the basis for the
deployment of UNSMIS, with the aim of observing and reporting on the cessation of
the violence. With conflict escalating across the country, however, the UNSMIS
mandate ended in July 2012, following the fate of an earlier mission comprising
67 LAS monitors.

Operational-level mechanisms
23. Beyond strategic-level discussions, operational coordination is crucial to
building the common understanding that contributes to strategic -level decisionmaking and to ensuring the effective and coherent implementation of mandates on
the ground. It involves a number of actors on all sides, including the teams
producing and harmonizing analysis, and planning or backstopping the operations
once deployed; and the mechanisms through which coherence is achieved not only

6/18

15-05045

S/2015/229

between the missions operating in parallel or engaged in rehatting, but also with
other entities on the ground.
The United Nations and the African Union
24. To date, the United Nations and the African Union have worked together at the
operational level on the ground in five peacekeeping contexts, namely, Burundi, the
Central African Republic, Mali, Somalia and Darfur, the Sudan. Cooperation in
those countries/areas has largely shaped the peacekeeping partnership between the
two organizations at the operational level. Within that partnership, the model mo st
used has been that of sequential deployment, transitioning from an African Union led operation to a United Nations operation. In such cases, operational cooperation
takes place through the provision of support to the African Union during the
planning phases of its operations, as well as during their deployment, and later on
through close cooperation to ensure an efficient transition to and rehatting as a
United Nations operation.
25. Somalia represents a successful example of joint planning, especially in view
of the Security Council position on the potential transition from the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to a United Nations peacekeeping operation at the
appropriate time. Collaboration in the field on the 2012 strategic concept for
AMISOM succeeded in revitalizing the African Union-United Nations strategic
partnership and led to an increase in the AMISOM troop level endorsed by the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union and the Security Council of the United
Nations. The 2013 joint African Union-United Nations assessment mission
reinforced that collaboration through the establishment of shared strategic objectives
and benchmarks. The outcome of the mission was the development of three options
for the way forward, one of which was endorsed by both Councils. The broad
consultations and inclusion of key partners paved the way for agreement and swift
implementation of the joint recommendations. A second joint African Union -United
Nations review of AMISOM and the Somalia National Security Forces is scheduled
to take place in April 2015.
26. Two recent examples of sequential African Union-United Nations deployments
are AFISMA in 2012, followed by MINUSMA in 2013; and MISCA in 2013,
followed by MINUSCA in 2014. In the latter case, the United Nations worked from
the outset to support the transition of authority from the ECCAS -led Mission for the
Consolidation of Peace in the Central African Republic (MICOPAX) to MISCA, and
participated in the African Union-led assessment missions, as early as in April 2013.
The United Nations provided technical and expert advice on the planning and
deployment of MISCA, the strengthening of MISCA command and control and the
building of its administrative infrastructure and training capacity. Following the
adoption of resolution 2149 (2014), the United Nations and the African Union
developed a transition plan, operationalized by a team in coordination with MISCA
and the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African
Republic (BINUCA), thus contributing to a smoother transition. For example, the
establishment of a joint MISCA-MINUSCA coordination forum on the protection of
civilians in Bangui as part of transition planning efforts helped to avoid a vacuum in
the implementation of the protection of civilians mandate.
27. Close operational cooperation should also be a key element in the force and
police generation processes in the case of sequential deployments. In respect of both

15-05045

7/18

S/2015/229

the Central African Republic and Mali, although clarity on United Nations
requirements for rehatting was established at an early stage, following the decisions
for the transition, the capabilities of the AFISMA and MISCA troops inherited by
the successor United Nations missions — in terms of equipment and selfsustainment, as well as in terms of training — did not match relevant United
Nations standards. While lower standards are sometimes inherent in the rapid
deployment of enforcement operations in Africa, rehatting can be more successful
through United Nations-African Union collaboration in respect of facilitating the
fulfilment of United Nations standards during the transition of uniformed personnel
to African Union missions that are expected to be rehatted.
28. The United Nations also continues to coordinate with the African Union in
providing support to enhance the African Union Regional Task Force, a component
of the Regional Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord ’s Resistance
Army. At the request of the African Union Commission, the United Nations sent a
multidisciplinary team of experts to Yaoundé in February 2015 to support the
development of the strategic concept of operations towards the operationalization of
the multinational joint task force initiative against Boko Haram. The Force
Intervention Brigade in the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) represents another creative model
of operational collaboration between the two organizations, with the United Nations
following up on what began as a regional initiative to resolve the crisis in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and established the Force Intervention Brigade
within MONUSCO in 2013.
The United Nations and the European Union
29. Operational cooperation with the European Union in different peacekeeping
settings, including, most recently, the Central African Republic, as well as the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Mali, has usually been based on a clear
division of labour, aimed at ensuring the most efficient use of the capacities and
resources of each organization. In the start-up planning phases, in which
coordination is crucial to ensuring complementarity and avoiding duplication, or
seamless transitions logistically and operationally, recent examples have
demonstrated the progress made in the United Nations partnership with the
European Union over the past few years. Starting in Mali and later in the Central
African Republic, operational planning for MINUSMA, the European Union
military mission to contribute to the training of the Malian Armed Forces (EUTM)
and the European Union Common Security and Defence Policy mission in Mali
(EUCAP Sahel Mali) took place in a consultative manner with the European Union.
The United Nations-European Union guidelines for coordination during the
planning for respective operations, envisaged in the European Union plan of action,
were tested in Mali for EUCAP Sahel Mali as well as to facilitate a successful
transfer of security tasks from the European Union military operation in t he Central
African Republic (EUFOR RCA) to MINUSCA and the deployment of the European
Union Military Advisory Mission in the Central African Republic earlier in March
in the Central African Republic. Further to those guidelines, the United Nations and
the European Union plan to look jointly at the lessons learned in the transition and
handover from the European Union operation to the United Nations in the Central
African Republic and develop, as necessary, joint guidelines for similar transitions
in the future. The experience of the handover of the European Union Ucatex camp to

8/18

15-05045

S/2015/229

MINUSCA should also be positively acknowledged, and lessons from that exercise
should be drawn for potential future cases in which the sharing of resources between
the two organizations are needed.
30. Cooperation and coordination on the ground between United Nations and
European Union missions and operations deployed in parallel have been efficient
and regular in most country scenarios. Coordination mechanisms that have worked
in different country settings include the establishment of liaison officers on the
ground, co-location, arrangements for the exchange of classified information, and
the participation of European Union representatives in coordinating structures led by
the United Nations, in particular rule of law and security sector reform-related
mechanisms that involve European Union civilian missions. In order to be effective,
such mechanisms should always be backed by strong political will to engage in
sharing and partnerships. In Kosovo, 1 United Nations-European Union cooperation
should be further strengthened to ensure a more coordinated international
engagement as the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX)
undergoes further restructuring.
31. Finally, in the light of the European Union delegation’s prominent role in
providing support for the justice sector and other institutions in post -crisis countries,
close cooperation with the wider United Nations family in jointly setting related
priorities has been crucial to the implementation of coherent institution-building
strategies. For example, a close partnership has been developed between MINUSMA
and the European Union delegation in Mali, which provided equipment and
supported the refurbishment of a court in Timbu ktu. In the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, seven prosecution support cells have been established by MONUSCO
with European Union funding to assist national authorities in the prosecution of
serious crimes.
32. With regard to exit strategies, there has been less of a culture of coordination
between the two organizations, although both are committed to improving their
engagement during the end phases of their respective missions. Unless there is a
clear understanding of a transition from one organization to the other, the two
organizations have been more inclined to conduct their own strategic reviews and
decide on their drawdown and follow-on arrangements on the basis of limited
consultation with their partners. For example, in the case of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the two organizations could have consulted more closely
and at earlier stages in planning their respective reviews and transitions, although
the level of engagement improved at the later stages of the process.
The United Nations and other regional partners
33. Kosovo, in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999), represents an important
example of United Nations operational coordination with other regional actors, in
particular the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the O rganization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). The OSCE Mission in Kosovo has
enjoyed a long-standing relationship with the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) as its institution-building pillar, an arrangement that
has allowed for close and constructive operational engagement throughout the years.
__________________
1 References to Kosovo shall be understood to be in the context of Security Council resolution

1244 (1999).

15-05045

9/18

S/2015/229

The NATO International Security Force in Kosovo (KFOR), deployed as the
international security presence alongside UNMIK, maintains some 5,000 troops on
the ground and performs the role of the third emergency responder, after the Kosovo
Police and EULEX. UNMIK and KFOR have enjoyed close cooperation, at the
military liaison and head-of-mission levels, in the implementation of their respective
mandates and on all operational issues, including in ensuring a stable environment
in northern Kosovo and the protection of religious heritage sites.

IV. Capabilities and capacity-building support
34. The delivery of peacekeeping in partnership with regional actors should
benefit from stronger partnership with regard to capability development. While
major actors in the field of peacekeeping have been working separately on the
development of their own capabilities, some synergies have been established on a
bilateral basis. These are focused on the sharing of expertise between organizations,
and the United Nations has been both a recipient and a provider of such expertise
and assistance. A common priority has been and should continue to be to ensure that
the capabilities developed can be used to facilitate the rapid response of the
international community to unfolding crises.
The United Nations and the African Union
35. As the African Union takes up more responsibilities in peace operations, it has
been faced with the challenges of acquiring the requisite capacity to plan, deploy
and sustain such operations. While the African Union has been willing to deploy
rapidly and even engage in combat operations despite the risk of casualties, it has
not always been able to provide troops and police with the required training and
capabilities in line with United Nations standards.
36. The African Union has been working towards establishing and operationalizing
the African Standby Force (ASF) and, more recently, has begun developing the
African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises. The United Nations, through
the United Nations Office to the African Union, is working closely with the African
Union and the regional economic communities/regional mechanisms to support
those efforts, accelerate the operationalization of ASF and the African Capacity for
Immediate Response to Crises and improve the conceptualization, planning and
management of African-led peace operations. Specifically, the Office has continued
to support the African Union in the development and review of key policy and
guiding documents, such as the doctrine issued by the African Union Peace Support
Operations Division. The United Nations also continues to assist the African Union
in the development of the police and rule of law elements of ASF as well as in the
implementation of the ASF road map III, including the AMANI Africa II training
cycle activities.
37. Many of the long-standing challenges related to the capacity of the African
Union to deploy and manage peace support operations in extremely difficult
conditions and at short notice have yet to be overcome. However, both ASF and the
African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises have the potential to become
effective rapid-response tools for the African Union and, by extension, for the
United Nations. Once fully operational, those forces could provide a critical start -up
capacity for responding to African crises as bridging mechanisms, as well as for

10/18

15-05045

S/2015/229

providing enforcement action, if required. Alternatively, they could co mplement a
United Nations peacekeeping operation when in extremis support is needed.
38. Beyond supporting the operationalization of ASF and the African Capacity for
Immediate Response to Crises, the United Nations is engaged in building the
capacities of the African Union and its member States in a number of key thematic
areas related to peacekeeping. In particular, the United Nations Mine Action Service
has supported the African Union in preparing a mine action and explosive remnants
of war strategic framework for 2014-2017, aimed at enhancing the capacities of
African Union member States and operations to deal with explosive threats. The
United Nations and other partners, such as the World Bank, have also provided
significant support to enhance the capacities of the African Union in the areas of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, security sector reform, human rights
and child protection, including through secondment arrangements, institution building programmes and the provision of technical a ssistance to civilian capacities
in the African Union operations.
The United Nations and the European Union
39. Discussions with the European Union on capability development have been
held in the context of United Nations efforts to expand its base o f troopcontributing/police-contributing countries with additional European contributions,
and in line with the relevant provisions of the European Union plan of action. States
members of the European Union have indicated that contributions to United Natio ns
peacekeeping should be discussed and determined on a bilateral basis, rather than
through European Union-coordinated mechanisms. At the same time, the potential to
“bundle” various European Union member State contributions into one package,
potentially also combined with contributions from non-European Union members, in
order to fill specific gaps in United Nations peacekeeping missions should not be
underestimated. The European External Action Service has shown willingness to
explore this issue further and to share capabilities with the Secretariat in respect of
its expertise in specific areas, such as intelligence and rapid response.
40. With regard to rapid response, and the goal of the United Nations to deploy its
operations more rapidly, the two organizations have been sharing experiences and
information on their respective doctrine development. Discussions have been taking
place on the possibility of deploying a European Union “battlegroup” as an
autonomous rapid response force in support of or as a bridge to United Nations
operations, including in specific country contexts. The battlegroup has yet to be
deployed despite the potential offered by such a standing and rapidly deployable
capacity. Discussions are expected to continue as European Union me mber States
reinforce their efforts to ensure that this valuable tool is used, and I encourage this
process.
41. The European Union has also been committed to building the African capacity
for peacekeeping and crisis prevention. Beyond the financial suppo rt provided to
African Union operations, the funds in the European Union African Peace Facility
have been used for capacity-building actions focused on the operationalization of
the African Peace and Security Architecture. The 2014 -2016 action programme of
the African Peace Facility realigned the support provided by the Facility to the
African Peace and Security Architecture in order to ensure more targeted support,
including effective assistance to the upcoming AMANI Africa II training cycle

15-05045

11/18

S/2015/229

activities, and support for activities dealing with strategic lift, communications and
logistics. In addition, the European Union is preparing to launch a new “train and
equip initiative” that will complement its training activities on the continent. In the
light of the commitment of both the European Union and the United Nations to
support African capacity, that is an area where increased triangular cooperation
could be pursued.
The United Nations and other regional organizations and arrangements
42. NATO capabilities and expertise in dealing with asymmetric threats, in
particular in Afghanistan, have resulted in new fields of United Nations -NATO
cooperation. The United Nations can benefit from NATO expertise in specific areas
and from its large network of training centres and centres of excellence, which could
be used to support the United Nations in those areas. In particular, cooperation has
been ongoing in respect of counter-improvised explosive device issues, including
through an awareness-raising course for United Nations staff conducted by the
centre of excellence in Madrid. Cooperation in 2015 will be focused on engagement
with the centres of excellence on counter-improvised explosive device issues,
military engineering and explosive ordnance disposal, on par ticipation in joint
exercises and on the conduct of a seminar on strategic and operational theory and
practice regarding counter-improvised explosive device efforts.
43. The United Nations is willing to contribute to the efforts of other regional
organizations to build up regional peacekeeping capacities. A concrete example of
such cooperation is with the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), which
has been supported by the United Nations in the development of expertise and
capabilities in peacekeeping over the past two years. Following a memorandum of
understanding concluded between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
the CSTO secretariat on 28 September 2012, on strengthening cooperation between
the two organizations, the United Nations organized briefings and shared material
on United Nations peacekeeping policies and standards with CSTO officials engaged
in the development of its 4,000-strong standby force. Most recently, Malaysia’s
announcement of the potential plans of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
to establish a regional peacekeeping force could pave the way for increased
cooperation with the Department, which is interested in supporting the endeavour.

V. Financing for peacekeeping
44. While regional organizations have the responsibility to secure their own
resources, the need to enhance the predictability, sustainability and flexibility of
financing for operations launched by a regional organization operating under a
United Nations mandate remains a critical issue, particularly in cases of transition to
a United Nations operation. In particular, the continued absence of predictable and
sustainable funding has led to a number of limitations for the peace operations
deployed by the African Union, which in turn have an impact on the overall ability
of the international community to effectively respond to crises in Africa. The Peace
Fund established by the African Union to support its peace support operations is
inadequate to support the current demands of African Unio n peacekeeping. There
are efforts under way to increase the allocation of African Union -assessed funding
to its peace and security efforts; the January 2015 African Union Summit decided to
allocate 25 per cent of the assessed contributions of African Union member States to

12/18

15-05045

S/2015/229

peace operations. In the meantime, the African Union has been largely dependent on
donor funding or, as in the case of Somalia, on United Nations -assessed
contributions to launch and sustain its operations.
45. The largest source of external funding is the European Union African Peace
Facility. Established in 2004, the Facility is the key instrument for facilitating the
implementation of joint African Union-European Union priorities on peace and
security, with a funding envelope of 750 million euros for the period 2014-2017, the
vast majority of which is dedicated to supporting African-led peace operations. This
financial support for African Union-led missions has been a predictable source of
funding that has proved crucial to the African Union in planning and carrying out its
operations. China and the United States of America are developing similar funding
mechanisms to support the African Union, in addition to a range of smaller bilateral
arrangements. African Union peace operations are also supported by direct bilateral
support provided to their troop-contributing/police-contributing countries, which is
particularly valuable in assisting the latter with improving their lethal equipment
capabilities.
46. The United Nations has also developed various models to support African
Union operations, including a mix of assessed funding and voluntary contributions,
or voluntary contributions prior to transfer of authority to a United Nations
peacekeeping operation. The largest and most developed funding model today is in
Somalia, where the United Nations Support Office for the African Union Mission in
Somalia (UNSOA) manages the disbursement of funds from the United Nations assessed budget to provide logistical support to AMISOM. That model is
complemented by a United Nations-managed trust fund, in accordance with
resolution 1863 (2009). That logistical support package of assessed funding has
been in place since 2009, with the provision of services and equipment necessitating
the utilization of voluntary contributions to meet shortfalls. Following the adoption
of resolution 2036 (2012), the shortfalls were also covered by assessed funding,
leading to a significant decline in trust fund activity. The Security Council adopted
resolution 2124 (2013), by which it created an additional trust fund for the provision
of United Nations non-lethal logistical support to AMISOM and approximately
11,000 Somali National Army troops participating in joint operations, including for
medical evacuation. That support has been complemented by substantial financial
assistance from the European Union in respect of paying AMISOM troop, police and
civilian allowances and salaries directly through the Facility. As such, the Somalia
experience represents a successful model of United Nations-African UnionEuropean Union collaboration in this area.
47. Although the United Nations trust fund model to support African Union peace
operations was also utilized in the Central African Republic and Mali, it encountered
numerous challenges. Discussions to improve its use are under way, specifically in
identifying ways to improve allocation and disbursement to the troop -contributing
countries based on their priorities. The United Nations Trust Fund for Support to the
African-led International Support Mission in Mali was established pursuant to
resolution 2085 (2012). Contributions amounting to approximately $44 million were
received, of which approximately $38 million in contributions were not earmarked,
with the original intention to provide a mission support package and equipment to the
various uniformed AFISMA components. Equipment worth approximately $12 million
was deployed to Mali from the United Nations strategic deployment stocks. With the
transfer of authority, options for providing support became limited given the United

15-05045

13/18

S/2015/229

Nations obligation to support troop-contributing/police-contributing countries
through assessed funding. On that basis, donors determined their preferences for the
utilization of remaining balances, with the majority in support of counterimprovised explosive device efforts. Similarly, the United Nations Trust Fund in
Support of the African-led International Mission in the Central African Republic
was established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013). Contributions amount ing to
approximately $5 million have been received, to be used to provide strategic
communications to MISCA prior to the transfer of authority, and catering and
kitchen equipment to the current troop-contributing countries of MINUSCA.
48. As I highlighted in my recent letter to the President of the Council ( S/2015/3),
the experiences in the Central African Republic and Mali have confirmed that no
funding or support modality is sufficient on its own. It thus appea rs that there is a
need to mobilize a broad range of modalities in most cases, including a combination
of voluntary, assessed and bilateral modalities, as appropriate. In that regard, I have
called for a lessons learned exercise, to be jointly undertaken with the African
Union, which will be aimed at reviewing and providing an assessment of the various
mechanisms available to improve the predictability, sustainability and flexibility of
financing for African Union peace operations authorized by the Security Council.

VI. Cooperation in policy development and training
49. Beyond capability development and rapid deployment, the United Nations has
also increased its cooperation with regional organizations in respect of policy
development in a number of key thematic areas. This has yet to lead to full
harmonization of predeployment training standards, which is crucial to ensuring quick
and effective rehatting processes, in cases of transition from one organization to
another. It should be noted that cooperation in policy development does not
necessarily translate into similar results and levels of implementation, as the latter also
depends on the institutional culture, mechanisms and capacities of each organization.

Protection of civilians
50. In recent years, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations has worked with
regional organizations on the development of guidance and conceptual frameworks
for the protection of civilians. The Department was closely involved in the recent
development of guidance on the issue for European Union military operations, for
example. The African Union and the Department also engaged in close consultations
regarding the development of guidance on the protection of civilians in the African
Union context, but the guidance was never finalized. While consultations between
the Department and the African Union endeavoured to ensure consistency between
the concepts of the United Nations and the African Union in respect of the protection
of civilians, it has become clear that one concept may not be sufficient, given that
African Union and United Nations operations are often deployed in different operating
environments. In Somalia, for example, AMISOM must focus on avoiding civilian
casualties in the context of offensive operations, rather than proactively mitigating
threats to vulnerable civilian populations. At the same time, African Union missions
sometimes receive protection of civilians mandates that are similar to those of United
Nations peacekeeping operations, as in the case of the Central African Republic. In

14/18

15-05045

S/2015/229

such situations, a consistent approach on the protection of civilians greatly enhances
the collective efforts and makes transitioning from one organization to the other
easier for troops, police and civilian personnel. Given the likelihood of the
deployment of African Union and United Nations operations, often sequentially, into
situations in which civilian lives are at risk, greater work on formulating and, where
possible, aligning the concepts would be a step in the right direction.

Women and peace and security
51. The United Nations Office to the African Union works with the African Union
Commission on issues related to gender mainstreaming and women and peace and
security, including in the development of policies and guidelines and in the
conceptualization and planning of African Union-led operations. Collaboration on
the agenda regarding women and peace and security is also well established with
NATO. The two organizations have prioritized the development of co mmon
messaging and terminology on gender and conflict-related sexual violence in order
to promote a harmonized approach to operationalizing the principles regarding
women and peace and security in respective operations.

Police
52. The Policy on United Nations Police in Peacekeeping Operations and Special
Political Missions, promulgated by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
the Department of Field Support, defines the core functions of United Nations
police and the fundamental principles guiding its activities. It was developed with
the assistance of key regional organizations such as the African Union, the European
Union and OSCE. The overarching policy is being cascaded through a hierarchy of
thematic guidelines, manuals, standard operating procedures and training materials on
specific sub-areas as identified within the four core functions. The guidance materials
are being developed by the United Nations, in cooperation with the African Union,
the European Union and other key regional and p rofessional organizations, and are
intended for use by any organization or Member State deploying police to serve in
complex, multidimensional international peace operations.

Security sector reform, and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration
53. Since 2009, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the African
Union Commission have enhanced their partnership on security sector reform, most
recently in close collaboration with the European Union, the United Nations Office
to the African Union, the United Nations Office for Project Services and the African
Security Sector Network. The partnership has resulted in several key achievements,
including the adoption of the first continental policy framework on security sector
reform and the design and implementation of the $2.4 million support programme
on security sector reform, which has facilitated the development of related
operational guidance. The policy framework is now actively being disseminated to
African Union member States and regional economic communities, including through
training sessions and the production of guidance documents on, for example, how to

15-05045

15/18

S/2015/229

incorporate the provisions of the policy into domestic legislation. With regard to
doctrinal development in the area of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
the African Union, while subscribing to the Integrated Disarmament, Demobilization
and Reintegration Standards, is developing complementary Africa-specific guidelines,
with five already in place and an additional four planned for 2015.

Training
54. In the area of training, the United Nations continues to collaborate with the
African Union in the assessment of the immediate training needs for its past and
ongoing missions, especially in Mali and Somalia. The United Na tions has been
invited by the African Union to participate in the development and review of a peace
operations training curriculum prepared by the African Union in partnership with
the African Peace Support Trainers Association, as well as the planning and delivery
of relevant training. Another area of significant cooperation relates to the rehatting
of troops to United Nations-led peacekeeping operations. Receiving appropriate
predeployment training on the protection of civilians, includi ng women and
children, is a predeployment requirement for United Nations missions. The
Integrated Training Service of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support supported the training of AFISMA troops in
connection with their rehatting under MINUSMA in July 2013. During July and
August 2014, similar rehatting training was conducted for troops entering
MINUSCA. In both cases, personnel were trained on the mission mandate and
background; military and police concepts of operations; rules of en gagement; the
United Nations code of conduct for peacekeepers; the zero tolerance policy
regarding sexual exploitation and abuse; human rights; international humanitarian
law; the protection of civilians; conflict-related sexual violence; child protection;
and support for humanitarian assistance. The United Nations will seek to strengthen
its training support capacity for the African Union.
55. Overall, the potential for training cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union, NATO, the European Union and other organizations should
continue to be explored in cases where organizations have training capabilities and
capacity applicable to United Nations peacekeeping efforts and where the respective
training architectures can be aligned. Examples of such cooperation might include
the sharing of experience or expertise, the development of training methodology,
standards and tools for training delivery, evaluation and certification, and the design
and management of e-learning or simulations and other training exercises.

VII. Observations
56. The framers of the Charter of the United Nations showed great vision in
foreseeing a global, collective security architecture with the United Nations at its
centre and a clear role for regional arrangements. As shown in the present report, the
partnership between the United Nations and regional organizations in respect of
peacekeeping activity has never been stronger, particularly in Africa. It continues to
deepen and evolve, with the United Nations, the African Union, the regional
economic communities and the European Union working side by side, and
increasingly hand in hand, in multiple countries and regions.

16/18

15-05045

S/2015/229

57. We have thus entered an era of “partnership peacekeeping”, where close
cooperation among multiple multilateral actors throughout every phase of a crisis is
becoming the norm — and an essential component of each organization. Rather than
one organization exiting and handing off its mandates/responsibilities to another, the
respective roles of the organizations continuously evolve to meet new requirements
and complement the changing roles being played by the others. This is a paradigm
shift that is not the result of happenstance, but reflects the invaluable contribution
that each organization can make, whether in the political, security, human rights,
development or humanitarian sphere, during each period of the overall response. It
also reflects the clear recognition that no single organization can effectively address
increasingly complex, multifaceted peace and security challenges on its own,
whether at the subregional, regional or global level. Responding to those challenges
has increasingly been and must be a joint endeavour. At the same time, it is
important that the endeavour truly be the full su m of all its parts, namely, that each
organization play a mutually supportive role with the others to advance the common
goal of peace.
58. In order to continue to make progress in that regard, there is a need to further
strengthen the formal and informal mechanisms of engagement at the strategic level. It
is my hope that the Security Council will consider adopting a clearer methodology for
consultation with its counterparts at the regional and subregional levels, particularly
with the Peace and Security Council of the African Union. This would allow for
greater political coherence, especially in determining the role of each organization
in response to crises. Although it is unrealistic to expect organizations to always
agree on the best responses, strengthening the channels and practices of consultation
would facilitate more rapid decision-making and an optimal use of resources, not
least by reducing overlap and transaction costs. I trust that the other members of the
Security Council will fully support the pivotal role that the African three can play in
enhancing coherence between the Security Council and the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union, including during the drafting of relevant resolutions.
59. There is a need for the United Nations and regional actors to cooperate as
closely as possible on the planning of their respective operations as their roles adapt
to each new phase of the overall response to a crisis. The present report shows the
significant advances that have been made in this area as well, notably in the Central
African Republic, Mali and Somalia. Planning together and early for transitions
between different missions is particularly important. Important lessons have been
learned from the recent transitions of operations from the African Union to the
United Nations in the Central African Republic and Mali, which should be applied
to future transitions. The transition from EUFOR RCA to MINUSCA was exemplary
and reflected substantial improvement compared with other transitions of op erations
from the European Union to the United Nations. Moving forward, it is important to
continue to capture lessons together and ensure that each organization incorporates
them into its guidance.
60. In my recent letter to the President of the Security Council on lessons learned
on the transitions from African Union peace operations to United Nations
peacekeeping operations in the Central African Republic and Mali ( S/2015/3), I
offered a number of important recommendations that are relevant in the context of
the present report. I reiterate my call for their full implementation, in particular the
joint lessons learned exercise on the various mechanisms for the financing of
African Union peace operations authorized by the Security Council. I intend to

15-05045

17/18

S/2015/229

present the recommendations of those exercises in my report on ways to strengthen
the partnership between the United Nations and the African Union, to be issued in
2016. I strongly believe that a shared understanding of the options for, and
limitations to, the provision of support to African Union peace operations will not
only strengthen the operational partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union, but also inform the assumptions on which relevant dec isions are
made and contribute to the management of expectations.
61. Recent transitions have pointed to the need for the gradual harmonization of
policies and standards between the United Nations and regional organizations and
arrangements. Efforts in the future should be geared towards closing the gap
between United Nations and African Union predeployment standards and training in
key areas, in order to facilitate future rehatting processes. There is also a need to
strengthen the understanding between the United Nations and its partners on what
certain mandates mean in practice, first and foremost those related to the protection
of civilians, which are central to contemporary peacekeeping. The work of all
organizations in this area would benefit from more systematic coordination on
guidance, training and the sharing of lessons learned.
62. The new paradigm of “partnership peacekeeping” also highlights the need to
broaden the understanding of partnerships beyond the bilateral relationships forged
between the United Nations and individual regional organizations, or between
regional organizations. The most obvious example is the simultaneous engagement
of the United Nations, the African Union and the European Union in Africa. In many
contexts, as made evident in the present report, this has become a de facto trilateral
partnership. We must explore how better to exploit the great potential that that
trilateral partnership can offer.
63. In a similar vein, the response mechanisms and capabilities available to e ach
organization should not be looked at in isolation from each other. Instead, we should
see how they can be combined most effectively and used more predictably, in
particular in order to respond rapidly to acute crises, when thousands of lives are at
risk. In that regard, I welcome the efforts of the African Union to fully
operationalize ASF, a goal that will continue to be supported by the United Nations,
as well as the continued discussions of the European Union on the
operationalization of the European Union battlegroup. Given the magnitude of the
peace and security challenges that the United Nations, the African Union and the
European Union face together, it is imperative that they consider how those
capacities can best complement each other to achieve the collective goal of
mounting the most effective overall response to crises.
64. I also welcome the efforts and initiatives of other regional organizations and
arrangements to strengthen their nascent peacekeeping capacities or develop new
ones. The United Nations remains open to supporting such initiatives, in line with
United Nations policies and standards, so that other regional organizations can
eventually assume a greater role and further enrich today’s peacekeeping partnership.
65. Finally, I would like to thank the African Union Commission and the European
Union for their collaboration in preparing the present report, and all the regional
organizations and arrangements partnering with the United Nations in the quest for
peace.

18/18

15-05045
