S/PV.8485

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8485th meeting

Friday, 15 March 2019, 3.25 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Gueguen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Duclos
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Safronkov
Ms. Tshabalala
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2019/193)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-07327 (E)
*1907327*

S/PV.8485

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 3.25 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2019/193)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Afghanistan to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2019/223, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Germany and Indonesia.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/193, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Belgium, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominican
Republic, Equatorial Guinea, France, Germany,
Indonesia, Kuwait, Peru, Poland, Russian
Federation, South Africa, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 2460 (2019).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): The result we just
witnessed — 15 votes in favour — was the objective
that the co-penholders, Indonesia and Germany,
had from the very beginning. It was key for us that
we demonstrate today that the Security Council is
2/8

15/03/2019

unanimous in its decision on Afghanistan and on the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and that we send a united message to the
people of Afghanistan that the Council remains by their
side at this time. But I also have to say that resolution
2460 (2019), just adopted, is not the kind of UNAMA
resolution that we worked towards as co-penholders
over the past six weeks, and it is not the kind of UNAMA
resolution that we have had for the past 17 years.
When Indonesia and Germany — and I would
like to pay tribute to the good cooperation between
us newcomers as penholders — negotiated the text,
we reached a very strong consensus on all substantial
issues, including on perhaps the most important one,
namely, on the urgency of progress with regard to
an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process.
Unfortunately, however, issues that have nothing to do
with it and are not related to the excellent work and
mandate of UNAMA made it impossible to achieve
the resolution for which we had originally aimed. I
must admit that I really regret that we were not able to
overcome those differences.
We very much lament that such topics as the
upcoming elections, the participation of women in
the Afghan peace process, the situation of children in
armed conflict and the nexus between climate change
and security are no longer reflected in the resolution.
We have before us a text that really satisfies none of us,
but it has UNAMA’s mandate at its very heart. Again,
we remain united in our commitment to Afghanistan,
and that is the most important message.
The mandate duration now is only six months.
That should be a reminder that our engagement in
Afghanistan is much broader than what we have
achieved, which is six months of engagement. Also,
when we resume discussions in the fall, we will have
a chance to reflect the dynamics in the country with
regard to the peace process and the elections. We hope
that at that time we will be able to refocus the resolution.
There is, however, one message that is very
important — and here I turn to the Afghan Ambassador,
who was strongly asking for an extension of one
year — that this extension of six months does not mean
that the United Nations, this organ and the international
community are not united in their support for the
Afghan people. The commitment remains, and the 15
votes today demonstrate that. I think that this is a very
important message that we want to send today.
19-07327

15/03/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

I urge colleagues that, when we return to that
discussion, which will come faster than we realize, that
we take it very seriously and focus on the most important
issues on which we shared agreement and agree to leave
the marginal issues on the sidelines, so that when we
adopt the resolution next time, we give UNAMA the
guidance and tools necessary to accomplish its crucial
and challenging mission.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me begin by expressing
my delegation’s deepest sympathy and condolences
to the families of the victims of the heinous terrorist
attack that took place today at the two mosques in
Christchurch, New Zealand, as well as to the people and
the Government of New Zealand. We of course strongly
condemn the attack, which took the lives of peaceful
people during prayer and left many injured, including
two Indonesian nationals at the mosque. We certainly
condemn terrorism; it has no place in any society. As
New Zealand’s close neighbour, we once again extend
our condolences.
Much has been said by my colleague the
Ambassador of Germany, including that we worked
together and collaborated as co-penholders. I would
like to extend our gratitude to our colleagues around
the table for the support extended to Germany and
Indonesia throughout the negotiations on resolution
2460 (2019), on the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). It was not an easy task to come up with
a text that was agreeable to all, and indeed we had to
strike a balance so that more weight was not placed on
one side or the other.
The idea, as my German colleague mentioned, was
to ensure unity within the Security Council; it is very
important to show the world that the Council is united.
But the most important part that takes precedence
is to side with the people and the Government of
Afghanistan, who have been on a long quest for peace
and stability. That was the basis for us to ensure that
we had a consensual text that was not only acceptable
to the Council but also in line with well-being and
interests of the people of Afghanistan.
Like my colleague also mentioned, the resolution
does not necessarily purport to answer all challenges,
but we are confident that it reinforces, in a substantive
manner, the indispensable role of the United Nation in
support of Afghanistan. That is the main message that

S/PV. 8485

we wanted to see in the text. Certainly, the text can be
built upon in future, as the situation warrants.
For the co-penholders, as I mentioned, unity was
the priority, and that was what we are sought. We were
both happy to play the role of bridge-builder. Once
again, we are grateful for the understanding and all the
positive contributions in that regard.
I would like to recall the message that Special
Representative Yamamoto delivered during last
Monday’s briefing that the success of the Afghanistan
peace process will depend upon international support
for local efforts (see S/PV.8481). I think that is the main
point that we should work on, and we are delighted that
there is a text in that regard.
As can be appreciated, given our discussions,
the text before us focuses on what matters most for
UNAMA, that is, to continue to operate without
disruption to support Afghanistan in its efforts. It
underlines the importance of an Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned political process; reaffirms once
again the strong commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity
of Afghanistan; continues support for the Government
and the people of Afghanistan as they rebuild their
country and strengthen democratic institutions; and
also expresses the desire for the Government and the
people of Afghanistan to reinvigorate their country’s
standing as a platform for international cooperation.
That is the main gist of the resolution.
As I mentioned before, we will have an opportunity
again to further develop the resolution, according to the
conditions and priorities of Afghanistan. I would just
like to underline that this resolution is a good basis to
do that sort of work — to chart positive development
in Afghanistan and monitor the areas where the
Government and the people of Afghanistan need the
international community’s support.
This resolution on UNAMA is revolutionary in the
sense that it does not simply build on past resolutions
but tries to focus on the main priorities and interests of
the Afghan people. We have heard in many instances
and proceedings that members want a successful
resolution, and we hope that this resolution can be read
and understood as having a clear mandate. I think it
answers that basic prerequisite for which a member has
long been asking.

19-073273/8

S/PV.8485

The situation in Afghanistan

Lastly, I think we should also take into account the
positive movement that is happening in Afghanistan.
The country is no longer the same as it was several
years ago. Let us play our respective roles, befittingly
at this important juncture in history. I am positive that
the Council will support Afghanistan in all its effort.
I think I will leave it at that. Once again, I thank you,
Madam President, for all your support. I also thank my
brothers, our German colleagues, who worked hard, as
well as my team and their team.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): The United
States voted in favour of resolution 2460 (2019) today
to extend the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for six months, and we
would like to thank the co-penholders, Germany and
Indonesia, for their diligent efforts.
Let us be very clear about our very strong support
for UNAMA. The United States fully supports the
Mission’s role in Afghanistan’s peace process, electoral
reforms and coordination of international assistance.
We reiterate our steadfast commitment to advancing the
prospects for peace in Afghanistan. That is reflected
through our intense diplomatic engagement, led by our
Special Representative for Afghanistan Reconciliation,
Zalmay Khalilzad, to build momentum towards
intra-Afghan dialogue to end the long-standing conflict.
However, we are deeply disappointed that the Council
was not able to come to a consensus on a resolution
renewing the Mission’s mandate for a full year. China
held the resolution hostage and insisted on making it
about Chinese national political priorities rather than
the people of Afghanistan. As a result, the Council had
no choice but to accept a short-term technical rollover.
When the Council considers important issues of
international peace and security, such as the situation
in Afghanistan, it cannot allow the national initiatives
of one Member State to derail negotiations. In this
case, the issue was China’s demand that the resolution
highlight its Belt and Road Initiative despite its
tenuous ties to Afghanistan and known problems with
corruption, debt distress, environmental damage and a
lack of transparency. We look forward to working with
our fellow Council members in the coming months
on a more complete resolution that would extend
the Mission for a longer period, which I believe the
entire Council agrees that UNAMA and the people of
Afghanistan deserve.
4/8

15/03/2019

We hope that in subsequent negotiations China
will focus on how best to advance peace and security
in Afghanistan rather than using Security Council
resolutions as a platform for inappropriately promoting
self-serving initiatives.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation voted in favour of
resolution 2460 (2019) just adopted by the Security
Council to extend the mandate the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. We believe that
the United Nations Mission has an important role in
coordinating international humanitarian assistance
to Afghanistan. We highly appreciate the courageous
and self-sacrificing work of United Nations staff
in that country, It is our view that an important
precondition for the effectiveness of our joint efforts
to resolve the situation in Afghanistan should be the
adoption of decisions that are based on a thorough
assessment, taking into account the current realities
and acknowledgement of the common positions of the
international community towards establishing peace in
that important State.
The need for such an approach is increasing, in
particular at this time, since because Afghanistan is
on the verge of fundamental changes in the life of the
country and the people. The Afghans themselves must
play a key role in resolving national issues. Ensuring
the most inclusive peace process in Afghanistan, whose
most important task is to seek sustainable national
reconciliation, and involving all public and political
forces in the country in that process is crucial. We
are convinced that stabilization in Afghanistan and
addressing the complex challenges facing the country
will be possible only through the integrated and
consistent approach of the international community.
Russia is working to ensure that all Afghan political
parties and key external stakeholders act in unity on the
basis of common rules.
We regret that on this occasion the Council was
not able to adopt a substantive resolution, which
would have reflected the coordinated approaches
of all Security Council members on the issue of
Afghanistan. We once again draw attention to the
procedure for negotiating resolutions. We understand
that the co-authors were trying to bring the Security
Council to a consensus but external pressure prevented
the work from being conducted in such a way that the
consultation process could take into account the wide
range of positions. Some of our colleagues decided to
19-07327

15/03/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

ignore the views of a number of Council members, at
the last moment changing positions on the previously
agreed language. That gave rise to a counterproductive
situation, ultimately undermining our joint efforts
to resolve the situation in the country and to achieve
national reconciliation.
In the Council’s future work on Afghanistan, we
call on all colleagues to take into account the military
and political realities in the country. There must be a
realistic assessment of the situation in Afghanistan,
which requires strengthening the joint fight against
terrorist groups, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, Al-Qaida and affiliated terrorist organizations.
The ongoing focus must continue to be on combating
drug trafficking and the narcotics trade. Regional
organizations, in particular the Collective Security
Treaty Organization and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, continue to play an important role. The
Moscow consultations formation on Afghanistan and
the intra-Afghan dialogue launched in the Russian
capital seek solely to achieve lasting and irreversible
national reconciliation.
We once again affirm our commitment to
working in close cooperation with the Government
of Afghanistan, all political parties in the country
and regional and international partners. We call on
the Council members to act in a mutually respectful
way on the basis of consensus in pursuit of a common
solution. In that regard, we note the important role that
the People’s Republic of China can play in finding a
lasting settlement in Afghanistan.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption of resolution
2460 (2019). We recognize the diligent work of the
co-penholders. However, we also regret that it was not
possible to adopt a more comprehensive resolution with
a 12-month mandate.
The forthcoming presidential elections mean that
Afghanistan faces some crucial months ahead. As we
have all recognized, it is important that lessons are
learned from the earlier parliamentary elections to
ensure a transparent, credible and inclusive presidential
vote on 20 July. To that end, we believe that the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
has a crucial role to play and that it will be important
for UNAMA to work closely and urgently with the
new election commissioners in identifying priorities
and challenges.

S/PV. 8485

As progress is made, the meaningful participation
of women at all levels of decision-making, from the
local community to the negotiation table, is essential.
The sustained and empowered involvement of women
makes any peace process more likely to succeed. We
reiterate that any political settlement should protect the
progress achieved on human rights and gender equality
in Afghanistan over the past 18 years.
Millions of Afghans face extreme difficulties amid
a complex humanitarian situation. The United Kingdom
agrees with the Russian Federation that UNAMA has
an important role in leading the international response,
and we urge UNAMA and the Afghan Government to
work together to support the most vulnerable.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
At the outset allow me to express my country’s deepest
condolences to the Government of New Zealand and
to the families of the victims following the terrorist
incident in Christchurch yesterday.
Today Belgium voted in favour of resolution 2460
(2019) renewing the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We did
so because the resolution ensures that UNAMA can
continue to provide valuable support to the Afghan
authorities at a crucial time in the peace process
and in strengthening democracy in the country. We
welcome the efforts made by the co-penholders to find
a common understanding. However, we regret the fact
that the Council was not able to reach consensus on a
more detailed resolution, thereby depriving the Mission
of the necessary political guidance.
As my German colleague eloquently said, a
one-year mandate would have allowed the Mission to
have better operational planning and more prospects.
Renewing the mandate in September will give us the
opportunity to rectify that.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to express
our gratitude to Germany, Indonesia and, in particular,
their experts on Afghanistan for their dedication and
professionalism shown during the negotiations.
We are witnessing new dynamics with regard to the
peace process in Afghanistan. That may bring a longawaited resolution to the conflict, which has caused
so much suffering to too many victims. Our intention
was to have all such aspects reflected in the resolution.
Poland voted in favour of resolution 2460 (2019) to
support an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned process.

19-073275/8

S/PV.8485

The situation in Afghanistan

Poland is a strong advocate of a global solution to
the challenges facing our planet due to climate change.
That also applies to Afghanistan, which has been
severely affected by desertification, among others. We
encourage the Government of Afghanistan to work
on adequate risk assessment and risk management
strategies in order to mitigate future threats to stability
and security.
I would like to conclude our explanation of vote
after the voting by reiterating our strong support for
Special Representative Yamamoto and the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, as well as
for Afghanistan and its people.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
current situation in Afghanistan is at a critical stage,
with many important issues on the political agenda
this year. China supports the reconciliation process in
Afghanistan and the country’s efforts to improve its
security environment, advance its reconstruction and
participate in regional cooperation and development.
China supports the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in the continued
implementation of its mandate in order to provide
assistance to Afghanistan in the relevant areas. China
sincerely hopes that lasting peace and long-term
development can be achieved in Afghanistan, which is
not only in the vital interest of the people of Afghanistan
but is also of critical importance to security, stability,
development and prosperity in the region.
China appreciates the efforts made by Indonesia
and Germany as the co-facilitators of the consultations
that led to consensus on resolution 2460 (2019).
China voted in favour of the technical roll-over of the
UNAMA mandate. The mandate remains unchanged.
UNAMA will continue to provide Afghanistan
with support in a peaceful reconciliation process,
elections, regional cooperation, reconstruction and
humanitarian assistance. China actively participated
in the consultations on the resolution on the technical
roll-over and has made a number of reasonable and
constructive suggestions and proposals with regard to
the reconstruction of Afghanistan, the fight against
terrorism, the reconciliation process and regional
cooperation. China supports the technical roll-over
so that UNAMA can continue its work. However,
that should be only a temporary arrangement on
which members of the Council should continue
thorough consultations.
6/8

15/03/2019

In his statement, the representative of the United
States referred to the Belt and Road Initiative. However,
his remarks were at variance with the facts and fraught
with prejudice. Therefore, I would like to emphasize
the following points.
First, the Belt and Road Initiative has been widely
welcomed by the international community. In the six
years since the Initiative was put forward, 123 countries
and 29 international organizations have signed
cooperation agreements to jointly develop the Initiative.
Participants agreed to adhere to the principle of building,
sharing and actively implementing cooperation projects
to promote interconnectedness and bring development
opportunities to participating countries.
Secondly, the Belt and Road Initiative is conducive
to Afghanistan’s reconstruction and economic
development. Under the framework, China and
Afghanistan will continue to strengthen cooperation
in various fields, promote economic and social
development in the country and integrate Afghanistan
into regional development. China and Afghanistan are
actively implementing a memorandum of understanding
on the Initiative to promote efforts in the areas of trade
and transportation, energy, health and communications
and cooperation in other fields.
Thirdly, the Belt and Road Initiative emphasizes
openness and transparency. In building the Initiative,
China and other countries adhere to the principle
of a market economy led by businesses and abide by
general international and market rules. A total of 27
countries, including China, have developed the Guiding
Principles on Financing the Development of the Belt
and Road Initiative, which outline clear provisions for
building a transparent, friendly, non-discriminatory
and predictable financing environment, with an
emphasis on promoting sustainable economic and
social development.
Fourthly, the Initiative is one of economic
cooperation aimed at achieving shared development
and prosperity. It has nothing to do with geopolitics.
All countries are welcome to participate and share in
the opportunities it affords.
The Council failed to reach an agreement on the
extension of the substantive content of the resolution
because of the persistence of differences, one of which
is that one member in particular repeatedly refused to
accept the consensus in the Council for many years
and the constructive opinions put forward by others,
19-07327

15/03/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV. 8485

which poisoned the atmosphere for consultations. That
is obvious and cannot be denied.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.

I give the floor to the representative of Afghanistan.

In my national capacity, I reiterate our deepest
sympathy to the families of the victims of the
reprehensible terrorist attack on the mosques in
Christchurch and the people of New Zealand.
France stands in solidarity with New Zealand at this
challenging time.
At our meeting on 11 March (see S/PV.8481),
France recalled at this pivotal time in Afghanistan’s
history the importance it attaches to unity among
international partners and in the Council in support of
Afghanistan. We reiterated that, now more than ever,
we must remain united in support of Afghanistan’s
path to peace, stability, democracy and economic and
social development.
Germany and Indonesia have made commendable
efforts to achieve a substantive and satisfactory renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). However, we
deplore the fact that differences among some members
of the Security Council on issues that are not directly
related to the Mission’s mandate, or even to the
Council’s responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations, have led us to adopt a resolution for a
six-month technical renewal. For France, that is not the
signal we should be sending to UNAMA and it should
in no way set a precedent.
We hope that this time will be used to overcome
bilateral disputes and refocus on the core mandate of
UNAMA, in particular on issues such as, first, support
for peace efforts; secondly, preparations for presidential
elections; thirdly, the coordination of development
aid and humanitarian assistance; and, fourthly, the
promotion of human rights, in particular women’s
rights. We would like negotiations to resume as soon as
possible and be conducted in a transparent and inclusive
manner. The United Nations plays an essential role in
supporting Afghanistan in its transformation decade.
UNAMA, like the many United Nations agencies
present in Afghanistan, conducts remarkable work on a
daily basis in difficult conditions and deserves the full
commitment of the Council.

Ms. Raz (Afghanistan): I would like to make a
few points in the context of today’s extension by the
Security Council of the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.
Before that, however, let me join previous speakers
in expressing the deepest condolences of the people
and the Government of Afghanistan about yesterday’s
terrorist attack in New Zealand. We condemn that
attack in the strongest terms and express our solidarity
with the people and the Government of New Zealand in
the wake of the tragedy.
The adoption of resolution 1401 (2002) marked
the start of a new phase in the engagement of the
United Nations in Afghanistan. It coincided with the
determined efforts by the people of Afghanistan to shape
my country’s future, one that would see all Afghans,
especially youth, taking charge of their destiny. In that
regard, the United Nations and all the members of the
Security Council have played a crucial role in helping
us to achieve many gains that once seemed impossible.
Despite remaining challenges, today Afghanistan’s
progress in consolidating those gains continues to
move in a positive direction. That is attributable to
the courage and determination of our people and the
support of the international community. The adoption
of resolution 2460 (2019) today allows the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
to continue its mandated activities in support of durable
peace, security and stability in our country, which we
welcome. As always, we are very appreciative of that.
Nonetheless, we regret that the nature of the
negotiations on this year’s resolution was such that the
divergence of views among some Council members
led to a situation whereby UNAMA’s mandate was
extended for only six months, as opposed to the usual
12-month renewal period. However, we understand
the Council’s commitment to a forthcoming 12-month
extension of UNAMA’s mandate. We will utilize the
upcoming six months to develop a more comprehensive
and effective mandate and draft resolution to serve the
people of Afghanistan.
Afghanistan stands at a crucial juncture in its
successful transition towards a self-reliant nation
living in peace and prosperity. As we are approaching

19-073277/8

S/PV.8485

The situation in Afghanistan

presidential elections in July, we are focused on
ensuring a transparent and credible process that is
embraced by our people and marks another important
step in consolidating democracy and the rule of law in
the country.
At the same time, we are also encouraged in
working to advance our Afghan-led and -owned
peace process so as to ensure just, dignified and
sustainable peace for our people as a matter of priority.
The supporting role of the international community
and the United Nations remains of great importance
to those national processes, as well as in other key

8/8

15/03/2019

areas, including enhancing development, governance
and the rule of law, coordinating the delivery of
international civilian and humanitarian assistance and
promoting human rights. We look forward to — and
we expect — the Security Council’s continuing firm
engagement in our stabilization efforts on the way
forward. That will be vitally important to achieving a
fully secure, stable and prosperous Afghanistan, which
is a fundamental imperative for advancing international
peace and security.
The meeting rose at 4.05 p.m.

19-07327
