S/PRST/2012/9

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 April 2012
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6745th meeting of the Security Council, held on 4 April 2012, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Peace and security
in Africa”, the President of the Council made the following statement on behalf of
the Council:
“The Security Council reiterates its strong condemnation of the forcible
seizure of power from the democratically elected Government of Mali by some
elements of the Malian armed forces, and recalls in this regard its Press
statement of 22 March 2012 and its Presidential statement of 26 March 2012.
The Council calls on the mutineers to ensure the safety and security of all
Malian officials and demands the immediate release of those detained. The
Council renews its call for the immediate restoration of constitutional rule and
the democratically elected Government and for the preservation of the
electoral process.
“The Security Council supports the efforts of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), which issued communiqués on 27 and
29 March 2012, and commends the work of President Blaise Compaore, as
ECOWAS facilitator, in promoting the return to full civilian authority and the
effective re-establishment of constitutional order in Mali. The Council also
commends the efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary General
for West Africa and of the African Union in this regard and takes note of the
announcement of the mutineers to restore constitutional rule as of April 1,
2012. The Council expects the mutineers to take immediate steps to effectively
implement this commitment and will follow developments closely.
“The Security Council strongly condemns the continued attacks, looting
and seizure of territory carried out by rebel groups in the North of Mali and
demands an immediate cessation of hostilities. The Council is alarmed by the
presence in the region of the terrorist group Al Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb,
which could lead to a further destabilization of the security situation. The
Council calls upon the rebels to immediately cease all violence and urges all
parties in Mali to seek a peaceful solution through appropriate political
dialogue. The Council stresses the importance of the safety of civilians and of
the respect of human rights.
“The Security Council reaffirms the need to uphold and respect the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Mali.

12-28398 (E) 040412

*1228398*

S/PRST/2012/9

“The Security Council renews its serious concern over the insecurity and
rapidly deteriorating humanitarian situation in the Sahel region.
“The Council commends efforts of humanitarian organizations involved
and calls on all parties in Mali to allow timely, safe and unimpeded access of
humanitarian aid to civilians in need, in accordance with international law,
including applicable international humanitarian law, and guiding principles of
emergency humanitarian assistance. The Council calls for an increased
mobilization of the international community to support humanitarian efforts.
“The Security Council expresses its concern at the risk posed by fighting
to Mali’s World Heritage sites.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to update it, as
appropriate, on developments in Mali and will remain seized of the matter.”

2

12-28398
