NATIONS UNIES

UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES·VERBAUX OFFICIELS

FOURTH YEAR

No. 21

QUATRIEME ANNEE

No 21

FOUR HUNDRED AND EIGHTEENTH
MEETING

QUATRE CENT DIX·HUITIEME

Held at Lake Succeu, New Yvrk,
on Monday, 14 March 1949, at 3 p.m.

Tenue d Lake Success, Ne-,1J-York
le lundi 14 m4'YS 1949, a 15 heures.

President: Mr. A. MVAREt. (Cuba).

President:

Present: The representatives of the foHawing
countries: Argentina, Canada, Chir.a, Cuba,
Egypt, France, Norway, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist ~epub~ic, Union of Soviet Sodalist Republics,

Umted Kmgdom, United States of America.

1. Provisional agenda (S/Agenda 418)

SEANCE

M. A. ALVAREZ (Cuba).

Pr6~'ents: Les rcprcscntants des pays suiv:;lnt.s =
Argentine, Canada, Cl1ine, Cuba, Egypte, France,
Norvege,
Republique
$I)cialiste
sovietique
d'Ukraine, Union des Repub1i<;.ues socialistes
sovietiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

1. Ordre du jour provisoire
(SI Agenda 418)

1. Adoption of the agemla,

L Adoption de l'orc1re du jour.

2. The Indonesian question:

2. La question :ndonesienne:

(a) Report dated 1 March 1949 from the

United Nations Commission for Indonesia i:1 accrJrdanc.e with the Security
Coundl reso:ution of 28 January 1949

(5/1270 and 5/1270/C",.I);
(b) Letter dated 2 1farch 1949 from the
representative of the Netherlands to the
Presi(lent of the Sewrity Council concerning the Council's resolution of 28 January 1949 on the Indonesian question

(5/1274) ;
(c) Supple:nentary report dated 7 March 1949
fmIll the United Nations Commission for
Indonesia submitted in accordance with
the CQullcil'.l resolution oi 28 January
1949 (5/1270/Add.l and Cord);
(d) Second sltpplementary report rJatf'.d
10 March 1949 from the United Nations
Comm:ssion for Indonesia submitted in
accordance with the Council's resolution

nf 28 :anc,",y 1949 (S/1270/Add.2) ;
(c) Third supplementary report dated
11 March 1949 from the Uni~ed Nations
Commission for Indonesia sllbmitted in
accordance with the Council's resolution
of 28 January 1949 (SjI270/Add,3). -

a) Rapport, en date du ler mars 1949, adresse
all Conseil de securire conformemetlt a la
resolution ciu Conseil desecurite en date
du 28 janvier 1949 (5/1270 et 5/1270/
Corr.!) ;
b) Lettre, en' datt du 2 mars 1949, adressee
au President du Conseil de s6curite par le
representant des Pays-Eas, concernallt la
resolution du Conseil en df-te du 28 janvier
1949 relative
la question indonesienne

a

(5/1274) ;
c) Rapport suppl~mentaire, en date du 7 :nars
1949, adresse au Conseil de securite -par la
Commission des NatlOns Unies pour !'I11donesie conformement
la resolution du
Conseil de securite en date du 28 janvier
1949 (S/1270jAdd.1 et Cord) ;
d) Deuxieme rapport suppJementairc, en date
du 10 mars lY49, adresse au Con:;eil de
securite par la Commission des N~tions
Unies pour l'Indonesie, conformement a
la resolution du Conseil de securite en date
du 28 j:'.nvier 1949 (S/1270jAdd.2);
8) Troisieme rapport suppl6m:nta:rc, er. date
du 11 mars 194-9 adresse all Conseil de
securite par :a Commission des Nations
Unies pour l'Indonesie conformement la
reso1,ution du Conseil de securite en date
UU 28 je.nvier 11)·1-9 (S/1270jAdd.3).

a

a

2

2. Adoption of the agenda
Th!? agenda. was adopted.

2. Adoption de l'ordre du jour
L'ordre du jour est adopie.

3. Continuation of the discussion on the
Indonesian question

3. Suite de la discussion sur la qllestion
indonesienne

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Hood,
representative of Belgium.; U Ba Maung, repre~
sentative of Burma; Sir BeHegal Ramc Ra1~,
representative of IncUa; Mr. Va11 Roijen, repreSOJtatjve of the Netherlands; Abdltr R'lhim Khan,
re(!re~'entative of Pakistan; Mr. Lopez, representative of fhe Philippines, and Mr. Polar, representative of the Repltblic of Indonesia, took their
places at the Seclirity Council table.

Sur l'invitation d1t President, AI. H ooOd, representa.nt de l' A1Htralie,. M. van Lan.genhoz'e, represf>ntll-1lt de la Belgiq1w; U Ba Maung, repj·esentant d.' la Birmanie; Sir B"fugal Ra-mOo Rail.,
representant if> l'Inde; M. l'.'ltn Roijen, reprcselltant des Pays-Ras,. Abdur Ra-him Khan, representant dH Pakistan; M. L6pez, representa.nt des
Philippines, d.M. Paler, representant de la Rep1.bliq1U! d'Indontsie, prennent place d la- table
du Consei!.

The PRRsrnENT (translated from Spanish): As
usual, there will be consecutive interpretation oi
speeches made by members of the Council and
simultaneous interpretation of those made by
representatives.

Le PRESIDE.N'(' (traduit de l'espagnol):
Comme d'habitude, I'interpretation sera consecu·
tive pour les interventions des rnembres du
Conseil et simultanee pour celJes des representants
invites a participer aux debats.

AbdUI" RAHIM Khan (Pakistan): Before. proceeding to express the views of the Government
of Pakistan on the present dispute in Indonesia,
I wish to thank the President of the Security
Council for affording me an opportunity to speak
on the subject. The participation of my Government in the discussions before the Council is, nO
doubt, somewhat late, but this was due primarily
to the: absence of a permanent representative of
my Government at the heildquarters of the United
Nations.

Abdnr RAIIIM Khan (Pakistan) (fradwit de
l'GlIglais): Avantd'exposer les vues du Gouvemement du PakisL1.n Sllr le difH~rend indonesien
actltel, je tiens a exprimer mes remereiements au
President du Conseil de securite pour m'avoir
donne l'occasionl de prendre la parole sur cette
question. C'est un peu tardivement. eertes, que
man Gouvernement intervient dans le debat qui se
derou!e devant le Conseil de securite, mais la
raison en est -avant tout que mon Gouvernement
n'avait pas de representant permanent au siege
de l'Organisation des Nations Unies,
Mon GOl1vernement a eprouve une inquietude
et une apprehension tre., vives devant la tournure
qu'ont pris les evenements
la suite de J'action
militaire dec1enchee par les autorites neerlandaises
contre la Republique d' [ndonesie. Des le debut de
edte annee. Sir JvIoharnmed Zafrullah Khan,
Premier Ministre du Pakistan, a adresse au President du Conseil de securite IIn telegramme dans
lequel i1 lui' faisait part de l'angoisse et de
]'anxiete que causait cette ac:t~on militaire au
peuple du Pakistan [S/1179]. On a fait valoir,
a cette epoque, que la decision prise par les auto rites neerlandaises etait d'autant plus regrettable
que h possibilite d'un reglement etait alar.!: en
Yue. Les Hollandais ont entrepris leur action au
mepris des principes de la Charte et de I'autorite
de l'Organisation des Nations Unies; its n'ont
tenu aucun compte des recommandations faites
par la 'Commission de bans offices des Nations
Unies.
Mon Gouvernernent a egalement exprime l'inquietude qu'il eprouvait devant l'hesitation apparentc aye: laquelle le Conseil de securite avait
pris des mesures dans des conjonctures aussi
graves. Alors que mon Gouvernement considerait
que la decision du Conseil de securite, prescrivant
le cessez-Ie-feu et la mise en liberte des dirigeants
n~publicains, etait tout a fait insuffisante pour retablir la situation, les Holbndais ne se sont me-me
pas conformes aux instructions fonnelles du
Conseil de securite. Le Pakistan a averti le
Conseil de securite, des la premiere occasion, que
I'action militaire des Pays-Bas avait plonge clans
1a consternation et I'angoisse tous les peuples du
sud-est de J'Asie, et il a adjure le Conseil de
prendre des dispositions immediates en vue du
retrait des tfQupes neerlandaises, de la mise ell

representative of AustraNa; Mr. van Langenhave,

My Government has been deeply concerned
and alarmed over the turn the situation took when
the Netherlands authorities started military action
against the Indonesian Republic. At the very
beginning of this year, Sir Mohammed Zafrullah
Khan, the Foreign Minister of Pakistan, addressed
a cable to the President of the Security Council
-in which he informed him of the distress and
anxiety which the people of Pakistan were feel·
ing. on account of the butch military action in
Indor:esia [S/1179]. It was stressed at the time
that this decision of the Netherlands authorities
was all the more regrettable,· since a possible
settlement was then within sight. The Netherlands action was taken in defiance of the principles
of the Charter and the authority of the United
Nations. The Netherlands had ignored the United
Nations Committee of Good Offices.

My Government further expressed alarm at
the hesitating manner in wbich the Security
Council had taken action in respect of a very
grave situation. The action taken by the Security
Council in demanding the cease-fire and the
release of Republican leaders was considered by
my Government as qlllte inadeqnate to meet the
situation which had then arisen; yet even this
requirement of the Security Council was not
being carried ont by the: Netherlands. Pakistan
warned the Security Council at the earliest opportunity that the Netherland.~ action in Indonesia
hau shocked and distressed all the people of South
East Asia, and urged most earnestly that the
Council should take immediate action for the
withdrawal of Dtttch troops and the release and
1'estoration to fuU freedom of authority of the

a

3
Republican leaders-which were the two tnlnJmum cOnditions considered essential by my Gov~
ernment. We stressed the urgency of this to avoid
a feeling ?f deep di~appointment, bordering almost
on despalr, spreadmg over the population of the
countries of South East Asia with regard to the
ability of the UnIted Nations ever to handle
effectively any theat to international pea~e, and
more parli~u1ar1y one which involved an aggression by a western nation against an eastern nation.

libelte inconditionclle d~s dirigeants l'epublicains
et de leur retour au pouvoir: c'elait la les deux
c;ln,ditions minima que mon GOllvernement COI1stderalt comrr.e essentielles. Nous avons souligne
que ces mesures devarent etre prises d'urgencc
a.fin d'eviter qu'un sentiment de profondc de.::epttor:, co.nfinant presque au desespoir, ne gagne les
populattons des pays dt: sud-est de l'Asie, qui se
demandent si l'Organisation dts Nations Unics
sera jamais en mesure de parer emcacement aux
menaces a la paix internationale, ltotamment lorsqu)~l s'agit d'une agression cOll1mise par un~
nallOn ucciuc;Jtale contre une nation oricntdc,

The urgency of the situation and toe importan~e
which my Government at':aches to the necessity
of its point of view being placed more effectively
before the Council, is evicent from the fact that
I was charged to avail myself of the first possible
opportunity of appearing before the Securitv
Council in this connexion,
.

Le fait que mon Gouvcrnement m'ait charge de
saisir la premiere OCGl.sion d'intervenir ser Ce
sujet a1.\ Conseil de securite montre combien
siteation est urgente et combien 1\10n Gouvernement desire qL1e son point de vue sClit expose aussi
ndtement que possible devant le ConseiL

The Council has already heard the voices of
the representatives of the various countries and
has before it n1.1merOUS statements by Mr. Pafar,
the representative of Indonesia. I would therefore refrain from giving an ex.haustive survey
of the whole situation and would limit myself to
an exp~ession of the views of mv Government
with regard to the manner in whi~h it finds the
Netherlands authorities lire attempting to disregard the wisbes of the Security Counc.il in
connexion with the settlement of :he dispute in
Indonesia between the Netherlands and the Republican Governments,

Le Canseil a deja enten,du .les points de vue des
representants de divers pays ainsi que les nom~
breuses dedarations faites par M. Palnr, ~pre.
sentant de I'Tndonesie. Jfl m'absticndrai done de
{aire un expose detaille de la situation dans son
ensemble et me bornerai a preser.ter les 'lues de
mon Gouvernement sur la fa<;on dont, a son avis,
le Gouverncment netrhndais s'efforce de passer
outre aux vo:ux du Conseil de stcurite en ce qui
wncerne le regle-menr du conflit qui oppose If'~
Pays-Bas au Gouvernement de la Republique,

The Security Council resolution of 28 January
1949 [S/1234J laid down the most practical, jmt
and politically sound formula for the settlement
of the dispute. To many observers, the conces~
siom; to thf' Nethf'rlands point of "View were con~
siderable, but it is recognized by my Government
that, in the interests of world peace and the
absorbing necessity of maintaining the prestige
and dignity of tbe United Nations, it was probably
unavoidable that concessions to that point of
view should have been made, As has been stated
repeatedlY on different .occasions before the
Secl1rity Counci\ the aim of al1 responsible Govl"rnmer:ts is not to deal with problems such as
the one confronting the Security Council in a
strictly judicial and legal or theoretical manner,
but to achieve resl1lts which would in the ·end
lead to peace ar.d contenlment. My Government
cannot hdp but feel trJat any party creating
difficulties in the way of the implementation of
the Security Council resolution of 28 January not
only would be guilty of open defiance of the
authority of the Cmmcil, but would stand before
the world tribunal as one gllilty of striking a
deadly blow at the very foundation of the United
Nations. For any Government to assist in maintaining conditions of an extremely explosive
nature in regions whic~ are already ca:.lsing
serious concern to the statesmen of the world, is
most ~eprehensible behaviour, and such action
cannot be condemned too severely.

La formule que le Conseil d~ securite, dans sa
resolution du 28 janvier 1949 [Sj1234] , a adoptee
po·,tr regler le differend indonesien est la plus
pratique, la plus equitable et, po1itiqueme:It, la
plus rationnelle que l'on 'pouvait trouver, Un
grand nombre d'observlteurs On! e~time que -trop
de conc.e~sions etaiellt :aites a la these des PaysBas mais men Gouvernement reconnait que,sans.
dOllte il etait inevitable de faire ces concessions,
dans \'inttn~t de la pa:)t mondia1e et parc.e qu'i1
falIait avant ~Ol1t maintcnir le prestige et la dignit6
de l'Organisltion des Nations Units. Le btit de
tous les GOl:.vernements responsables, on I'a de~
clare it maintes reprises devant le Conseil de se~
curite, n'est pas de resoudre un pTl"l~leme tel q~e
celui qui ~e p.ose en se fon~an~ ~lIlque111ent, Sl~r
des cDnsiderittlOns formelles, Jundtques au theonques mais d'abtenir des resultats qui puissent, a:
lalo~gue assurer la paix et le bonheur du monde.
Mon Go~vernement ne pent s'empe.::her de croire
que le fait, pou,r l'tmB de: part,ies, d'entrav~r la
m:se en Bpplj~atlOn de la resolunon d~ Con,>ell de
securite en date du 28 janvier constttueratt, n~n
st".1lement un defi flagrant it l'autorite du Consetl,.
mais encore un coup fatal porte aux fondtmenls
memes de l'Organisation des Nations Unies, dont
le coupable ~urait it repon.dre devant.la comClence
universelle. On ne sauratt assez blamer le Gauvemement qui contribuerait it entretenir un foyer
d'incendie dansdes regions qui sont deja. un sujet:
de graves preoccupaticns pour les hOIl1mes ?'Etaf
ciu monde entier; pareille attitude ne sauraltetre
ccndamnee trap severement.
.

However, it is a matter of great satisfaction
to my Government to find that, on the subject
of Indonesia, there is practically complete unanimity with regard to certain fundamental issues..

la

Mon Goevernement a toutefois constate, avec
nne vive satisfaction que, ell ce qui COl1cet;Je l'ln~,
donesie, 11 existe un a::cord presque Ilnnll1me s1Jr
certaines Questions de principe.

4
The first a.nd foremost of these is the necessity
of re-esta.blishing the Republica.n Government
immediately in Jogjakarta, with full rights of
sovereignty. My Government attaches equal importance to the necessity of the witMrawal of
Dutch troops from the different areas in the
Republican territory where these troops are now
stationed. We believe that no negotiations can
have any possibility of success unless the repre~
sentatives of the Republican Government enter
into such negotiations as free agents, and on a
footing of absolute equality with the other party
participating in the negotiations.

La premiere et la plus importante de c:cs questions reside dans la necessite de retablir sans deJai
le Gouvernement republicain a Djokjakarta, dans
sa pleine et entiere souverainete. Mon Gouvernement attac:he une egale importance au retrait des
troupes neerlandaises des differentes20nes du
territoire republicain gu'elles occupent actuellement. Nous estimons que les negociations n'auront
aucune chance d'aboutir si les representants du
Gouvernement republicain n'y participent pas
librernent et sur un pied d'egatite absolue avec
l'autre partie en cause.

The proposals of the Netherlands presented to
the Security Council by Mr, van Roijen [416th
meeting L have been dealt with exhaustively by
Mr. Palar [418th meeting], and, after hearing or
reading his statements, no one could have any
doubt regarding the evasive and incomplete
nature of these proposals. The representative of
the United States pointed out to the Council on
10 March [416th meeting] why it was necessary
that the parties should adhere to the terms of the
Security Council resolution of 28 January, I
shall therefore deal with only one or two aspects
of the Netherlands proposals.

M. Palar a fait [418eme shll'lce] une critique
detaillee et approfondie des propositions neerlandaises [416Mne seance] pre.s,entees au Cons~i1
de securite par M. van ROIJen. Apres aVOlr
entendu ou 1u les deClarations de M. Palar, on
ne saurait douter du caractere evasif et incomplet desdites propositions. Le representant des
Etats-Unis a indique au Conseil, le 10 mars
[416eme seance], les raisons pour lesquelles les
deux parties devaient s'en tenir aux termes de la
resolution du ConseiL de securite en date du
28 janvier. Je me bornerai :i attirer l'attentio.u
du Conseil sur un Ot' deux aspects des proposItions des Pays-Bas,

De l'avis de man GOllvernement, la composition
. !n the opinion of my Government, the composItion of the round table conference as proposed de la conference de la table ronde, telle que I'enby.the Netherlands authorities is thorOllghly tln- visage le Gouvernement neerlandais, n'est nullesahshctory. Not only would some of those invited ment satis£aisante. En dIet, non seulement cerfail to command tIle trust and confidence of the taines personn~s invitees a cette conference ne
people within the Republic of Indonesia, but they jouiraient pas de la confiance du peuple.de la
are likely to be condemned as the "yes-men" of Republique d'Indonesie, mais enc:ore dies rlsque~
the Netherlands Government. Furthermore, the raient de passer pour les "hommes de paille" du
nominees of the Republican Government could be Gouvernement des Pays-Bas. De plus, les representants du Gouvernement repubJicain ne pour~
~ccepted as such only if there existed a government that was an effective government to nomi- r'lient etre reconnus comme tels que s'il existait
nate such persons. As I have pointed out, my un Gouvernement reel, qualifie pour les designer.
Government has no doubt in its mind that unless Comme je l'ai deja. indique - et c'est la convicthe Republican Government is established in its tion absolue de man Gouvemement - il\ mains
capital and is free from all restraining influences que le Gouvernement de la Republique ne sait
-particularly those like the presence of Dutch retabli dans sa capitale, libre de toutes entraves troops within its territory-the voice of its nomi- ie1les, en particulier, que la presence des troupe.'l
nees would not only sound hollow at the pro. neerlandaises sur le territoire - les declarations
posed r~ur:d tabl.e conference, but would carry de ses representants n'auront aucune portee a
no conVictIOn With the general public in that cette conference de la table ronde et ne sauraient
country.
convaincre la masse ,de la population.
The second point to which I should like to
draw the attention of the members of the Security
Council is the mistaken notion that the Netherlands Government seems to have regarding the
?e\lelopme~t of forces of disorder and upheaval
In IndoneSia, should the Republican authorities be
rest?red jmmedia~ely to their territory. We in
Pakistan are convmced that, whenever limitations
are placed on the authority of public leaders in
the exercise of their lawful functions, not only
are they unable to put down effectively all disruptive forces with which they have to grapple,
but a tremendous incentive is given to these very
forces to represent themselves as the champions
~f the cause of the people and the real fighters for
liberty and freedom. The result is that experienced
leaders, prepared to accept reasonable delays in
reaching the goal of complete and absolute freedom, rapidly lose their hold Over the country,
and the population begins to look towards the
extremists who are ready to offer them liberation
from the foreign yoke, if only their advice is
accepted and their leadership acknowledged.

Le second point sur lequel je voudrais attirer
l'attention du Conseil de secmite est que le Gouvemement neerlandais semble s'imaginer a tort
que le retablissement immediat du Gouvernement republicain ne ferait qu'augmenter le desor~
dre et le chaos en Indonesie. Au Pakistan, nous
sommes taus convaincus que, lorsque des dirigeants politiques sont assujettis a des restrictions
dans l'exereice de leurs fonetions legitimes, non
seulement ils ne sont plus en mesure de triompher
des forces dissidentes contre lesquelles ils ont a.
lutter, mais encore ces forces trouvent da.ns la
situation le plus valable des pretextes pour se
poser en champions de la cause du peuple et en
veri tables combattants de la liberte et de l'independance. I1 s'ensuit que des dirigeants avertis,
dispilses a accepter des delais raisonnables en vue
d'atteindre leur objectif, a savoir, l'indepenc1ance
complete, perdent rapidement leur emprise sur le
pays, tandis que le peupJe toume ses regards vers
les extremistes qui sont prets a leUT promettre la
liberation du joug etranger si leurs avis sout
suivis et si leur autorite est reconnue.

5

My Governme:J.t therefore hopes that the

, M0:'l Gouvernement espere done que les aut::lri~
ponder carefully- tes :Jeerla:Jdaises reflechiro:lt serieuSCtnent tres
very c2refll11y-the danger which faces not only serieusement meme, a'j danger qui les men~ce et
thm, but which is likely to be the canse of serious aux graves desordres qui risquent de se produire
trouble to all countries in South Eas: Asia, if d.ans le,S pays du sudwest de l'Asie si elles per~
they persist in placing difficulties in th way of Sl;t;n.t a empecher les dirigeants actuels de l'Indothe present leaders of Indonesia in dealing with neSle de mettre fin a l'agitation qd peu! se mani~
whatever trouble there may be in the areas of the f~ster ,d~r.s la Repub:ique: C'est une experience
Republic. It is one cl the most painful exper- ~l~n pemble pour beaueoup d'entre nous qui pariences of many of 1.11' as we participate in discus- t1clp:ms aux debats de ['Organisation des Nations
sions in the United Nations, often to find interested UOles que de conslater combien SOClvent 1es
parties attempting to disregard the authority of parties interessees s'efforcent de meconnaitre I'authe United Natio:ls by igporing the fundamental torite de l'Organis:ltion des Nations Unies en
principles of democracy and by refusing to accept refusant d'observer 1es principe£ fondamentaux
unanimous or almost unanimOllS decisions of one de la democratie et d'accepter les decisions unanior another agency of the United Nations, under mernent ou quasi !lna,imem~nt prises par l'un ou
the pretext that such eecisions have been arrived l'au:re de ses crganes, sous pretextc que ces deat with incomplete knowledge of the true facts cisions n'auraient pas ete prises en pleine conof the situation.
naissance de cause,
Nelher~ands authorities will

TIle dispJte between the Netherlands and the
Republican allthorities of Indonesia has received
the fullest att<:ntion of the Secl1rity Council, which
has been assisted in this by its agents in Indonesia. I have before me the two reports, dat~d

1 [5/1270 and 5/1270/Ca".I] and 7 [5/1270/
Add.l and Cord] March 1949 from tlle United
Nations Commission for fndonesia, set up in
accordance with the Security Council resolution
of 28 January. The terms of the resolution a.lld
the realities of the situation requirer. that preliminary steps in compliance with the resolution
should be taken by the Government of the Ndher~
lands, and that only after the Republican leaders
had been released and their Government set up
in Jogjakarm, should that Government be called
upon to discharge and fulfil its res?onsihiEties
under the resolution. Considerable time has elapsed
since that resolution was adopted by the CQuncil.
During this period the Government of the Netherlands has not only paid no heed to the dictates
of the resoltttion, but it has wilfully .and deliberately fiouted the tenets of the Charter. I belf the
indulgence of th~ members of the CotlO'.lt in
. quoting only one extract from the concbsions
arrived at by the Commi.>sion in its r~port of
1 Mmh [5/1270]:

L~ differend qui oppose les Pays-Bas et Its
autorites republicaines d'hdonesie a ,cltu toutc
l'attentior: rlu Coosf'il de securite, qlli a.~teas3ist~
etll cela par se5 represcntants en Indanesie: J'ai
devant IT.oi les deux rapports, en date du ler
[5/1270 et 5/1270/C,,,.1] ,t du 7 [5/1270/
Add.1 et CordJ mars 2949, etablis pH la Commission des Nations Unies pour I'Indollesie qui
a ete creee conforoement i la resolution du
Cons!':il de securite du 28 :anvier. Les termes de
la resolution et la sitU<1.tion'telle qu'ellc se presentait en realite exigeaient que des mesures pre.Iiminaires fussent prises par le Gouvernemen: des
Pavs-Bas en execution de la resolution, que les
didgeants republicains fussent remis en liberte et
que leur Gouvernement fut installe i Djokjakarta
awmt d'etre bvite i s'acquitte~ de Si). part de
responsabilite aux tennes de la resollltion. Une
tongue periode s'est ecoulee depuis le mom~nt ou
cette resolution a ete adoptee par le Consed. Au
cours de cette p~riode, le Gouvernement des PaysBas ne s'est pas bo~ne a ne ter.ir aucun compte
des ordres contenus dans la resolution, mais it a
volontairement et deliberement foule aux pieds
les prindpes de la Qarte. Je ~e:nande aux mem·
bres du Conseil de hien voulOlr me permcttre de
dter un seut extrait des conclusions auxquell es
est arnvee la Commission dans son rapport du
'ler mars [S/1270J:

"La Commission se voit dans l'obligation de
"The Cummisioll is obliged to report that as , re:ldre compte que, a. la date du ler ma.rs, !cf
of 1 March, there has been failure of the parties parties au difterendindonesien ?'o~t pas, rC'jS:>1 a
to the Indonesian question to reach agreement on realiser un accord sur la, constitutlOn d un gou~
the estabrshme.'1t of an interim federal govern· vcrnemenf federal provisoire. Cctte situation est
ment. This situation results from the failure of due au fait qlle le GOlJ,venlem~nt .de~ Pays-Bas n',a.
the Netherlands Government to accept the pro- pas accepte les procedures lOstltuee~ par 1<; recedures of the resolution of 28 January, and not solution du 28 janvier, et non a ur;e ~lmple dlVer·
from a mere tlifference of vkwpoir.t on details gence cl'opinion sur des p~,ints de detail concernant
of governmental structure and functions."
la structure et le fonctlOnnement d'.l gouverne·
ment."
Hostilities in fad active warfare, are still con~
tinuing in d'ifferent parts of the country. This
has been reporteu to us by the Untted Nationl>
Commission's Military Executive B~rd in !hat
Commission's report of 1 March. ThiS behavlDLr
of the )J"etherlands Government is an open
challenge to all the peace-loving and self-respecting nations of the world, and is, a~ attempt to
defeat the 'very purpose and pnnClpIes of the
United Nations and the Charter.

Les hosti1ites _ it s'agit en. filit d'un~ ~uerre
veritable _ se. pou,suive:J.t touJ~u;s .en dl,fle.rents
points du: l?ays: Ce, ~ai~ nous a ete slgn,al~ par le
Comite executlf mthtaJ.re de la. COffilO1ssmn d.es
Nations Unies, dar.s le rapport de cette Comml&>
sion en date du ler mars. L'attitude eu Gouvernement des Pays-Eas est t:.n defi lan:e a toutes les
nations du monde qui ont le sentunent, de leur
dignlte et l'a~~ur de .la I;aixj eUe cons~ltue ~r.:
tentative destmee fam e,chec au~ buts et pnn
cipes de la Cbarte des NatIOns UnlC3,

a

6
The Netherlands Memorandum

In contained

in appendix E of the Commission's report of

J March indicates that the Go7ernment of the
Netherlands h::t>l oeeirled to lift the restrictions on
the freeclolT of movement of the Republican
leClclers and that such lifting of restrictions is :101
dependent on their participation in the proposed
conference d The Hague; but subsequent statements by the "Netht>:rla:nrls authorities 3how th::.t
these leaders are not free to visit their own te:ritory under Republican control, nor to have c:mlacts with their '.Idherents in those areas. In fact
tbey are not allowed to return to Jogjakarta from
Bangka and Prap~.t, whE're r presume they are
still behind bars.

Le memor<.lnu.um neerlandais N' IH, qui figure
clans l"annexe E du rappol·t de laCotllmission en
date du le!" mus, inc.ique que le Gouver:1ement
des Pays-Bas ~ decide de lever les restrictions a
la libcrte de mouvement actllellement imoosees
n.ux dirigeants republieains et qlte cette mesure
n'est pas subordonnee
leut' participation
la
conference que 1es Hollandais proposent de tenir
La Haye; ce')encl<lnr, des declarations arrterieu.
I"ement faites par les autorites neerlandaises reve-1ent que ces dirigeants ne sont pas libres de
,-isiter 1eur propre territoire, le territoire sous
controle, republicain, ni cl'entrer en contac.t avec
leurs partisans dans [es regions. En fait, ils ne
sont pas autorises
~llitter Banka et Prapat,
je presume Cjtl'ils sort toujollrs retenus prisonw
r.iers, pour se renclre i Djokjakarta.

a.

a

a

a

ou

At this ooint ] think it nec:essary to refer
to the decisions of the New Delhi Conference OIl
Indonesi;l in which the responsible representatives
of nbeteen :lations <.lssembled to examine this very
question. The proceedings of the Conference ~an
leave no dO'"lbt in the minds of anyone that the
whole matter was examined in a most resrons]Jk
and statesmanlike manner. The Conference dew
voted its fullest energies towards discovering tlle
most appropriate means of settling thi.> unfortu~
nate dis[lute. The resolution o[ the Secu~ity
Council which followed be deci.>ions of the Kew
Delhi Conference. put the seal of approval on
the decisiol1s arrived .at there. No Government
can, therefc,re, have any justification i'1 attempting" to side-track the issue or i:l hoping that by
the nse of ambigl1Dus langaage it will be able to
defeat the objects underlying :lte resolution of
the Security Cound1; much less can the Netherlands Government which, with no jusHi.cation at
all, maintabs that the Security Council is no: in
possession of the fullest and most complete knowledge of the true state of affairs. The world is
wide awake aml i: ought to be patently clear to
the Netherlands authorities that their failure to
fulfil tneir responsibilities towards be United
Nations would be carefully examined, and lhat
serious notice would be taken of tlle delaying
tactics they are adopting. If the Ketherlands
persisted in doing so, it would ~e using the thinnest possible cloak to hide its intention to disregard the clecisiO:l of the Secu:'"ity Comd!.

A ce [Joint de mon :ntervention, je crois neeessaire de nit: n~fen:r aux decisions de la Conferenc.e de New-Delhi 'iur l'Indonesie au cours de
1aquelle les representants responsables de dix
nations ont examine cette meme question. Les
celiber<l.lions de la Conference ne peuvent laisscr
<luc.un doute quanl i la manihe ex.trcmement
serieuse et conpetente dont c:ette question a cte
examinee. La Confe~ence a conS<.lcre taus !'es
la r'~cherd:e d'un moyen satisfaisant
t::fforts
pour reg1er ce regrettable differend. Par la reso w
lution ql1'il a adoptee apres la Conference de
New-Delhi, le Conse] de securite a marque du
sceau de son approhation les decisions prises
la Conference. Dans ces conditions, aUCl.1n· Gouvernement n'est fonde
user de faux-fuvants ni
it penser que, g-race iJ. des declarations a~lbigl1e5,
iI pourra faire echec aux intentions qui ont inspire
la resolution nu Conseil de; securite; mains que
tOllt autre, le Gouvernement neerlamlais, cui, sans
aucune justification, soutient que le Conseil de
~ecl1rite ne possede pas une connai;;;;alll.:e pleine
et entiere de la veritable situation. Le monde V
voit tres c1a~r et les auto rites needandaises
vraient se rendre p'.lrfaitell1ent compte que leur
refus de s'<.lcqlliUer c.e la responsabilite qui lctuincombe envers l'Organisation des N<.ltions Unies
':era l'o·Jjet cl'un examcn attentif et que leur tactique dilatoire sera severement jugee. Si les' PaysBas persistaifollt dans :::ette voie. its ne feraient que
voiler d'.1 pIllS t·ansparl"nt des pretextes letlrs inten w
tions de passer outre la decision du Ccnseil de
securite.

It is this fact which troubles the n:ind of my
Governmer:t most. My Governtnent hLs demonstrated by its own at.:tiOIlS will! regard to its
dispute with Ind;a over Kaslmlir, that it considers it the duty of every Member of the United
Na(ons to subject its own interests to the higher
cal1se of strengthening as much as possible the
power and autbor:ty of lhe UniteJ- Nations. The
Foreign M:nister of my Goverr.ment, in a speech
made 2S recently as 27 September 1948" ,,'hen
speaking in a geneml debate in the General Assembly of the United Nations at Paris, watne<! of
the danger of L:UllUOfllIlg higll-banded, unjust and
provocative actions of any Government on the
basis of faits accomplis.

Ctst cette question qui preoccupe <tu pll1s haut
point mon GClIvernement. Comme it I'a prouve
?o.r ses propres uctes, IOl"squ'Ul1 diffen'na l'a
oppose a l'Inde a propOE de la ql1estion du
Cachemire, mon Gouvernement considere qu'il est
du devoir de tous les Membres de l'Organisation
des Nations Vnies de subordonner let1rs propres
intcn~ts a t1De caUse sup,hiel1l"(~: le devoir qlli leur
inc.oml:Je d'aff~rmir, dans tOnte la mesure du
possible, le pouvoir et I'autorite de l'Organisation
des Nations Unies. L Ministre des affaires etrangeres de moo Gouwrnement, dans un discours
prononcc a Paris le 27 septembre 19481 ·devarit
l'Assemblee generale des Nations Unies, a sou":
ligne, lors de la disctlssion generale, cOmbjel1 11
serait d<.lngereux. d'e;..:cuser les actions arJitraires,
injustes et provocatr:ces cJ'un Gouvernement, qui
pratique la politiquc du f!'..it accompli.

'Sce Offi-oiiJl Records of ihe t1lird seuion of fhe
Gmt?'al Assembly, Po?'t I, 14-Sth plenary meeting_

'Voir les Doeum?lIts officieis de J~ t?'oisie1lle sesSioJ.
de I'Assemblic gblerIJTi', premiere pIJrtie, 14Seme
sea'nee plllniere.

a

a

a

de-

a

7
It is m03t unfortunate that this CouncLI has
to deal with one serious clispute after another in
such quick su::cessio;'J. At the same time, my
Government feels that the vast majority of Member States of :heUl:ited Nations would always
give tbeir fullest support to the Stcurity Council
iT'. its decisions to preVent the adoption of aggressive anc unlawful means LJy any Me:nber State.
in the brtherance of its ob-jeets. If any further
p~oof of this were needed, I would draw the
attention of the Security Council ~o the message
which the Charrm<i.n of the New Delhi Conference
transmitted to tr.e President of the Security
Cour.eil [S/1222]. In this message, it was made
'i~Llndantly dear that the nineteen nations whicn
assembled at New Delhi gaVe their fullest assurances to the Stc,rity Council that the)' w01.111
give all possible assistat:ce to :t in enforcing its
decisions in Indonesia.

It est Les r~gret'..able que le Conseil soit s,llsi
de rant de grave, differends, qui se succedent avec,
Ulle telle rapid'te. Mon .Gotlvetneme:lt esbme
cependant que la grande maj orite des Etats Membres de l'Organisation ces Nations Unies appuiera
de toute 3a force les decisions que prel1drn le
Conseil pour empecher l'une que1co:lque des
nations Mernbres de .'Organi:lation d'uvoir reCOUfS
l'agression et d'a".1tres methodes ilUig'<!les
pOUf atte;ndte ses obJectifs. S'il est necessaire
d'en danner une nOl.lvelle preuve, j'attire l'attention du CO::Jseil ce secnrite sur lln message
[S/1222] que le Pres:del:t de la Conference de
New-Delhi a transmis au President du Conseil de
securite. Cl" message: .ndiqusit on ne peut plus
dairemen,: que les dix:-neuf nations reunies
New-Delhi dOllJJaient au r.onsei1 de securite l'assural1ce la plus fOLTleUe t;.u'elles preteraient sans
reserve leur cuncours a la nisI" a execution de
ses decisions stir la question indonesiel'.ne.

The United N<.tioflS -epresents the only hope
of the world, a world tired of warfal'e and llc,
trtlction, of aggression by one nation ag-dnst aeathe:', and the people cannot accept eo:sily the
defeat of one of the greatest experiments of
l1Umani:y in ensuring the exercise et tJ:e legitimate
rights 1md privileges of every indiddual :n a free
and pe<.ceful mar.ner, The people of the world,
er, at any rate, of the eountr:es of South East
Asia, wate:, with on expeet~nt but critical eye the
deeisior.s of tl:is Council jn the Indonesiw affair.
Certain events in the past have shaken the faith
d these peopl:: ir. the effectiveness of the Unitf(l
Nations. My Government most earnestly hopes
that the sitl1<l:iol1 will not be allowed tc become
wone and that fle Security Council wiJ rise 10
the oCCClsicn and proceed tc imple:ner.t its resoluions of 28 January 1949. We are cO:1Vinced tlnt
the tine has come when this Coullcil must
stre:lgben the belief of all nations boldng to it
for the enforcement of those principles which a:e
contained:n the Charter. It is a matter of grati:ication to my Govern:nent that in some H:speets at
least the Nptherlands author:ties recognize the
futility of their action in resorting to arms in
Indonesia. My Government still ho?es that the
good sense and statesmanlike craracteristics Jf
the Dutch leaders will overcome b.eir narrow
:1atioml outlook <l.nd that this Council will be saved
from iipplyillg stringent measures ag:tinst tle
Netherlan1s Governme:"lt.

L'Organisation ct:s Nations Unies representc
le seul espoi:' d't111 monrlf la~ des guerres et des
destructions, d'l111 :nonde lus des agressions des
nations les unes co:ltL·e les at.;tres; [-:s petlp[es ne
peuvcnt acce?ter facile:nent l'eehec d'une des plus
gmndes experiences de l'lmmanite dullt le hut est
de permettre a chaque individL1 d'exCl'cer librement et J::aCi:1lF.lernelJ[ ses dlTits et ses ?rivilcgcs.
Les peuples du monde en tier, ou du moins des
pays de l'Asie d:l Sud-Est, SULvent cl'un reil attel1tif, mais critque, 1es Olesures prises par le C011seil.
a propos ::le l'affaire indonesienne. Ceitains eveneIllents dt: passe ont ebrnle la contiance de ccs
pet1ples clans l'action effica:e de l'Organisatioll des
Nations Un:es. Mon GOLlve~nemel1t espere tres
sir:cerement qtte l'on ne laissera pas 1<. sitttation
la
empirer, que le Conseil de sec:urite seTa
hauteur des circonstances et qL~'il appliquera sa
resolutioll du 28 ja~vicl' 1949. NotlS sonunes conva:nc:tts que le moment est venll ou le ConseiJ de
securite doit renforcer la foi de tonles ~es :Jations
qui complent sUr bi pour appliquer les pl'il1c:pes
enonces dans la Char:e. jI,{on Gollvernement est
heureux de cor.stater que, certair.s egads tout
au nlGins, les auto rites neerJandaises reconr:aissent
la futilite de leur reCOUrs aux armes en Indonesie.
Mon Gouvernement espere toujOtlrS que le bon
senS et les q"..1alites d'hommes cl'Etat des dirigeants
neerla.ndais triompbe~(\nt de lellrs concept:ons
etroitetnent na:i(]r:ale~ et qlle. le Cor..seil ne se
verra pas contraint d'app:iqtler des mesures ber~
giques contre le Gouvernell1ent neerlandais.

\Ve do, however, look to tr.e Sen:rity Coun::il
to deal with the present dispute in a firo manter
and w:thcut any fmther delay. not only for tlu:
sake of saving t!:e lives of thousands of pecp[e in
Indonesia-particularly of the heroic fighters for
liberty and freedom, some of who:Tl are being
tortured and merci:essly treated fa: saving the
hOme ant:: property of m:Jlions of peupJe from
destruction. and loct-but also :or the sake of
developing a feeling of confidence :n the mil:ds
of all nations in this Organization; nations who
pin d:eir faith in :he United Nati0115 ar:d are
ready to sacrifice their all ror the calese:d htllT.an
freedGITl <LUU the spirit of liberty, ellcality and
frnternity for all.

Nous cornptans n6:.nmoins sur le Conseil pour
s'occupe:, de ce c:ifferend avec fennete et sans
dClai, non seulement ~fin de sauver la vie dt.
illiliiers de personnes en Indol1esje - et en par~
ticulier celLe des hero"iques combattants de la
liberte et ce l'incependr:nce, dont certain" sont
tortures et traites sans n-,erci pour avail' empeche
la destruction et le pillage des foyers de millions
de personnes - mai~ egakment afin d'aecroitre
la conflance des nations da:1s l'Organisa~ion des
Nations U:J.ies; (es nations placent leur espoir
dans cette organisaticn, et el1es sont pn~tes tout
sacrifier pour :a cause de l'emancipation. de l'humn.nite et pOUf hire triompher le pflIlClpe de la
liberte, de l'egalite et de la {raternite.

Mr.

(Republic of Indonesic): After
heard the statements made here on the
Indonesian sitttatio:1 last week, I want to bring;
forward two p::Jints regarding tJlf quest:on of

ha~'ing

PALAR

a

a

a

a

a

a

M.

PALAR

(Republiql1c d'Indo:J.es:e:1 (tradllit

de l'aIf11a£;) : Apres ayo!r entelldu les declara-

tions fuites id la semairce derniere au sujet de la
sitU<lliu:l en Indoncsie, je vouclrais mentjonner

8

a

sovereignty and t.he 3tlggestions of tile representa·
tives of Canada anc China [417th meeting).

deux points qui ont trait la question ell' souverainete e: aux proposjlio.:1s des representants uu
Canada et de la Chine [417 ellle seance].

The m~tter of tr.e transfer of sovereignty as
set forth 1ll the Neberlands proposals of 26 February [S/1270, appendiz D] has obv:ously created
so much codusion that the question of the imple·
mentation of the Scet:rity COLtncil's resoll1tion
of 28 J<:lnllary has been pushed to the background.
The discussions in the Security Council last wee:'
seemed to je based on the assumption that the
transIer of sovereigTlty as envisaged in the Netherlands pro;Josals for a round table conference is
precisely the same as that desired by the Security
Council, as set forth in the COl~ncil's resolution.

La question d11 transfert de som'erainete, tel
qu'il est pn~v'l dans les propociiliou:; Il~erlallda:ses
du 26 feyrier [S/1270, ann~.o;e DJ. a, de toute
evidence, cn~e tcJ:ement de confusion que la question de l'applirati011 de la resolution dtt Conseil
de securite en da.:e c1u 28 jsnvi.er a ere rdguee
l'arriere-plan. Les debats qui se sont deroules la
semaine derniere au Comeil de securite semblent
avoir eu pOUr pcint de del-lal'L la supposition que
:e transfel't de souverainete, tel qu'il est envisage
dans les pro;ositions neerlandalses relatives a. la
conference ce la table ronde, est pn~ciseme:r:t le
meme que celui qui est prevu dans la resolution
du Conseil de securite.

1 believe that h my previous speech [416th
I have made it sufficiently clear that this
assumption, based only on a statement ef the
N~th~r1anr1.<;; Gove~nment, ha:> no foundation at

Je crois lJue rhms mon precedent disc:)urs
[416iJme serr/lce] j'ai montre d'une £a\on suffisamment daire que cette Sllpp03ition, qui ne repose
que sur une declaration du GOl1vernement neerlandais, est denuee de tout foudemcnt.

meeti-~lg]

all.

a

The Dutch version of the :ransfer of 50ver~
eignty concerns thf> trnn!'lf~r 0: something which
has nothing to do wi:h sovereignty. The High
Representative of the Crown, Mr. Bee!, in his
memorandum-induded as No. III of the Commission's report of 1 March-explains that this
transfer will he limited by the Netherlands Constitution, whic:1 has been amended for this p'jrpose
while the two parties were still negotiating on
the question of ~overeignty. This means that
Indonesia will no! have sovereignty because as I
pointed out to this ,Council in my statement 12.st
Thursday [416th meet;,,]], :hc terms of section 208, sub-sections 3 and 4, of be Netherlands
Constitution, preclude a:lY possibility of the
United States of Indonesia heing an independent
country. According to these sections of the
Ket11erlar:ds Constitlltion. the Netherlanc-Indonesian Union will g'larantee jur~dical warrants
allU a good govc~nment in Indonesia, 11ot1-J basic
functions of sovereignty.

La version ne~rlandaise d:l transfert ce souverainete prevait un transfert de quelque chose qui
n'a rien a voir avec ]a sO:JverainctC. ).1. Beel,
Commis,aire de la Couronne neerlandaise, explique, dans le memorandcrn N" III dll I<.ppo~t de
la Commission en date dl1 ler mars, que ce
tra-nsfert sera limite par la Constitution neerlandaise qui n ete amendee, a. cette fill,
une date
011 les deux par~ies etaient encore en pourparlers
au sujet de la ljuesiioll de souvcrainete. Cela
signifie que la sOtlverainete ne sem pas conffn!:e it
I'lndonesie, car, ainsi que je l'ai fait remarquer eu
Con,eil dartS la d~dar<ltion que j',"i faite jeudi
demier [416~me seance], 1es parag~aphes 3 et 4
de l'article 208 de la Constitution des Pays-B:ls
excluent tOl1te possibilite de £aire des Etats-Unis
d'Indonesie UIl Etat independant. Aux termes de
ces disoositions de la Constitution neerlandaise,
1'unio11 ·neerlando-indonesienne se portera caution
ne., garanties juridiques et eu ban fonctionneme.'1t
du GO"lvernement en Indotl~sie; elle assumera
done deux fonetior.s fondamentales de la SQuverainete.

I can understand that even Mr. Tsiang, the
representative 0: China, was confused by :.he
rnanr:e.r in which the Netherlands has dealt with
this subject. The representati\'e of China quoted
[4-17ih meeting] the President of the Republic
as saying:

Je comprencls fort bien que la maniere dont les
Hollandais Dnt traite ce sujet ait pu creer une
confus:on, meme clans l'esprit de M. Tsiang. Le
representant ue la Chine a cite [417c~ne seance]
les paroles suivantes du President de la Republique:

"I personally :find the idea of an early and '.tnconditiork'l.l transfer of full sovereignty to the
United States of Indonesia, wr-.ich 11 r. Koets
explaincc:. on 28 Febm'l.ry and 1 March, an
.attractive one, [and J I be:ieve that SUc11 a transfer
of sovereignty is the only way to improve relations
between :he Netherlands and Indonesia
"

"J'e~Lillle personncl1cl1lcnt que l'idee d'tm transfert i bref delai et sans condition de la pleine
souverainete aux Etats-Unis d'Indo:H~sie, que
M. Koets a exposee les 28 fevrier et ler mf,rs, est
seduisante, et je crols que Cl' transfert de SQuverainete est le seulmoyen d'ameliorer les relations
entre les Pays-Bas et l'lndonesie . . ."

I stresa the point, "which :Mr. Koets explained
On 28 Fei)ruary and 1 March". On those two days
Mr. Koets exp:ained-and I quote from the
COlTI:nission's report of 7 March I Sj1270/Add.I]
-that "the purpase of tIle round table conference
is the advanced transfer of sovereignty, real,
complete an~: t1n~onditioral".

Je souligne ee membre de phrase: "que
M. Koets a exposee les 28 fevrier et ler mars",
Ces jcurs-la, M. Koets a declare - et je cite un
passage dl! rappo:·t de 12.. Ccmrnission en date
du 7 mars [S/1270/Add.1j - que "I'ohjet de
la eoderence de la table ronde est le transfert
effectif, totnl et ir:eonditionnel de souven;.inete".

This is the kind of transfer of sovereignty
which is attractive to ou: President.

Te1 est le tra1Jsfert de souverainete envisage
par notre Presider.t.

I want to stress with the ireatest possible ern~
phasis that the letter of t'resident Soekarno,

que la lettre du President Soekar:J.o, mentionnee

a

Je 'ioudrais particulicrement ins:ster stlT le tHit

9

referred to b~ the representative of China and
used us a ~asls for their views by several other
representatives, was ~ased on the clarification by
~r. Koets, 'tS r TnentlOnecl before, as to the mean
mg of the sovereignty which is to be transferred.
w

par ~e representant de la Chire et sur Jaqtle1le
certams atttres representants Dnt fonde leurs
~rgul1~ent.s, se rapportait aux ecIaircissements
ourms par M. Koets a'1 sujet du sens a donner
au transfert de :ouverainete. '

.L'~tcord donne par le Presillent Soekarno au
prmclpe d~ la conference de la table ronde se
fondalt ullJquerr:enb sur les explicatiom donnees
par M. Koets quant a l'objet de cette conference.
Ce.pendant, le President de la dklegation neerlan~
dalse en Indonesie a dedare que ees explications
de M. Kae,ts n'etaient pas completes. Par comeIltl€'.nt, la c1t"clamtion du President Sodmrno n'est
plus valable, puisque les explieations de M. Koets
Sl1f le;;quel}es elle etait foncJee, ant ete offieie1~e:
ment mvahdees par les Hollandais.
,QueUe.s. .sont do~c les eKplicatians offieielles
_ vVh<lt, then, is the official Netherlands clarificat1011? That is not so easily fouod, but if we lo~k nee,rlan.dalses? Il n est pas facile de lcs trouver,
at the repor~ of the United N<:.tions Commission ~als, SI notts CO:lsultons le ,rapport de la Commis~
for IndoneSia of 1 March [5/1270] we find :n a Slon des Nations Unies pour l'Indone~je en date
dl~ ler mars 15/1270J, nouS trollVOns, dans le
m~l11.orandum-mentionfd before-to tIle Com~
:nemorandum que j'<l.i nr.ji\. mentionne et qui a.
mlS;;lUll from the Crown Commissioner himself
!hat Mr. Beel makes it clear that the Netherl:ond~ ete a~resse a ceUe Cammission par M. Beel,
Conselller de la Coltro:tne, des explicatiol1s dps~
1S bound to it$ Constitution. This means that
Indonesia will ;tot get sovereignty, becfltlse it will quelles il :-essort que les Pays-Bas sont lies par
not. be Ind?neSlU, but the Netherlands-Indonesian lenr Cor.shtution. Cela signific qlte l'In1onesie ne
UnrOI.l whIch will have to ?;uarantee the basic sera pas souvernine, car ee n'est pas l'Indonesie
mais l'l:nion neerlando-indonesienne qui devr~
functions of sovereignty in Indonesi<=..
assumer les fon:tions fondamentales de la souveminete en Indonesie.
. Par co.nsegtlent, I~s buts du GOllvernement
Whot the N etberlands Guvenunept is alMJnP"
at is. therefore, entirely differe:lt froer: the aim 0'£ neerlandals sont entiere:nent differents de ceux du
the Securi:y Council, which desires the transfer Conseil de securite, qui desire un traruFert comof complete sovereignty to the United States of plet de souver.ainete aUK Etats-Unis d'Indonesie.
Indonesia.
Les propositicms faites en '~Je d'arriver il. tme
Therefore, it cannot be right to base suggestions
solution de ce probleme ne peuvent done se fonder
for a sohttion of this problem on the assumption
sur la supposition que les buts du Gouvemement
of identity of the aims of the Netherlands Govern- neerlanc.ais sont identiqt1es a ceux du Conseil de
ment and th~ Security Council.
securite
Malheurellsement, c'est ce qui deja arrive. 11
Unfortuflfltely, this has already happened. But n'est cependant pas trap tar<!. pour modifier ceUe
it is not yet too late to correct it. 1Ieanwhile manie~e de voir. Mais, entre temps, les Hallanciais
however, :he Netherlands has already succeeded ont deja rcussi a retarder l'application de la n~so­
in disntp:illg tne time-table presented in the lution du Conseil de securite. Ils ont egalerr.ent
Sec11rity Council's resolution. It h<'.s also suc- reussi a convaincre plusieurs rnemhres uu Conseil
ceeded in convincing several members of the qu'une conference de :a table mnde, telle qu'eHe
Security Council t11at a round table conference, est prevue dans leurs propositions, perlllcttrait
as envisaged in ~he Netherlands' proposals, could probablement ,If' troHer a la question indoprobably bring about the solution of the IIluu:lesia nesienne la solution qui est si ardemment l1esin~e.
question which is so earnestly desired.
Leg ?rapositions des Pays-Bas, que 1'on preThe Netherlands proposals, which it presents as sente comme dc.stinees a ac.:elerer le trans fert de
designed to accelerate the transfer of sovereignty, souver:ainete, n'ont fait, en realite, qu'ehlra:ncr
have in fact only brought about a delay in the un delai dans l'application de la resolution du
im?lementation of the Security Council's reso- Conseil de seccrite.
lution.
Ce celai donne allX Hollandais la possibilite
This elelay gives the Netherlands the O?por~ de continuer it creer de notlveaux Etats dans des
-amity to continue its work of creating new States regions dual ils ant iJ. assumer le contr6le aux
in areas which ::ame under its control under the termes de l'Accord du RenviUe [5/649, allnexe
Rott'ville Agreement [5/649, appendi.t: Xl]. But XIl. Or, la creation unilaternle de tels Etats,
by the terms of th<1t same Agreement, the uni- bite en violation des termes de ee meme Accord,
lateral creation of these Stares by the Nether- parte atteillte <LUX droits, <lUX titres et iJ. la posilands is a violation or the Agreement, prejudicing tion de la Republique d'Indonesie. Les Hollanthe rights, claims and position of the Republic dais n'en eont:ntlent pas moins de creer de noUof Indonesia. Nevertheless, the Netherlands is veaux Etats, dont les derniers en dute, selon les
still cr~ating new States, the latest ones, accord- renseignements que noUs avons rec;m, sont celui
ingto inbnl1ation we have received, being Central de la partie ccntr~le de Java et ceux de Rial', ell'
Java and Riau, Siak, and lnderagiri in SUf'.latra. Siak et d'Inderagiri a Sumatra.
Ce delai se traduit egalel11ent pat' de nouveauX
This delay means more' fighting and killing, comba:s, plus de victimes, plus de haine et l:1oins
more victims, more hatred, fewer possibilities for

.Prcsident Soe1<arno's agreement. in princble,
with the purpose of the round table conference
was hused .solel y on the c1ariflcatioll of the purposes of th15 .conference as supp:ied by Mr. Koets.
~l1t the CI?atrman of the Netherlands delegation
t~ IndonesJa has stated that Mr. Koets' clarificatIOn, .:IS understood hy President Soeb.rno is not
complete. Tllerefore, Prf';;ident Soekarnci'~ statement ,no longer holds true since the foundation
for hiS statement-the Koets' clarification-has
been officially invalidated by the Netherlands.

10
bringing the parties together. The Dutch speak de possibilites de mettre le5 parties d'acc=ord. ::""es
of this del~y as necessary to aviod reprisals by Hoeandais pretendent que ce delai est necessaire
the Republicans, which the Neherlands claims afin {}'eviter des rcpresaillcs de la part des Rewoulc: result if the Republic were res:ored to J og- pl1blicains, represailles qui, pretendent-ils, ne man~
jabrra immediatf>ly. But the Dutch are llsing queraient pas de se produire si la Rep'Jbliql1t
th:s delay for carrying out reprisals themselves Hait restauree imrneuialtllH::llt it Djokjakad;a.
against tlle Republicans and Republican SllP~ Toutefols, les Hollundais mettent ce delai a profit
porters throughout Java. As ] pcintf'rl out to the pour exercer eux~memes des repn~sai1les contre
Secllrity Council in :ny statement l<lst week, this les rep~blica!ns et les purtlsans de la Republiqut
delay means dangerous deterioration of the situ~ sur toute l'etend:1e de Java. Ainsi que je ['ai fait
ation in Indonesia.. This meam that our guenillas obse:rver "I( Cor.seil de seeurite la semaine derwill be strengthened in their convictions that the niere, ce df~lai risque d'aggraver dangereusetnent
lndo:lesian question should IIOW be fought out la situation en Indonesie. ITn d'aL1tr~s termcs, nos
on the battlefield.
.partisans armes seront de [llus en plus convaincns
que la quest:on indon,isienne ne ~eL1t se regle~
:naintenant que sur le chanlp de bataille.
There is no dot:bt now that our guerriJas,
assisted by the population, are ab:e to exhaLls~
the Du:ch militarily. Hut tr.is is ueing done at
the cost of great loss of He anC: property, losses
which we political leaders are trying to avoid by
bringing the dispute back to the Jield of negotiations. However, we are giving a solemn warning
to the- Dut(+, that if they corJinue with their
present policy, politically and lnjjta~ily, DU guerrillas will solve the ]ndonesiall question.

If est desormais certain que nos groupes de
partisans, aides de la population, sont capaLles
d'cpniser les ressources militl'lires de~ HoIlandais.
Cettc action entraine neamllo:ns de louales pertcs
en vies humaine3 et en biens, pertes ql:e nous, les
dir:g~ants politiqucs, tcntcns d'evlter en r:tmenant
le differend dans le cadre des negociations. Not:s
prevenons cependant solennellement les Pays-Bas
que, s'ils maintienncnl la jJolitiquc {ju'ils suivent
actuellement clans [es domaines pojtique et militaire, ce Sonl nos partisans qui regleront la question indonesienne.

The Netherlands h'l.s succe~ded in raw"illg' delay
iD the implementation of the Security COllncil
resolution of '28 January, by putting forward a
plan which, in 1lame only, has the snme ai.m ~s
the Council's resobtion.

Les Pays-Bas sont parvenus it retarder la mise
en application de la l'egoltttion nll Conseil de
securite du 28 janvier en preposant un Flan dont
le but est analogue, clans Ses termes seulement, a
celui de la resolution du ConseiL

Dans une tentative bite ell vue d'aider les
The repr~senbtive- of Ca:1ada, in an effort to
aS5ist the parties in reachin.l:!' an acceptable agree- parties a abunlir it un aecord qu'erQ~ puissent
ment, has COme forward wib a suggestion [417;h accepter, le representant 11\ Canada a sO:tmis une
proposition [417hne s!hnce J gui, a. wn avis,
mtetill[JJ which he honestly wnsidl'f"s to offer
the best m~thod for resolving the core o~ the resoudrait au mieux les principales qucstions Cll
problem. I am n:.ost a~preci<ltive of tbis effort litige. ]e suis ret:::mr.aissnnt a la delegatiOl, du
of the CaIlauian delegation. However, I feel Canada de son effort. Toutefois, je suis clans
obliged to point out that the assumptions on which l'obligation de bire observer que :es donnees :;ur
the Canadian resolution appears to be based, are lcsquelles la resolution du Canada semble se
not va.lid, because they are f(mnd~J ou the mis- fanner n'onl pas de valeuT, car enc.s sont dedui:es
taken impression that the aims of the Netherlands de l'impression fausse q'.1e les objectifs ciu GouGevemment, as set fo:th in its proposals ·~f vernement neerl.anclais, expJses dans la pnpcsi26 February [S/lZi'U, appel1di;;; DJ, are identical tion qu'il a faite le 26 fevrier [S/1270. annexe DJ.
with tbe aims of the Security Called! and tile sont les memes que .ceux du Conseil de se<:urite
Republic of Indonesia. This was ma:ie clear et de la Republique d'Indonesie. La difference est
when the Chirman eE the Netherlands delegation ucvellUC cvidCl1te Iorsque le Pr':'sident df' la delein Inclonesia informed the Commission tkt the gation neerlandaise en Indonesie a ~ait savoir
clarifi:8tiol1 lly Mr. Koets, as unders7-ood by our la Commission que les explications de M. Koets,
leaders in Bangka, cannot be regarded as :10 ainsi qu'elles3vaimt ete comprises par nos d~ri_
official clarificatio:1 of the Ne:herlands position. geants a 3ar.ka, ne feuvent are considerees
It is evident that the Netht>rlands Cor.stitution, as comme defmlssant officielll'ment la position des
amended at the same time as when we were Pays~Has. 11 est evident que la Cc:u;;titution de cc
negotiating with the Netherlar.ds representatives pays, qui a ete amendee au mcment meme oil
011 this question, does not allow the Ne~hf'rlar:ds
oous menicns des negociations avec les representotransfer complete and unconditional sov~reignty tants neerlandais sur ce sujet, ne perm<:t p2s anx
to the United St<ltes of Indonesia.
Pays-Bas de transferer, integralement et sans
ecmrlition, la sotlverainete aux Etats-Unis d']ndonesie.

I

a

Furthermore, if indeed the NetlU':rlands and we
ourselves were aiming at the same kind of
sovereignty-and it is quite obvious the.t we are
not-we would still not be prepared, as I explained in :oy previous 3tatement to the Security
Council, to negotiate wib the Netherlands with:>ut
the United Nalions Commission for Indonesia
assisting both parties with a] the powers CDllferrd upon it by the Security Council resolution
of 28 Jaml.:'lry.

En outre, s'il etait vrai que les Hollandais et
r.ous pensions a la rr,eme souverainete - et iI tst
evident que ce n'est -:las le cas - nous ne aerions
touiours fas disposes, je le repete, a nego::ie;avec les Hollandais sans l'assistance de la Commission des Nations Unies pour l'Indotlesie
mmtie rle. tOllS les pot:voirs que Jui confere 1~
resolution dLl Conseil de se<:urite en d.,te du
28 janvier.

II

If I t:nderstood the reprcsenta:ive of Canada
correctly, only the p:-elir.1im..ry discussions between
the parties as t'J the t:me and conditions under
·which (le proposed conference at The Hagne
could be held, will be car:r::ed Ollt under the al1Spices at the Jnited )f ations Commission br hdo·
nesia, while no provisi:m is made for the Commission to plny its lesitimLlte rc-le :l'l the finnl
direct negot:ations betweer: the parties.

Si j'a: bien compris, le representant dll Canada
prOpose que setlles soient placees sous 1es auspices
de la Commission cles Natiom Unies les discus·
sions preliminaires [llli :lllrunl lieu tutre les jJar~ies
en vue de cletet"11iner quelle GM et d:lns quelles
conditions se reunira la conferenc~ que 1'00 pro~ose de tenir
L<:: Haye; au contraire, :1 n'est
?a.> pn~vu <J.lle la Com:nis~ion jouera le dle qui
hti revieot h~gitimement dam 1l::) negoCiatil)ll.>
Jirectes et defi:J.itives entre les parties.

It is possible that I br..ve misunderslDod the
representative of Canada. Bllt if I have not misinterpreted his words, I 110pe that Gf'nf'fRJ McNaughton will understand that we c<:-nnot accept
this procedcre which he suggested, nor can we
accept preliUlin.'lry discussions aiming at a round
table conference when lhat conference, as matters
r.ow st2.nd according to the prop.)sak cannot
bring abollt the trar.sfer of real sovereign:y.

It est possible que j'aie mal compris le rep~e­
sentant dtl Canada, Toutcfois, si mon interpretation est corrcc:e, :'es[Jere Cjll'il comp~endra que
nous ne saurions a,:cet:ter la procooure qu'il propose et que DOllS ne sauriolls pas davantage
,1ccepter de prwdr~ p::.rt des discussions preliIllinaires qui meneraient a une confe~ence de la
blh]!' -ronrl~, lorsquc neus savons cue ceUe conference, sous la forne envisagee dans lcs FOposi·
tions, ne sera pas 11. meme d'aboutir li.ll tmosfert
de la sotlverainete effective.

A preliminary conference, however, as visualized by the representative of China, dealing with
the imp:emmtatio[J of paragraphs 1 and 2 of the
Security COl1ncil resolution of 28 January, might
be helpful in part. It could be taken a3 a start
in the full implementation of the resolutioll which
remains the m<:.in issue, and it wOl1ld again give
the initiative te the United Nations Commission
for Indonesia.

Toutefois, Goe conference prCiiminaire, telle
Clue la con~oit le rejJl'bentCln: de lCl Chine, qui
exarninerait la :jltCStiOl: de la nise en viguem des
paragraphes prem;cr et 2 de la resolution c1u
(ol1seil dl1 28 jfll'vier, pOl1rrait etrc utile. Elle
pourrait etre cOl1sidetee comlne ~e premier pas
vers la mise en application integrale d~ la rCsolution, cc qui reste la question princil'ale, et elle
rendrai: I'initiative la Comn:ission (,es Nations
Unies pour 1'Indonesie.

Ho'tl'cvcr, the ques:ion of impl/":Tlenting the
cease-l1re is not a matter for lleg-otiatioll. That is
a direct order of the SeCllritv Ccuncil. The snbject of a conference could
the facilities ~o be
provided fer the restoration of the Rer,nblic, as
mentioned in tIle Sec,lrity Council rewllllioll.
But this WOttle:. not require :engthy disclIssions,
There nust be a dead:ine for such a preliminary
conference. There mtlst he no more time wasted.
:::f more time is permitted to ebpse, the reslllt
will he, unavoidably, thn.t tl1e In[l::me~ian question
will be solved on tile battle:ield, unless the Security
Council apf.lies sancticns to the party wl:ich from
the beginning of tl1e second military action ha.s
continuously defied the SeC'Jrity Council.

Cf'pclldflllt, la QL1estian de I'executioll de I'ordre
de cesser le feu n'est pas UI1 f.rorMmc ql1i puisse
faire l'objet de negaciatiotl5. C'est Utl orclre direct
dl! Conseil de seLt\rite. L'objH de la conference
pomrait Hre c'examir.er les i"ciEtes a a·:corder
en vlle de Ta restauration de b. RepuLlique, ainsi
qu'it es~ menticnne dans la resolution ciu [ol1scil,
mais ce1a n'exigcrnit p<lS de discussior.s pro~
longces. La dun~e (I'une telle CCl\1[eren~e doit etre
lilllitee. 11 11e faut pas :Jerclre davantage de temps.
Si 1'011 aHend enore, il en rcsultera inevitablement q01e la qt:estion sera re~lee sl1,r Itl. C}1a~lP ~e
batail1e a moins Cltle le Consetl de secunte n appltgrle de~ sa'1ctions a la putie CJui, dc~ la sccende
periode d'hosti:ites, 11'2 pas ce£se de porter un deli
au Cnnsei1.

Mahmou:l FAW21 Bey (Eg'/pt) : Several of out'
colleagues have a1re<.dy expressed the feelh:g
:hat we Sl10111d not give l1p IlCpf, and I too feel
that we shollld not: l3"ivf': '!P :1ope t1~at an agreemer,t will soon be reached between the interested
parties in collllexion witI', the question of Indonesia. I must cOllfess that we do not have too
many reasons to hope that such agreemen: will
shortly be -p;Jelled, hut. I refeat, there are oossibilities of reaching agreement, and there is the
hope or doing this v~y soer.

Mahmot:.d FAWZI Bey (Egypte) (tradttit de
l'a11g/uis): Plusieurs membres du Cameil oot de.ja
declare qu'il ne fall.ait pas abandollller tOll: espOlr,
et .ie pcnse att3si qu'ilne f~ut pas desespere:' .de
yoir tm accord se conch1l"e blenlot entre k~ partIes
inH:ressees. Je dais reconnaitre .que nous n'avQn~
pas beaucoup cle raisons de crOlre que cet accorc
sera concJu it breve ecll,ecnce, mais, !e le rLpete
iI y a des possibilites, et on j)eLlt encore esperer
qu'on ;:>arviendra som pell a un a.rranl;euelll.

There are, I feel, some people in the Netherlands who are sincerely trying to lTove with the
times and to adapt themselves to the n:llllino;J.lenLs
of the new world in which we are supposed to
live, and to the Uni:ed Nations Char·:er under
.which we are supposed to work. However, I am
not Sl1re that those people in the Netherlands are
strong enough to make their own ideas anJ \.:OnceptiOIls prevail. ! feel \.... ith reg'ret that there are
other elements trying in vain to stop the clock
and to move aRubst time; to hold stllbbornly to
an hour that has already passed, to a colonial
system the.! does not belong" allY more. I hope

Te crois qu'i1 existe aux Pays-Bas des gem qui
s'efforcent sincerement de yjvre elyer lerr temp~
et de :>'adopter am:: exigf'Tlce.~ rlu 1~10r..d~ nauv~au!
dans lequel nom sommes censes vlvre, <l;lml
qu'aux dispmitions de la Ch;-rte des Na:lOfiS
Unies auxque:les sommes censes nous conformer
clans notre travail.]e;le suis pas convaincu, near.mains, que ces p<ersonl1e~ soient assez p~issant;~
P?llr inwoser leurs idees, et letus ~?nCeptlO~s. J al
L'lrnpreSSton. et JC le deplore, [j".1 11 y. a cl autre~
elements qui tentent en vain de .rev,~~lr ,au passe
ou d'en rester a un moment qm deja n est plus,
a un regime colonial qlli n cesse de conve:nir.

be

a

a

a

a

12
that the preponderance of this tendency will not
continue for long in tl1e Netherlands, or elsewhere.
]t is a tendency which is stopping the wheel of
progress and causing a great deal of agony and
suffering.
I should like to recall that Egypt not only
supported and voted for the Security Counci:
resolution of 28 January, but fully and officially
participated in the ~ew Delhi Conference on
Indonesia at which, as the representative of the
Philippines so eloquently expresse.::1 it the o!her
day [416tlt meetin.g\. convictions an~ feelmgs
went above and beyond the restramed and
measured terms of the resolution adopted <it that
Conference.
I should like also to recall that the Security
Council has Jeen dealing with the Inconesian
question for quite a long time. :f I ren:ember
correctly, tl\e Security Council has been seIze? of
the qllestion since J~ly 1947. This is a 1,!:1~ tIme,
indeed, during wh1ch to allow the ktllmg of
tholtsands, and the deepening misery of millions,
to continue.
The latest resolution adopted by the Security
Council in re~ard to the Indonesian question is
the one of 28 Janu::.ry 1949. Weeks have since
passed-weeks already growing into months.
\·Vhat has been dOlle, or rather, what has not
been done? The political leaders of Indonesia
are not free, and the Security Council recom. mended that they were to be freed immediately.
No sertous step has heen taken tOW<lrds the restoration of the Republic of Indonesia. Instead of
implenenting the Security Cotlnci: resolution, we
see some-shall we call it, movement, or, shall
we call it, manoeuvring-by the Netherlands
Government in a d:rection and i:l a way which
some people, r might even say most people, con~
sideI' to be an attempt at "dodg:ng" the implementation of the SeCllrity Council resollltion
and at by-passing the Security Council and the
United Nations-an attempt to g<lin time, to have
more scope for arranging- things, perhaps for
creating more pUPFets and more puppet governments in and around the territory of Indonesia.
If this goes on, we might coin another term: to
gain more scope for "puppeteering".

J'espere que ceUe tendance preponderante ne per~i;;Le:ra pas longtcmps aux: Pay~-Bas, ni ailleurs.
C'est cette tendance qlli f~eine le progres et cause
beallcoup d'angoisse et de souffnmce.

a

Je tiens rappe:er que l'EgypL'e, non seulement
a vote pOUT la res~lution du ConseiL, mais a par~
ticipe officiellement, et szns reserve,
la Conference de New-DeI:1i sur l'Indonesie ou. les convictions et les sentiments Se sont f'Xprimrf; sous
une forme Cjni allait au de1a des tennes moderes
et contenus de la resolution adoptee par cette
meme Conference, 'ainsi que le representant des
Philippines I'a dit si eloquemment l'autre jour
[416eme seallee].
J'aimerais egalement rappeler que le Conseil
s'occupe de la question indonesienne depuis fort
longtemps deja. Si je me sou vi ens hien, it a ete
sai:;i de la question des le mois de juillet 1947.
C'est une periode hien longue, en verite, si on
sait qu'on a laisse se prolonger des combats
sanglants et grandir la detresse de millions de
personnes.
La derniere resolution adoptee par le Conscil
au wjet de ceUe cuestion date du 28 janvier 1949.
Des scmaines ont- passe depuis, (les semaines Qui
vor.t devenir des mois. Qu'nA-on fait, Oll plutot
qu'a-t-on neglige de fail'e? Les dirigeants politiques indonesiens ne sont pas lib res et le Conseil
de securite <t recommande qu'ils soient imll1ediateme:lt rem~s en liberte. Aucune mesure serieuse
n'a ete prise en vue de la. restaun.. tion de la
Republique d'Indonesie. Au lieu de voir cette
resolution du Conseil mise en ceuvre, nous constatons certains actes - 01.1, dirons-nous, certaines
manceuvres - du Gouvernement des Pays-Bas
qui visent
elucler 14 mise en application de la
resolution du Conseil et
passer outre aux decisions du Conseil et df! l'Organisation des Nations
Unies, ainsi que certaines personnes, je dirai
meme la majorite des gens, le pensent; les PaysBas veulent ainsi gagne:- du temps, avoir plus de
latituue pOllr ar;'angcr les chases 0. leur £a~on,
pOUT Creel' pellt-Hre de nouveanx Etats fantoches
it l'interiel1r et autOllr du territoire indonesien. Si
celte situEotion persiste, nous pourrions aussi bien
creel' un mot qui la definissf,
savoir: la "fantochisation" du pays.

a

a

a

a

I hope that I am Cjuite mistaken in having such
a sllspicion or in entertaining such a dOl1bt as to
the intentions of some people in 7he Netherlands.
I would be very glad indeed if I am proved
wrong. However, in the meant:me I do entertain the suspicion that more scope is being sought
for Stilt more "puppeteering" in and around the
territory of Indonesia.

J'esperf tne tromper en entretenant ces soupl;ons
ou ces doutes Quant at.:.x intentions de certaines
lJer;;unnes aUlI: rays-Bas. Je scrnis tres heureux,
en fait, d'e-tre detrompe.. Toutefois, je soupC;onne
encore pour le moment que les Pays-Bas veulent
gagner du temps afin de cn~er d'autres Etats
fantoches sur le territoire indonesien ou autour de
ce territoire.

\Ve are told to be stll! more ~atient. Well. I
think that we have been patient. 'We are patie~t.
But we have duties and responsibilities. If we
are to discbarge those duties and assume those
responsibilities, there is at least a certain minirnmu
which we s:10uld do, not tomorrow or the cay
after, but immediately.

On nous dit de patienter ellcore. Cest bon, je
crois que nOllS avons ete patients, que nOllS le
SUInmes. Nous iiVOllS cependant une tache et des
responsabilites. Si notre intention est de nous
acquitter de cette tache et d'assumer ces responsabili tes, nous ,wons un minimum faire, non pas
demain ou :apn~s-demain, mais immediaternent.

I have already called the attention of the
Security Council to the deepening misery of
millions in a very important area of the world.
How can we wait while this continues? What are
we waiting for? A round table conference r All
right. let us hope it will succeed. But] doubt
whether the manner. in which it is being suggested by the Netherlands Government will be

]'ai deja appele l'at~ention du Conseit de securite sur la detresse CtOlSsante de millions d'Hres
qui habitent une zone tres impottante du monde.
Commenl pouvuns-nous attelldre dans ces conditions, et qll'attendons-nous? On nous propose une
conferente de la ta.ble ronde. Fort bien J Esperons
Cju'eUe reussira. Je doute neanmoins que la
maniere dont le G01..:vemement des Pays-Bas

a

13
conducive to a really free and constructive conference. Who will represent the people of Indonesia? Their leaders? Where are they? Will
th~y represe nt a government at the same time?
Wlll they have a govern ment at the same time
or ",:,ill they go to the cOnference right from"'--:
I Will not eaU it right from gaol, if there is
c~j:ction to that-;-b ut f~01n something very much
Similar to gaol, dlrectly mto the conference. without having any possibility of getting in tOl1ch
with the very people whom they are supposed to
represe nt?

l'envisage en fasse une conference vraiment libre
et, ~onstructive: 9ui va representer le peuple indoneslen? Ses dm¥eants? Oil. sont-ils? Representeront-tl~ en meme temps un Gouvernement?
Auront-tls un Gouvernement i ce moment ou se
la conference au sortir _ je ne
r~n~rollt-ils
pour eviter route object ionprison,
de
dlr~1 pas
mals de quel~l'te chose qui lui ressemble beaucoup;
se rendr?nt'lls donc tout droit a ceHe conference
sans aVOlr auctlne chance de prendre contact a vec
le pellple meme qu'ils sont cense~ representer?

'Ye have no Government of the Republic of
Indone sia. We have no free leaders of the Republic of Indonesia. We do not see any link
betwee n those leaders and their own people. How
then, can they go to a conference before the
restora tion of the Republic and before creating an
atmosp here free from restrain t, and how can the
leaders of the Republic get in touch with their
own people? How can we seriously speak of a
confere nce withou t that, at least, as a preliminary
step?

A l'heure aetueJle, la Republique d'Indonesie
n'a pas de Gouvernement; ses dirigeants ne sont
pas en liberte; il n'existe aucun lien entre ees
dirigeants et le peuple. Comment, je vous le demande, peuvent·ils panidr er a une conference
avant que la Republique n'ait ete retablie et qu'une
atmosphere d'une entiere liberte n'ait ete creee'
~omment les dirig;ants de la Republique peuvent~
lIs entrer en relabons avec le peuple qu'ils repnfsent~nt: corrunent :peut-on serieusement envisager
de reumr une conference avant que ces conditions
prealab1es n'aient ete au mains remplies?

Anothe r way in which we have been told to be
patient and also to be wise was expressed here
in the very learned and very important statement
made at our rreviotts [417th] meeting by ·the
represe ntative of Belgium. I consider <l good part
of that stateme nt to be a vaiuable contribution
to the work of the Security Council and the
United NatiOns. At the same time, I cannot help
taking exception to several things that were contained in it. I shall limit myself, from among
those things to which I will refer, or to o:lly two.
The first, with om colleague's permission, I might
call the legal aspect, and the other, the matter
of previou s experience. The representative of
Belgiu m spoke of them in his statement in the
reverse order I have mentioned them. Again,
with his permission, I would like to speak first
of the legal aspects. The representative of Belgium said:

"That is the experience which the Council has
had from the Palesti ne question. I recall that
preced ent certainly not for the sake of criticizing
the patience, or rather, the forbearance which the
Securi ty Council has shown in that question.
At that time, Belgium had a seat on the Council.
From the very beginning it never ceased to recommend pn1dence, and I mentioned that example
only in order to advise the Council to use it as
a guide in the present case."
I shall come back to H • • • guided by it." At a
later stage, the represe ntative of Belgicm said;
"Accor ding to some people, it would .seem that,
after the adoption of the last resolution of ~he
Council, the Nether lands refused to comply WIth
an injunct ion directin g tllem to free the peoples
of Indone sia. Howev er, such an injunction does
,"
not exist and cannot exist for two reason s. .
He then gave us the two reasons, showing some
cases in which international peace was most
serious ly and gravely disrupt ed and could be lost
sight of between one argume nt and another ~nd
withou t the United Nation s ever even grapphng

a

.L'appel a notre patience et a notre w.gesse J.

pns une autre forme dans la declaration fort

erudite et fort importante bite, au cours de notre
demiere seance [417~me], par le representant de
la Belgique. TOllt en estimant qu'une gl"ande
partie de cette declaration constitue une contribution precieuse a l'ceuvre clu Conseil de securite et
de l'Organisalion des Nations Unies, je no puis
nea111l10ins m'abstenir cl'elever des objections a
I'encontre de certains arguments qui s'y trouvent
invoques. Parmi les nombreux arguments auxquels je songe, je n'cn ex:aminerai que deux. J e
ponrrals appeler le premier, a vee la permission de
notre eollegue, l'argument j uridique. Le second,
c'est l':argument selon Jequel nouS clevrions nous
inspirer de l'experience aequise. Le representant
dt la Belgique a expose Sa these clans l'ordre
inverse. Je "ais lui demander l'atltorisation
d'examiner en premier lieu, l'argtlment juridique.
Le representant de la Belgique a declare ee qui
suit:
''Voila l'experience que le Conseil a faite dans
l'affail'e de Palestine. Si je rappelle ce precedent,
ce n'est certainement pas pour critiquer la
patience. ou plutot la mansuetude, do';t le Conseil
de securite fit prenve dans cette affatre. 1..0 Bel·
gique siegeait ;l cette epoque au Conseil. Des le
debut, eile ne cessa de recommander la prudence
et je n'ai fait etat de cet exemple que pour conseiller au Conseil de s'en inspirer clans le cas
present."
Je reviendrais plus tard i l'expression "pour
engager le Consei[ a s'en inspirer dans le. cas
present". Plus loin, le representant de la Belglque
a declare:
"I! semblerait d'apres eertains que les Pays-Bas
se soient refuses, a. la suite de la derniere resolution du Conseil, i se soumetter i une in}onction
leur prescrivant de tiberer les peup1es cle l'Indonesie Or semblable injonction n'existe pas. Elle
ne s~urait exister et, cela, pour deux raisons. ..
11 nous a dorme ensuite leg deux raisons, evoquam justement des cas dans lesqucls l.a paix i.nternationale etait gravernent compromise et fIS·
quait de disparaitre .darts 110 de~a1e d'a:-gurr;ents
sans que l'OrganisatIon des Nallons VOles alt eu
H

14
with the problem at .all, It c:Juld be lest sight

9f between the concrete agreemt;nts presented here
In sl1ch

articles of the Charter as Articles 41 and
42, on the one hand, and Artic:e 39 on the otht;r,
and amid tllem nll, the resp::l1lsibilities of HIe
Security Council in rnaintai1.ing international
{leace would be jl1st dimmed t::l the point of not
being seen at all.
YVhen the representative of Belgillffi S.:l.ys that
there could be no sl'ch injl1nction to tell the
Netherlands to emancipate the. people of 1ndo~
nesia, I have two ways of <l.pproaching this
point. One way is to recall that under the Charter,
We still have the principle of self-determination.
The other way is to remind ourselves that the
Republic of Indonesia is not being created and
could not have been created by this Security
Council or any other o~gan of the United Nations.
It has be.en and it is there, and it has been recognized by the ~etherlands inside and outside :he
Unitec Nations.
In ether instances, the Egyptian delegation has
firmly maintained the view that the Uni:ed
Nations is not comptient, has no a".Ithority to
ordain the existence 0: States, to partition States,
or to do stlCh things in international life, but when
we now tell one country not to kill thousands of
people and throw millions of people of anoher
country into misery, this is not ordaining the
existence of a State; this is not creating a new
5t;\te. The Republic of Indo:1esia, I repeat, has
been and still is there, whether some reactionaries
like it or not. And by reactionaries, I mean those
- I hope, decreasing-numbers in colonial countries who are still clinging to an irredeemable
past "nd who want to draw llS into it and stop
time from moving.

I now come to the :>econd point ill the state
ment of the representative of Belgium, Although
this point has been dealt with in a full page, I
hope the members of the Se.curity Council will
be patient enough to allow me to read it, because
it is very important indeed. It appears in the
record of our last meeting, as follows:

la possibilite de traiter le fend de la question; die
risquait egalement de disparaitre au mileu de discussions sur les dispositions conc:retes des Articles
de la Charte, tels que les Articles 41 et 42, d'une
part, et l'Article 39, d'autre part; dans tout ce
dehut, la responsabilite qui incombe au Canseil,
a savoir, le maintien de la paix internationale,
s'obscnrcissait au pr:.int de ne pltlS etre visi·)le.
.-'ai deux observations a faire au sujet ce l'as~eltion du representant de la Belgique scion
laquelle it ne saurait etre question d'enjoindre aux
Pays-Bas de Iiberer le people indonesien. En premier lieu, ~e rappe:lerai qu'iJ y a, clans la Charte,
un principe nettemellt eta".:>1i, cdui du droit des
peuples a disposer d'eux-mernes. En second lieu,
11 faut nous. souvenir ql1e le Conseil de securite
ni aucun autre organe de l'Organisaticn des
N"tions Unies n'est en train de creer, ni n'aurait
pu Cf(~er la Republique d'lr,c1onesie. Certe derruere
a existe, et elle existe de fait; die a eU~ en outre
reconnue par les Pays-Bas devanl l'Organisation
dC3 Natior.s Unie,s et en dehot-s cl/elle"
En d'autr~s occasions, la delegations de l'Egypte
a :ermement soutenu la these selon laquelle l'Organisation des Nations Unies n'est pas competente
et n'a aucune autorite pour decider dl! sort des
Etats, pour prononcer le partage des E~ats ou
pcm s'immiscer de pareille falj;on, dans la vie
internationale. Mais, lorsque nO\13, enjoignolls a
ur. Etat de cesser de maSSC1crer des mil1iers de
gens et de plange.r des millions d'autres dans la
mi:"iere, il n'est pas question de decider de l'existellce d'un Etat; it ne s'agit pas de creer un
nOttvel E~t; la Republiql1e cl'lndonesic, je le
repere, a exist€: et existe de fait, qllC cela plaise
ou non a ccrtains reactionnaires. Par r~,lcliUI1­
m.1res, j'entends ces groupes - dont le nombre
decroit, je l'espere - qui, chez les Puis:>ances
coloniales, rontinuent de s'accrocher a Ull passe a
j<lmais dlspartl, En s'effor<;ant dl: le ressusciter
et d'arreter la marche du temps.
J'cn ViC113 maintennnt :r..tt second argument invOfJue par le representant de la Belgique dans sa
declaration. men que eet argumEnt fasse l'ohjct
cl'un expose d'une page entierc, les membres du
Conseil de securite auront, je l'espere, la ?atience
de me pe:-mettre d'en donner lectnre, paree qu'il
est tres important. Le passage en question se
trouvc d::ns le compte rendu de notre dcrnit'-re
seance et se lit comme suit:

". . . I should like to refer today to a :more
reter.t example taken from the Palestine ques:ion.
After the A::ting Mi:diator :111.d reported serious
breaches Ot the trtlc~ in the Negeb, the Security
Council on ~ NovE";n:ber last adopted a resolution
[S/1070] under the terms of which the parties
were called upon to withdraw their forces behind
provisional lines wh:ch the Acting Mediatllr was
to determine.

le • • • Je voudrais me rHerer aujourd'11ui a un
exemple plus recent empnnte a }'affaire de Palestine. Le Mediateur par interim ayMt fait rapport
s'..Ir de graves violattons de la treve clans le Negeb,
le Conseil de securite avait adoptee, le 4 novembre
demier, une resolution aux termes de laquelle !cs
parties elaient invitees .a. retirer leurs forces derriere des lignes provisoires que le Mediateur etait
charge de tracer.

"On 7 December [S/1112] and again on 23 December, the Acting Mediator informed the CO'.mcil
and its Commission of the refusal of Israel lo
comply witl: the rerolution of 4 November. His
last report in that connexion bears the date oT
2S December 1948 [S/1152]. At that time, almost
two months had paosed since the ad'Jption of the
Council's resolution. The Acting Mediator mentioned inter alia.---and I quote verbatim extracts
from his repurt-his. 'inability lo supervise
effectively the truce in the Negeb, since United
Nations observers are being refused access to

"Successivement, les 7 et 23 decembre, le
Mediateur par interim signala au Consei: et a sa
Commission le rcfus d'Israd de se conformer a
la resolution du 4 novembre. Son dernier rapport
dans ce sens porte la date du 2S decembre 1948.
A ce moment, pres de delL"'<; mOts s'etaient ecoltleS
depuis I'adoption de la resolution dll Consei1. Le
Mf.diatetrpar in~erim co~st.1.tait notamment _ et
je le cite textllellement par extraits - qu'il n'etait
"en meSlltc de control er effectiycment l'applicatiol1
de 1;;. .trhoe dans le ~eg;b, etant donne que les
Israehem refusent 1acces de cette region aux

15
the area on the Israeli side'; that the Govern_
ment ?f Israel felt 'bound to reserve its freedo
of aChor;' ; and that, in his opinion, 'the intraIls~
~ent att~tude asslll~led by Israeli authori ties . . .
~s a major ~actor. m preven ting progres s toward
nnplem entabo n or the resoltltion of the Securit y
Counci l of 16 Novern ber'.
"That is the cnd of the quotati on.
. "In vie~ of this repeate d refusal to comply with
Its resoh:t lon of 4 Novem ber, the Securit y Council
adopter!. a new resolut ion [S/1169] on 29 December whICh reqtlested the Govern ments concerned
t? implem ent withou t further delay the resolutIOn of 4 Novem ber and the hlstruc tions iSSllecl
by the. Acting Mediat or in accord ance with that
resoh,h on. Althou gh that resolut ion merelv re~ewed a frequen tly repeatecl reqt:est, and altl{ough
lt has purpos ely beel} drafted in a spirit of ex:treme
~oderatlon, the 1!mon of Soviet Sociali st Repubhcs and the Umted States of Americ a did not
feel tbat they could give it their approv al.
"Hut what did the Acting Mediat or do? He
did not conside r that the attitude of Israel was
sufficie nt reason to hreak off his attemp ts at conciliation, On the contrar y, for nearly two months
n~~rc. he continu ed ttntirin gly his efforts at cooCdw.tlon and thus, on 23 Februa ry last, withou t
the Israeli troops ever having carried out the
withdr awal called for in the C0l1l1cil's resolut ion"
- I ;-epcCit: "withon t. the Israeli troops ever havid g
carrled Out the Wlthdrawa1 called for in the
Counci l's reso1u tion"-" an armisti ce was finally
conclu ded between Egypt and Israel, an armistice
in which the promise of a nlt:tl return to peace
can be seen."
I am not trying to open wide here the question
of Palesti ne: not only would that be a digression,
but it would not be an act of good faith ill so
far as the conduc t of ottr work is concerned. I
shnl1 not nttemp t to Open IIp the Palesti ne qllestion
while we aTe discussil1.~ another problem. However, I cnnllot but be aware that, when we deal
with the various problem s that come before liS,
we are not dealing merciy with particu lar problems. We are at the same time creatin g precedents and creatin g j\1ri,,;prllclence; we are setting
the style ;lod pace of the Securit y Counci l's work
and the way in which interna tional problems
should be handled uoder the Charte r. This is a
very great respons ibility, and I do not think that
anyone seated at this table would sugges t that we
take it lightly,
Theref ore, I cannot but have very serious misgivings when I heaT" so 1eamed and disting uished
a colleag ue as the represe ntative of Belgium tell
us-in all good faith, I am sure-t o take the
Securi ty Council's :tction in wnnex ion with Palestine <15 a good examp le and to follow it. I said
"the Securit y Counci l's action" , but that is a
euphem ism; I shotltcl have spoken of "the
Securi ty Counci l's inactio n". We see clearly,
from t1ie very stateme nt of the represe ntative of
Belgiu m, that in the end the Acting Mediat or
threw lip his hands in despair in so far as any
action by the Securi ty Council was concer ned;
he had his instruc tions, and he carriecl on.

observateurs des Nations Unies , .." el que le
GOt:vern;m~nt ,d'Israel croyait "devoir reserver
~a hb::te cl actlO.n et que, son avis, "l'attitucle
11ltrat~~lgeallte pnse par les autorites d'IsraiH ...
~OllSt1t\le un .factenr tre;; i,l11portrmt qui s'oppose
ce 9u OIl.puIsse paryemr a mettre en appEc<ltion
la re~ollltlon adoptee le 16 oovembre p<lr le
Consell".

a

C'est ainsi que se termine ma citation.
"En presence de ce refus repete de se cooforn;er ~ ~<l resolution dU,4 novembre, le Conseil
ele secunte adopta, le 29 decembre 1948 [Sj1169j
tloe nO;lv;lk r~soll1tion qui invitait les Gotlvcrne~
l?ents, mter~sses a donner elIet S&l1S plus atlendrc
a la r.esolutlon du 4 novembre et <lUx instructions
donnees par le Mediateur par interim C011tonnemen! a cette resolution, Bieo que cctte resolution
ne ht que renouve1er une invitation maintes fois
deja fonnulee et qu'elle eut c1esseil' ete con~tte
da?s u~ esprit d'extreme moderation, l'Union des
Republlql1es socialistes sovietiqucs et les EtatsUnis d'Amerique ne crurent pas potlVoir lui don-.
ner leur approbation.
. ':1\his que fi.t de son cole le Meeliatellr par
llltenm ? Le Mediatellr par interim ne considcra
pas que l'attitude d'lsrae1 flit llll motif suffisant
pOUl- interrom pre ses efforts de conciliation. Au
contraire, il poursuivit inlassablement ses efforts
de conciliation pendant pres de deux mois encore
et c'est ainsi que, le 23 feyrier dcrnier, sans que
les forces cl'Israel eussent jamais efCectue le repE
que lellr prescrivait la resolution du COllseil _
je repete: sans que les force~ d'Isr<lcl clIssent
j amais effectue le repE que leur prescrivait la
l-~soll1tion dl1 COllseil - un armistice fut fmalenlent conc1u entre l'Egypte et IsraCl, armistice d(lm
leql1e1 on peut voir la p~omcsse d'un relour MfinJti f it la paix."
Jc ne cherche pas it rouvrir le debat SlJr la
question palestinienne, car cela constitacrait, non
seulUllent une digression, mais un aele de mauvaise foi clans la condtlit~ de nos travaux. Je ne
propose donc p<lS d'en revcnir it la question palestinienne all moment ou nous discutons d'L1l1c autre
affaire. Ceci dit, je ne puis nC<lnmcms ignorer le
fait que 1es diverses questions que nOUs examinons
ne constituent pas des question~ iso1ccs, des cas
cl'espece. Toutes les feis que noLts prcnons une
decision, notls creons des precedents, nous creons
tlne jurisprudence, nous defmissons la maniere
dont le Conseil doit aborder ses travaux, la marche
qu'il doit suivr... et la maniere dont les problemes
internationaux doivent etre n~sollls conformcmellt
bi1ite
a la Charte. Cest la une tres grave rcsponsa
que nul, autour de cette table - ,ic le crois ferme~
ment - n'aurait l'ide e de prel1dre it la legere.
11 ro'est donc i~l1possible cle ne pas eprouver des
inquietudes serieuses lorsqu\m representant :l;.tssi
eruclit et aussi eminent que cdui de h Belglque
nouS propose - en toute bonne foi, feu suis
convaincll - de prendre pour exemple I'action
qu'a exercee le Canse;l de securite dans le regicment de la question pa1estinienne. Je dis "l'action
du Conseil de securite". C'est la un euphemisme.
J'aurais du dire: "I'inaction dtl Conseil de secttrite". 11 est evident, de l'av1"; l11eme dn represcn~
taat de la Belgique, que le Mediatcur par interim
a :fini par renoncer a tout espoir en ce qui concerne une action qudconque de la part du Conseil
de securite. I1 avait des instructions, et il les a
suivies.

a

16
Someone may say to me; "Vlell, but you have
.signed an armistice," Indeed, we have signed
an armistice; that was the only thing left for us
to do. Die{ the Council offer us allythio?: better
which we then refmed? Did the Council give us
or the Charter better suppan?

On nO\1~ reto~quera: "Mais vous ayez signe
l'annistice." En eifet, nous l'aYons signe, car
c'thait la demihe n:5source qui. J.OU5 fut offert~.
Le Conseil nouS a-t-il presente une meilleure solu:-ion et l'avons-nous refusee? Le COflseil nous
a-t~il appuyes? A·t-il respecte les dispositions de
la Charte?

On several occasions, I have caIled the attention
of the Security Council to the f"ct tnat :ts failure
fully to assume its responsibilities under the
Charter in such cases-I am not speaking now of
any sinffe case-would mark a failure to keep
faith wi:h the ideals of the United Nations. We
have to remain fnithful to the principles :mder
which we a:'e working. We cannot say that tr.e
Security Council Sllould follow what was dor.e
in connexion with ?alestine: that would be very
far fron a compliment to the SecUI:ity Council.

J'ai attire, a plusieurs reprises, l'attentiuIJ du
Comeil de securite, sur le fait que, s'il n'assumait
pas la pleine et entiere rcsponsabilite qui Jui incombe aux terrnes de la. Char"e oa.n.:; la solutio:J de
cas de ce genre - je ne wnge pas a un cas
particulier -- il manqllerait la fidelite qu'il doit
aux ideamc de l'Organisation des Na.tions Unies.
N ous devons rester fidetes flUX principes qui nous
guident. Notls ne PQuvons pas inviter le Cmseil
<ie .,ecurite a agir comme dans l'affaire palestinienne. Ce ne serait point fa.ire un compliment
all Conseil de securi:e, bien loin de l3..

In this morning's newspapers, we were struck
with a headline which we had seen, with s'ome
variation, in a United Nations document. This
is not exactly a digression, bu: yet another fa~t
which, although not a vcry :rnportant one, IS
related to what we are discussing now. A few
weeks ago a Zionist representatiye se2.rched for
a neW name for himse:t :fow of all the :lames
in this wide world, he selected one of a place right
on the Gulf of Aqaba, on the Red Sea. I do not
want to be. personal, but this is symp~omatic of
someth.::ng else; something Illore seriotls and mu~h
bigger than the mere selection of a name. Anyone can choose any name 1:e wishes, but if a man
se1ects a name such as "30ston" or "Chicag.:)"
and then, a few weeks later, he is seen actually
marching: on Boston or Chicago, that become5 a
very different matter bdeed and assumes greater
proporlions.

Ce matin, it :a lectnre des journaux, j'a: ete
frappe par le titre d'unc infoftTlil.tioll; q\:e j'il.vni"
hte, sous une forme tm peu differente, dam un
document de l'OrgtiDisatioll des Nations Unies.
Ne croyez pas que je fasse ici rroprement p~rler
une digres~ion; je signale simplement un fait qui,
s'il n'est pas tres irrpoliant, a ceper.dant quelgue
rapport avec la question que nows examinor.s en
ce momenL It y a quclqucs semaines, un teprf.sentant sioniste cherchait un nouveau nom. Cl', de
tom les noms qui existent dans ce vaste monde.
it choisit celui d'un endroit situe exactement sur
le golfe d'Akaba, dans la mer rouge. Je ne desire
pas hire de remarques dE50bligeantes a I'egard
de qui que ce wit, mais j'estime que ce fa:t est
:;ymptomatique; c'cst I'indice de quelque cbo;e d<plus grave et de plus important qu~ le simple
choix d'un nom. Chacun a le droit de (;hoisir le
nom Qui llli plait, ma-is s'it decide de s'appeler
"Boston" ou "Chicago" et que, quelques serraines
plus tard, on le voit effeeti\'ement mar:her vers
Boston ou Chicago, le prcbleme change tout
fail cl'aspect et l'affairc devient beaucol1p plu~
serieuse.

a.

a

a.

What do we see in -:his morning's newspapers?
We read, "Transjordan troops forced from Aqc.ba
stripb Israel", and- "Arab withdrawal from key
Elath area ar..d from Nurth Negeh revealed in
Te1 Aviv-Bul1cbe holds cease-fire broken". Wf'
also f.nd something similar to that in United
Nations documellt Sj1286, wl:ich was distribu:ed
thiH Hftf'rnoon. If we listen :0 the advice fmm
some quarters, of course, we must be patient. As
long as the strong side or the alert side grabs
something, we should merely pu: our signatJre
to it and legalize it. Why sho~1d we bother? We
can then ~1ail the great success of the Securit)'
Council of the United Nations in handling the
matter. 1£ that is an edifying picture of the work
of tIle United NE-tions, I do not understand it,
and if it is an example to be followed, I certainly
do not understanc it.

Que lisons-nol1s dans les joUr:l2UX de ee matin r
"Les troupt:s TlJ.l1sjordaniennc9 sont forcees a
quitter la bande de terre d'Akaba, en Israel", et:
"On revele Tel~Aviv que les Ara':les se retirent
de la regio:1 de Key Elath et de la partie septen- trionale du Ne.seb - Bunche estime que l'ordre
de cesser le feu a ete enfreint", Nous trouvons
quelque cbose de semblable dans le document de
l'Organisation des Nalions Unie,:; [S/1286] qui
a ete distr:bue cet apres-rr.idi. Si n01lS ecoutons
les· conseilsr qui nous viennent de certains cotes,
natnreUement nous devolls etre patients. Aossi
longtemps que la partie la plus forte DU .h plus
habile s'empare de que1que chose, nous devrions
simplement sOllscrire au fait accon:pli et 111i clonner no:re sanct:on. Pourquol nous tracasscr? N OllS
pouyons a10rs applaudir au grand succes renporte
par le Conseil de securite de l'Organisation des
Nations Cnies dans la manif::-e de traiter cette
a/1aire, Si c'est la un tab1e:::.u edifiant des travaux
de l'Orgadsat:on des Nations Un:es, si c'::st un
e>:emple a suivre, je n'y camprends absolument
den,

All of us, jndu/ling, r am sure, the Government
of the N etherland,,>, want. peace in Indonesia and
elsewhere, but peacr has certain indispensable
ingredients. I cIo not see a sufficient number of
those ingredients present now in connexion with

Notts desirons tous - y compris, j'en sms sur..
le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas - qae la. paix
regne en Indonesie et ailleurs, mais la paix hnplique certaines conditions incispensables. Je ne crois
pas que, en ce qui concerne l'Indonesie, ces <:on-

a

17
the question of Indonesia. I hope that I shall
see more of them soon.
I am in agreement in principle, although not
necessarily in detail, with the idea of a preliminary
conference in connexion with Indonesia, but I
must point out two matters which are of great
importance in the view o£ my delegation. The
first is that the Security Council's resolution o£
28 J an'1ary still stands. The second is that the
deliberations of the so·ca11ed round table or preliminary conference-call it what you will-should
be deslRned not to find out whether or not the
Republic uf Indunesia should be restored, but
in order to discover the best and 310St rapid means
of effecting that restoration. In the meantime, I
should like to submit that the Security Council
should express, through its President, its concern
at the failure of the Netherlands Government so
far to implement the resolution of 28 January
1949,

ditions soient suffisarnment reroplies.
qu'elles le seront bient6t davantage.

J'esp~re

Je me raDie dans l'ensemble, mais pas ne:essairement dans les details, a l'idee tl'unc cunference preJiminaire au sujet de l'Imlonesie, et je
dais attirer l'attention du Conseil su: deux points
qui, de l'avis de ma de:egation, Jnt une tres
grande importance. Le premier est que la resolution adoptee par le Conseille 28 janvier est toUj ours en vigueur, Le deuxieme est que les travaux
de la conference dite de la table roode Oil prelimin.1.ire - appelez-la comme V01.:S voudr..:!. doivcnt Ctrc dcs:ines, non pas a ~avoir si la R~_
publique d'Illdonesie doit etre restauree, rnais a
decouvtir les moyellS les ?lus efficaces et les plus
rapides pour la restauration de cete Republ'gue.
le pro;Jose, entre temps, que, par l'interrnedi~ire
de son President, le Comeil de securite expr l l11e
le saud qu'il eprouve en constatant que le Gou~
vernement des Pays.Bas ;t'a pas, jusqu'a present,
mis en application la resolution du 28 janvier
1949.

Sir Benegal Rama RAu (India) : In expressing
my general agreement with the views expressed
by Mr. Palar, I wish only to emphasize one point
w11ich requires some clarification. With the
President's permission, I shall read a sedion from
the rcaolt\tion of the Security Council [S/1234].
Paragmph 2 calls upon " ... the Government
of the Netherlands to release immediately anc
unconditionally all political priaoners arrested by
them.
"
The paragraph goes on to say,
to facilitate
the immediate return of the officials of the Government of the Republic of Indonesia. to Jogjakarta in onjer that they may discharge their
responsibilities under paragraph 1 <l.bove ..."
H •••

The respo:lsibilities under paragraph 1 are
stated in the following terms:
"Calls I~P0'11. the G(n'ernment of the Netherlands
to ir.sure the immediate discontinuance of all
military operations, calls upon the Government of
the Republic . . ."
This assumes the re·establishment of the Indonesian H.epublic at Jogjakarta. That is the pai:lt
that I wish to emphasize.
Actually it is only an establisl~ed governme~t
that can issue a cease-fire order 1f that order 1S
to be effective.
Finally, paragraph 3 recommends-the first
two paragraphs are orders-that:
<I •• , in the interest of carrying OU! the expres~d
objectives and desires of both parties .to est::l.b~sh
a. federal, indepe~dent, and ~overel~ Untted
States 0 f Ir.donesla at the earliest posslbl~ date~
negotiations be undertaken as soon as pOSSIble by
representatives of the Government of t?e Netherlands and representatives of the ~e~ubhc of Ind0h:
nesia . . . on the basis of the prInCiples set f~~"
in the Linggadjati and Renville Agreements ...

Sir Benegal Rama MU (lnde) (~rad1~it dt: t'lInqlais) : J'appro:lve, d'une rrumiere generale, les
~ues exprimees par M. Palar, mais je desire revenir sur un point qui exige quelg\1es eclaireissernents. Avec la permission du Pre,ident, je donnerai lecture C'une partie de la resolution du
Conseil de securite [5/1234].
Le ')aragraphe 2 invite: ,r, .. le Gouvernement
des Pays~Bas a rcmeltre, immediatement et SOlUS
condition, en liberte tous Ies prisonl1iers politiques
arretea par lui ..."
Ce paragraphe c01~tinu~ ~ans, ces .ter:nes: "...
faciliter le retour lmrnedmt a DJokJa\~arta .des
fonctionnaires du Gouvernernent ?e la Republ~que
d'lndom':sie, de maniere qu'i1s p~lSsent s':acq;lltier
des tiches qui leur sont impartles confonnement
atl paragraphe premier ci-dessus . , ."
Les responsabilites prevues. au paragraph:: premier sont enoncees comne SUlt:
Hhvite le Gollvernement des, rays~Bas. ~ f~'lre
cesser immedi<:tement toutes ope,ratlO~s ffilhba!,res,
invite le Gouvernement de la Repubhgue ...

a

Ces dispositions supposent le r~tablissemen! de
la Republigue d:lndones.ie.a DjJkjakarta. l.'est
sur cc point que Je veux lOSlstl:r.
Setu, en fait, un gouverneme.nt, etabli pcutdonner l'ordre de cesser le feu, Sl Ion veut que cet
ordre soit res')ecte.
E;tl1n le p~agraphe 3 recommande - le~ deux
premier~ paragmphes etaient des ordres:
"
fin d'atteindre les objcctifs reconnus. et
real:s'e; l~s souhaits exprimes par les deux part~es~
a savoir, la const1tutian, d?ll~ le pl~s ~ref Ql'lat
possible des Etats-Ur.is fedeu'.1X, mdependants
, , d'Indonesie que les representants
I R'
et souverams
'
du GouverneTIent des Pays-Bas .~t ceu,~ de a e:
publique indonesienne Duvrent, ces ~u 11~ le iJO~r s
ront des negociations . . . en s IOsJ:;lmnt . e.
rin~ipes enonces dans les Accords de LlOggadjatl
pet cn RenvJ'le..
/'"
,
F. d'autres tennes s'il doit y avoir tme conferen~~ re1im~naire en'vue de l'elablis~emen! de. la
In other words, if there is to be a pn:litnin
Re uJi ue a Djokjakarln,. el1e peu~ .avOl f lle,u
conference for the establishnent of the R~fu
at Jogjakarta that can be held now Wit I t e maPnten~nt avec la participation des dlngeal1:ts re~
mais toutes negotiations ulteneures
leaders of th~ Republic, but any ~u~sequent ~id pu h'l··
\cams,
' t ts de la
velopment, any subsequent n6gotlatlOns, s~o
devront etre engagees avec les represen an
be with the representatives of the re_established

b?he

18

Republic of Indor.esin. This is a very important
point because the representative of Canada made
it clear tlJat et was not his intention to go beyond
the tet::ns of the SeuaiLy C<.JUllL:il's resolution.
If thls confere:1ce is to discuss the further
stages in the negotiations and the procedure for
these ne.'fotiatinn~. it woulrl be in contravention
of this reso:ution unless the Republican leaders
attend these negociations as representatives of the
re-esta':Jlished Government in Jogjakarta. That is
the point which I wis11 to make very dear. And
E thi!l conference is to he held, I should think it
would be only for the establishment of the Government in Jogjakarta and for settling the necessary admillistrative arrangements which are
essential for the functioning of the Governoent
in J ogjakarta. If it goes b~yond that, then it
should be a new conference with the "RepublLcan
leader; appearing there as representahes of the
re-established Government of Indonesia.

Republique et'Inclonesi~ restauree. C't:st la un
point tres important, etant donne que le representant du Canada a indique clairement q'.l'il
Jl'avait pas 1'intcntion d'aller au dela ut:, disposi~
tions de la resolution du Cotlsei[ de securite.
Si cette conference doit S'occl1per des stades
Itlterieufs des negociationsl et de la procedure a
slline pour ces negoci<ltions, die agira en opposition :avec cette resolution, a mains que les dirig-eants rep'.lblicains ne participent aux nego::iations en qualite de representant:; dl1 Gouvernement restaure a Djokjakarta. C'est ce point que
je desire rnettre en relief. Si ceUe conference a
lieu, je pense qU'elle acra pOllr objet de retablir le
Gouvernement a Djokjakarta et de fixer les m~su­
res administratives necessaires pour que ce Gou.vemement puisst' s'aquitter de ses fc'nctior.s a
Djnkjakarta. Si elle va au deJa, i; faut qu'el1e se
transforme en une nouve.l1e conference, a laquelle
les dirigeants republicains seront presents en
qualite de representants du GDuvernenent restaure d'Inclonesie.

There is another point which I wish to emJha~
size. We :lRve modified our resohttbns 6ree
times, and tl1ree times the resolutions have not
been carried out. I think there should now be
a tim~-limit, as suggested by Mr. Palar, for the
re-establishment of t1le Government at )ogjak;.rta;
otherwise these negotiations will go on indefinitely.
This is the first essential preliminary for any
negotiations for a peaceful settlement.

11 y a un uuLre iJoiul sur lcqucl jc voudmis insister. NQUS :lVOns mDdifie trois fois nos resolutions, et t~oi.s fois ces resolutions n'ont pas ete
mises en vigueur. J'estime, comme 1'a pro?ose
M. Palar, que nOl1S devrions fixer une date li:nite
pour le retablisserm:nt (In GULlvernement ii Djokjn1.:arta, sinon les r.egociations se pO'.lrsuivront indennimenL C'est la condition essentielle de tmlfes
negodations en vue d'ull reglement pacifique.

Mr. :MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republies) (translated fro1'it Russian): The situation
in Indonesia and the official documents made
available to the Security COl1ncil show' that the
Netherlands Government has not so far carried
out :he principle requirements of the Security
Cot1l1cil resolution of 28 January 1949 [S/1234J,
which called for the immediate discontinuance of
all military operations and unconditio:1al release
of nll political prisoners arrested in the Republic
of Indonesia by the Netherlands Government.

M. MJ\uK (Union des Reptlbliques !Wci::llisteR
sovietiql1es) (tradll1:t du TlISse) ~ La situation qui
exis!e en Indonesie et les documents offidels mis
a la disposition du Conseil de securite prouvent
Clue le Gouvernernent des Pays-Bas n'a pas encore
dunne suite aux dispositions cs:.entielles de la d·solu:ion d:.l Couseil de securite du 28 janvier 1949
[S /12341, qui deman::1ent la cessation immediate
des ;"ostilites et la rerrisc ell Hber:e sans condition
des oersonnalites poJitiques de la Republiquc d'Indonesie, arretees par le:; autorites nccrlo.ndaises.

The members of the Sectlrity Comdl, as well
as ffi"lny of the representatives of other countries
attending this meeting, are fully aware or the
circumstar.ces in whkh the text of the a·~ove­
mentioned resolution was drafted <.!l1d a:lopted. As
is kmwn, in the case of hdonesia, the Security
Council fdled from the very start to fulfil its
obligatlOn to mnintain international peace, which
is one of the reaSUll~ why Ncthcrl:l.J-.ds aggression was unleashed in Indonesia,
Owing to the efforts of the United States of
America and some other c'.eJegatiotlS, that5ituation temained unchanged, even during the drafting
of the resolution of 28 Janua:y. Once again,
the United States delcli;ation assnmed the part of
chief mediator and trtt.'d to persuade the representative er the Netherlands to agree to the inclusiDn of one provision or another in the draft
resolution. The process of persL:.ading and drafting took ... very long time-from the beginning
of January 11nti1 28 January, that is, almost a
whole rno~th. The understanding reached between
the Uniter' States and Netherlands representatives
gave substantial encouragement to the aggressor.

At the Security Caune] [406th] meeting of
28 January the majority of the Cotmdl, led by

Les rnembres du Consett de secJrite et plusieurs

aut res reprc§sen:ants qui assistent a cette seance
connaissent for: bien les conditions qui ont preside a l'elaboration et a l'neioption de Cl" rrojet de
resolution. On sait qU~, dans la question d'Indonesie, le Conseil de securite a fail1i des le debut a
ses obligiJions relatives au maintien cle la paix
dam le monde; c:'est la. une des circonstances qui
ont permis auXl P<:1ys-Ba:; de dedencher leur
agnssion en Indonesie.
Par suite des efforts deployes par la dell~gation
des Etats·Unis d'Arnerique et par certaines autres
delegations, ce:te si~uation est dernel1l"ee sans
c:h<tngement, malgre 1'~!abuI-aiioll de 1kl. resolution
du 28 janvier. :Jue fois de plus, la delegation des
Etats-Unis cl' Amerique a exerce son pOtlvoir de
penuasion sur le representant des Pays-Bas pour
l'amener a. accepter certaines propositions 'cu'eUe
voulait btroddre dans le pro jet de resolution.
Ces efforts de persuasion et l'elaboration clu t~xte
se sont :>£,urst:ivis fort longtemps - depuis le
debut de janvier jusqu'au 28 de ce rnois, c'est-a~
dire pendant pres d'un Inois. Le resultat net de
ces tractations entre les representants des Etats·
Dois et des p;:,ys-Bas a ete d'encourager l'agres~
seur.
A la. [406emq] seance du 28 j.anvier, la majorite
des membres dl1 Conseil. sous la comiuite des re-

19
the re?reselltatives of the United States of
America and the r;nited Kingclorr., rejected the
USSR propoR:11 [Sll233] that Netl-,er:<lnds troops
sll0l11d immediately be withdraW:1- from the ten>
tcry of tIle Indone,jan Republic to the positions
indicated in the Renville Agreemen:. Or. the proposal of the United States rejCresentative, supported by a numJer of other representatives, tLe
resolution <ldopttd or: 28 January :ectlced the
boundaries of the Indonesian RepLblic to the
paltry dimensions of the town o~ ]ogjakarta, ard
even that te-wn wa, ldt ut.der the oCcllpation of
N etJ.erlands troops,

presentants des Etats-Unis d'Arnerique e: du
Royaume-Unt, a rejete la proposition de ·'URSS
[5/1233] all»;. tennes de laquelle les troupes 'lee,rlandaises qUL occupent Ie territuin: de la ReFublique d'Indonesie devaient etre immediatemer:t retirees sur 1es positions pre.vtJes par l'Accord du
Rem'ille, Sur la propos:tion du representan: des
Etats-Unis qlli a lite ap'puyee pelr eerlaines aLltres
delega:ions, la resoll1ticn du 28 janviel" 1949 a
des proreduit le tenitoire d!" la Republique
portions mincscnles, a la seule viUe de Djokjakarta, en y maintenant d'a:lleurs leg troupes d'octupation neer:andaises.

The aggressor h~rl reason to exult. The reS::lIlltion was :::Iearly directed against the victim of
ugg:ession. The representative cf the Ne:herlands :ully Jnderstooo at the time :llClt the United
Sta:es representative, whilf'. playing the part of
persuasicn, was actually ready to come to an
agreement wi:h the aggressor, thereby covering
t;.p and er.couraging the Netherlands Govemment's agg-:ession agninst thl'_ Republic of Indonesia. That was also clear to so:ne others, but,
as usua:, they voted in faVOlU d the draft
resolution.

L'agresseur pouvait se rejollir, eette res<l]Lltion
etait manifestemeIJt Jirig~e contre la victi me de
l'agression. Le representant des Pays-Bas se
rendait padaitement com?te que le repre~entant
des Etats-Unis, tout en ceployar.t ses efforts de
persuasion, etait de connive.nce avcc l'agl'esseur
et qlle, en realite, i1 justifiait et faverisait l'agl'es·
sion que le Gouverne:nent des Pays~Bas avai:
bncee eotltre la Republiqt1e d'Indonesie. D'antres
representants le comprenJ.ieut, eux iUussi, cc qui
ne les a pas e:l1j::eches de voter, COl11me d'habituclc-.
en faveur du projet de resclution.

]n the c:rc-Jn~st<ll1ces the Ne:herlc:ncs Govern·

Le G:nlvernCJ1lCllt des Pays-Bas cll'v;:l.it mauj·
festement concll1fe de tout cela qu'il pOl1v<Jit s.e
dispe:lser de donner S;Iite i eette resolution d)!
Consei1 cle se::urik C'est surtout pour eeUe raison
qUto les didgeants politi::.tues de la RcptlbliC]l1e ~ont
tau] ours empriso:lJles; c:'est pour cela que les
troupes d'occupation neerlanclaises continllent,
Cornme l'a declare lv!. Palar, representant de la
Rept1bliqllt~; ii ~e :ivrer- it des actec (le violence "tdes reptesailles santar:tes comre la popula:io:J
de la Rt.p'.lbJique d'rnd01~esie. l.e represent,nt de
la Republique a lllonbe que les forces cl'occupation neerlandai,ses etaicnt en train d'e.xtec-mincr
les inte~lectue1s et les gens tant soit peu instruits;
les alltcrites IT1Jitaires n<~crlandaises en InC:one~ie
se renc1ent ainsi coupables du crime de genocide.
Le Conseil de ,;eull-ile ne saurait s'el1 eJe;;;interesser.

me:1t was bound to CGme to the fu:ther co:1clusion

that even such cl resolution as that adoptec1. by the
.Secnrity Coundl could be ignored aed not ptlt
il1tO effect. It i:: r1ain}v for that reason that :he
political leaders of tllE'i" Repnblic are still unnet
arrest and. that, as Mr. Palar, representative of
the Repuhlic, stated, Nethe:-Iands oc(:upation
treops <:.re cenfnuing to commit ac:s of violence
and bloody rep:isa! against the population of the
IniQllesinn RelJllb:k. Moreover, the statement by
the rl'presl'l1tative of the Republic that the Nether~
lands occllpation forces are eAierminating- the
literate and intellectual population of the Indo~
llesian RepLb!:c, means that the N ethe~[ands
ar:ned IOH'es ;m~ virtually c.ommitting the ct:me
of genocide in hdonesia. Tle CoU:1ciI. canno:
fail to :ake note of that fact.

a

a

Ohvi,JUs]y, l~ejther the ar,f[uments soilec with
hypocrisy which the :.retherl~nds repr~entative
h"s been trying :'.0 utilize he:"e, fl{)r any of his
invented pretexts, will help hin :'.0 dissimulate
the only too obvious attempts of the ::-Jetherland:>
Government to comf)lete the liquida~ion of the
Indcneaian Re;JUblic and prevent its re-establisl:·
ment, even within the limits of the one town of
Jogj::tkarta..

Biell entendu, nuct:n des arguments entaches
d'hYPol.:risie q·.lC le representant drs P:tys-Bas a
tS5<1ye d'im·oquer an Conseil de securite, a1tcun
pretexte et aucur.e invention ne lui pe:mettront de
masqm~r les tentatives tluxque11es se livre son
Gouverncment pour 111ettre fin a l'1"xist~nce de la
Republique d':ndonesie; ee Gouvernement se re·
fuse manifestement
retablir la Republique,
meme dans les limites de la scull'. ville de
Djokjakarla,

That is clearly the purpDse of Mr. v<.n Rtijen
in agai:l telling the COltlleil tD-les about the "chaos"
which might ensJe if the innrisonec of1lcials of
the Indonesian Republic were to ':le rele<.sed,
about :he "conn:unist menace" and other similar
scarecrows w:th which t1:e Netherlands representative so frequently tries to frighten the
nervous members of t:.te SeC:llrity Council and the
representatives of other countries attending its
meetings. It should bt noted, 1:1 that conne.'Cion,
that Mr. van Eoijen's fairy-tales so Ifightened
one of these representatives that, dllrillg at:d after
the Delhi Conference, instead of c:Hlcerning, himself with the Cjuestion of defending the interests
of the IT-donesinn Repl1blic ,l:1d it5 people against
Netherlands ;:;ggressiol1, he took it tlPcn himself
to or;ranize an anti-coml111.:nist bloc in Asia,

C'est precisemeut clans ce but que M. van
Roijer. rac:onte llouveau au Conseil ce securite
des fables au sujet dll "r:Jlaos" qt:'entrair:erait la
remise en liberte des ionctionnaires ::le la Re·
pUbliql1e; il a parle de la "menace comnlUniste"
et i1 a agite d'autres epouvantails sernblab!es
auxqucls iI a si souvem 1"l1 '-eCOUfS pour essayer
cJ'intimider certains represent,mts impressionnables elu Conseil de securite et de certa:ns pays
qui assistent aux reunions du Cor.seil. Les contes
Je M. ViLn Ra; j en od si forte.me:l t in-pressionne
l'llrl de ces represel1tants que, pendant 1;:. Confe·
rel1ee de New-Delhi, et meme apre.~ celle-ci, 11 a
pr is l'il1itiative cl'organ:se: en Asie un hloc anti.
CUl'n111I1ni~te pour lu':te:; COlltre la "menace communiste" en fndonesie, au lieu de se (:onsacrer a.
la defense des interets de la Repubjqne et du

a

a

20
allegedly for the purpose of combating the "communist menace" in the Indonesian Republic.

peuple d'Indonesie contre l'agression neerlandaise.

Mr. ';an Roije:l concluded his terrifying tales
with the llyp:Jcritica1 remark that the Netherlands
Government might have been able to hand over
the sovereignty of Indonesia sooner, had it not
been for the demand that it should release the
Rcpub1i:an leaders held under arrest by be
Netherlands authoriti.. .s.

M. van Roijen a conclu toutes ccs histoires
terrifiantes en affirmant avec hypocrisie que le
Gouvcrncmcnt clC3 Pays-Ba>: pourrait bater le
~ransfert des pouvoirs wtlveraim a. l'Indonesie,
si l'on n'insistait pas pour qu'il remit en liberte
Ies dirigeants de la Rep'.1blique emprisQnnes par
:es autorites neerlanooises.

These statements are full of hypocrisy, .<lnd one
could not, in any case, give much credence to'
undertakings made by the Netherlands. T1e reprl'sentative of the Indonesian Republlc gave thl'
Council a detailed statement in this regard and
there is no need to repeat all that. It is only too
dear that such manGellvres on thl' part of the
Nether:ands Government are utterly worthless.
Their purpose is to enable the Netherlands
authorities to se:ld the members of the Government of the Imlolltsian Republic, under guard
and as prisoners, hem the Nethcrlands prisons
on the island of Bangka direct to tlt~ round-table
conference in The Hague, and there to dictate and
force them to accept conditions of servitude.
That is the trtle rea~<ln for the cO:lvocation of
the "round table conferen.::e" in The Hagtle. It
is quite clear, :herefore, that the Netherl<tr:d5
Goverr.ment is not proposing tie convocation of
51:ch a conference for the purpose of settling the
Ir:donesian question, but merely as an attempt
to conceal the continuing Netherlands aggress:on
against the Republic.

Ces dec)<lrations 50nt d'unl:: hypocTis1e flagrante
et l'on ne S<1urait, en au:.':un cas, ajouter foi am::
engagements contractes ?ar les Pays-Bas. Le representant de la Republique c'Indonesie a fait all
Conseil une de:Iara:ion detailIee a ce sujet; il est
done inutile q;.Je jc rcvicnne sur tout ce1a. Cl'S
manceuvres du Gouvemetn~nt des Pays-Bas sont
manifestement fallacieuses. Enes visent s:mplement a. permettre, aux antorites neerlandaises
d'emmener directement, sous escorte, i la conference de la table ronoe cle La Haye les membres
dUi GOl1vernement de la Republique d'Indonesie,
actuellement detenus clans l'ile de Ba.nka, pour
leur y dicter et kJr imposer des conditions de
servitude. Tel est le but qu'on poursuit en convoquant a. La Haye une "confere:J.ce de la table
ronde". Dam ces conditions, i.l va de soi que, proposant de convoquer t:lle telle conference, les
Pays·Bas, loir: de chercher a. regler la question
d'Indonesie, s'efforcent simplement de dissirnuler
l'agression qu'i1s continuent .i mener contre la
Republique.

Participation by thl' United Nations Comrr.ission :or Indonesia in such a---saving your
Fe5enCc-conferencc, which the Netherlands
Government has been mE-king persistent efforts
to ensure, would he nothing more than a cover
for the aggresive action of that Gm'ernrrent wd
an attempt to legalize the stzte of lawlessness
r~~11lting f~om Netherlands aggression in lndo·
nesia.

La participation ::le la Commission des Nations
Unies pour l'Indo:J.esie a. U:le conference de ce
genrf:, participation que rec1amc instamment le
Gouvemement des Pays-Bas, ne servirait gu'a
camoufler les actes d'agression de ce Gouvernement. Elk cOnstituerait simplement une tentative
visa:1t a. rendre legitime la situation ille~le que
l'agression neerlandaise a ere-ee en Indonesie.

In view of those facts the USSR delegation
objects to participation by :l. Commission of the
Council in a cO:lference of that nature. Furtl:ermore., the USSR delegation sees no reason for the
COnvocatio:l of the so-called preliminary conference, as propos~d by the representatives of China
and Canada.

PoUr ces raisons. la delegafon de l'URSS
s'oppose a. ce que la Commission des Naticns
Unies pour I'Indonesie prenne ?:J.rt
de tdles
confe:rences. La delegation de l'URSS ne voit
aucutle mison qui jtlstiiier.ait la collvocation d'une
conference dite preIiminaire, COUlme le proposent
les representants de la Chine et du Canada.

The SeCLtrity Council, in its decision of 28 January, called dearly upon the Nt:tht:rland:; Govel\lnent to ensure the immediate discontinuance of
all military ope~ations, as well as to release immedi:rtely and tmconditionally officials of the Republic. Up to no'", that has no! been done. The
~ot\ncil's decision has been vidated, and it is the
cuty of the Council to demanc fulfilment of that
cecision. To agree to the convocation of a pre·
liminal'y conference would serve only to coax,
even to encourage, the aggressor.

Aux termes de la resolution qu'il tl adoptee le
28 janvier, le Conseil de secttrite oem:mne r".laircment atl Gouvernement des Pays-Bas de faire
cesser irr.mediatement toutl'S operations militai.cs
et de remettre imcnediatement et sans ccndit:on
en liberte les fonctionnnires de b Rep:lblique. Or,
ce1a n'a pas encore ete fait. La decision du Conseil
de securite n ete violee; le Conseil s. done le
devoir d'en exiger la mise iJ. execution. Accepter la
convocation d'une conference preliminaire ne
servirait qu'a amadot:er, voire a enCotlragcr.
l'agresseur.

I should also like to say a few words about the
B~lgian representative's 'statenent, in which he
tned to draw a parallel between the Pall'stine
c;uestion and the Indonesian question and deplored
the fact that the USSR delegntion h:ld not supported the SecJrity Council reso1u:ion of 4 November. Well, the USSR delegation does not
support sc~h resolutions as the ont forced upon
th~ Cotlncll by the United Kingdom delegation
With the support of the Belgian delegdion and

Je vocdrais faire ma.:ntenant que1ques cbservations i propos de la declaration du representant
de la Belgiqu~ qui a tente d'6tablir un paratlele
entre la question de Palestine et celle d'Indonesie.
11 se pla:.nt de Cl'. que 1<1. delegation de l'URSS au
Conseil de securite n'a pas vote en faveur de la
resolution du Conseil e:t date du 4 novembre. Dr
la delegation de l'URSS n'appuie pas Ies resolu~
tions de ce genre; en eIfet, cette resolution, qUi a
ete imposee au Conseil de securite par la det6_

a

21
()t~ers, setting fonlt the biquitous demand that
the I~raeli forces s~ould be withdrawn fmm their

gation du Royau:ne-Uni, a'iec l'appui du representl'lnt de In BelgiQue et de tertains <.lutres rep[e~
own territory, while the forces of foreign Powers sentants, contenait une exigence injuste; elle dewr.ich had invaded the territory of Israel remained mandait le l'etrait des troupes d'Israel d'une parlie
on fsraeli territory. 'The OSSR delegation will de leur propre territoire, "lors que les forces
ne-/er suppor~ S11Ch proposOlls, <.tnc1 that attituce is I a.r01ees des Etats qui l'avaient envahi ~o.:raiellt
consistent with its position of principle. It has restees sur le territoire c1'Israel. La delegation de
m"intained tllat thl": forei~n troep;, whic:l invaded l'URSS, qui eo adopte it cet egard une attitude de
Israeli territory should be withdrawn from that principe, n'appuiera jaruais tle te1\cs proJpositions.
territory.
Elle a insiste pour que les troupes etrangercs qui
avaient envahi le territoire d'Israel en f115sent

I

retir~e~.

During the consideration of the Indonesian
q1.1estion, the "CSSR drlegation again demanded,
on the 9.asis of its position of principle, th.at the
Netherlands troops, as well as forei,!!Jl troops,
whidl tad invaded the territory of the Indonesian
Republic, should immediately be withdrawn irom
that territory. Consequently, there is poo inconsistency between the position taken by the USSR
delegation on the Palestine question and its
position on the Indonesian question, And J can
can assure the representative of Belgium on behalf
of the USSR delegation, tl1il.t when:vel' there is
aggression, wherever troops of an aggressor invade any territory, the USSR delegation will
always demand that the aggre<;snr shot11d immediately remove his trcops from the territory of
the victim of aggression.

Lors de l'examen de la question d'Jndonesie, la
delegation de l'URSS, fidele
son attitude de
principe, a ega[ement ueIIlande I'6~·acuation imme(jate des troupes neerlandaises, puisque Cl;; sent
la des troupes etrangeres qui ant env<lhi le territoire de la Republigue d'Indonesie. Ainsi done,
l'attitude que la delegation de l'URSS a adopt~e
propos de la qucstion indonesienne est tout
alls~i logiqt\e que l'attitlJ(le qu'elle avait adoptee
<:\. regard de la question. de Palestine. le puis
asSurer le representant de 12. Belgique que la dele~
gation de l'URSS insistera taujOltr~ pour que les
troupes de l'agresseur evacuent immediatement
tout territoire qu'elles auront attaque.

If the representative of Belgium is drawing a
pal"allel between tIle Indonesi:ln ane Palestine
questions in order to bring abollt th withdrawal
of Netherlands troops from the territory of the
Indonesian Republic, then the USSR delegation
is prepared to support a proposal ~o tll"t effect.
Judging-, howf'vl'r, hy the Belgian represent:;.tive's
~osition with regard to the Indonesian question,
he has intentions which are quite different. He
nas attempted draw a parallel with a view to justifying and comealing the aggression of the Netherlands Government against the Republic of Indonesia, The "CSSR delegation cannot be a porty
to such an underta.king.

Si le representant de la Belgique <l. etabli ee
parallele entre les qllestions d'Imlonesie et de
Palestine pour obtenir l'evacuatlon dCl tenitoire
de la Repuhlique c1Tnclonesie parIes troupes n<~er­
Jandaises, la delegation cle l'URSS est prete a
appuyer sa propositlon. Toutefois, ii. en jllger par
l'attitude adoptee pnr le representant de la Belgique, les buts qu'iI pOU1·su~t sont f'ntierement
difterents, 11 n'a etabli ce paraUele qu'en vue de
justifier et de dissimule l'agression que le Gouve~ncment des PaYS-B1~ a commise contre la
Repl1blique d'Indonesie. Or, la delegation de
l'URSS ne s;ltlfait participer a une telle
m'J.nreuvre.

Sir Terence SHONE (United Kingdom): The
gravity of this qll(;~tjOJl of Iildonesia, with which
the Secmity Council has for so long been confronted, has not lessened with the passage of
time. It is tmgic that all the potif'nt f'nrleavours
that have been made over a period of years both
in this CDuntil and outside it~anc1 not least bv
the United N ::I.tions Committee of Good Offices,
as it was, or the Commission for Indonesia, as it
now is-have so fa.r failed to bring about a settlement of this dispute. TIle results which may iSS11e
from a continuance of the c!ispute a~e incalculable;
they may be dire, not only to the parties directly
involved but also to many other Governments and
peoples in differem PUrtS uf L!le world to w'lom
the possible consequences are a matter of anxious
concern.

Tllese considerations may baye served not only
to te:nper the discus~iol1s at our rcccnt meetings
but ~lso perh.o.ps to strenRthen the will to fi:ld a
solution. If so, tbe way to a solution should not
be iITlpo~~ible 10 fi[!d. FrO'/ided the lmme{li..te
difficulties arising Out of the failure of the :Ietherlands to comply with paragraph Z of the operative
part of the Council's resolution of 28 January
can be resolved, we may perhaps look forward

a

a

Sir Terenee SHONE (Royau:ne-Uni) (trcduit

d~ l'anglaj~): La gra"ite de la qu;~tion iad.o:

nesienne dont le Consed de sewn le est S8.151
depuis si longtemps o'a pas diminue avec le te~ps.
11 est tres regrettable que tous les efforts pattents
tentr.>:s pendant plusieurs allne-es, hUlt l'interie1.1r
qu'ii. l'exterieur du Conseil ~ et particuliereme~t
par la Commission de bons oHi:es pour l'Ind?nesie, mnintenaut deventtc Commission r1f'_'l NatLol;S
Unies pour l'Indonesie - n'aient pas permls
d'atriver a un reglerr:ent de ee differeJld. Les
consequences que peuvent ~woir la prolongation de
ce cliffhend sont in<:aku~bles; elles pellvent etre
desastreuses, non seulement pour les parties dlrectement imp!iqw~es, mais egalemenl pour beau·:oup
dJautres Gouvernernents et peuples de differente5
parties dn monde qui eprouvent, au suj:t de
conseQ11ences eventuelles, les plus VIVes Inquietlldes.
Ces considerations ont peut-etre contrihue,' non
seulellll'nt a rendre moins violentes les discussions
qui ont eu lieu au cours de nos derniel'es seance:;,
renforcer notre volonte de trouver
mais aussi
nne solution. S'il en est ains:, cette solution oe
C:evralt pas etre imposs:ble a trouver. Si nOtts
pOL1vons resoudre les difficLllb~S immedi.ate, nees
du falt que les Pays-Bas ne se sont pas con formes
au paragraphe 2 dll dispOSllif de la resolution

a

:es

a

22
with some confidence to a filial solution acceptable to the parties and also to this CounciL

The Security Council resolution of 28 January,
which my delegation supported, was. the result
not merely of much discussion but of determined
eR'orts to provide a basis 'for an acceptable solution of the Indonesian question-acceptable 110t
only to the parties directly involved, bttt to those
many other Governments and peoples to whom,
as I have said, t11is question is of anxious concern.

The Netherlands representative has explained
to us why the Netherlands has not felt able to

comply with paragraph 2 of the operative part of
the resolution as it stancls, calling for the restoration of the Goverl1ment of the 1:epub1ic to ]ogjakarta. It is perhaps only natural that the argL1ments put forward by the Netherlands in defence
of their attitude on non-compliance in this respect
;;;hou1d be subjected to criticism in the Security
Council. My delegation shares in wide measure
the views so cogently expressed by the representative of the United States of America on 10 Marcll
r41uth meetin,r;l- In part-icu]:u, we believe, with
him, that military action cannot be permitted
to eliminate one of the parties to the dispute which
has for 50 long occupied the attention of this
Council and that, until the Government of Indonesia can tOe-assemble as an organiled body, it
cannot be expected to aSSllme the responsibilities
which, as Mr. Austin put it, negotiation for a
jLtst and lusting political settlelnent require and
entail.
Thert' is another POil1t in the Council's resolLItion of 28 January to which my delegation, in
common with others, attaches major importance
-namely, the status of the United N<ltions Commission, !vIy delegation regards it as essential that
t11C Commission should be enabled to function in
tIll: discussions between the parties in a manner
full v consonant with the terms of the reso{ution.
Thi's bring-s me to the n'ew element introduced
into the [Jicture from the Netherlands side since
the adoption of the Council's resolution of
28 Jantlary. I refer to the invitation which the
Netherlands Government has issued to the President of the Republic, to other non-HepLlblican
Indonesian leaders and to the United Nations
Commission for lndonesia to attend a round table
conference at The Hague to consider the conditions and modalities by which an accelerated
transfer of sovereignty over Indonesia by the
Netherlands to a representative federal Indonesian
government can take place.

The sincerity of the Netherlands Government
in putting fOI-wanl tllese proposals }las been
questioned by a number of speakers in the course
of the l<lst debates in this COl1ncil. For our part,
my delegation does not wish to cast any reflection
on HIe sincerity of the Netherlands Government.
Vle prefer to loole Upon their proposals in the
same light as the representative of China, as being
generous and statesmanlike. But none of us can
ignore the existence of the dotlbts whicll have
been so freely expressed or the need for removing

adoptee par le COllseille 28 jallvier, nous pOUVOns
envisager avec confiallce une solution definitive
acceptable pour les det1:x: parties comme pour le
Conseil,
L;J. resolution dll Conseil de securite en date
du 28 janvier, que ma delegation a appllyee, a
ete le resultat, non seulement de debats prolonges.
mais aussi d'eftorls resolus en vue de rec.hercher
sur quels fondements pourrait reposer une s01u·
tien de la question indonesienne qui soit acceptable, tant poltr les parties directement imp1iquees
que pour beaucoup d'autres Gouvemements et
peuples qui, je le repete, se preoccl1pent vivement
de cette question.
Le representant des Pays-Eas nons a imlique
les raisons pour lesquelles son Gouvernement n'a
pas ete en mesure de se conformer au paragraphe 2 du dispositif de la resolution, SOltS sa forme
actnelle, qui plivoil1a restauration du Gouvernement de la Republiql1e a Djokjakarta. Peut-etre
est-il nature! que les arguments .avances par les
Pays-Bas pour justifier leur attiude it Cl' sujet
aient souleve des critiques au sein du Conseil de
securite, Ma delegation partage, clans line large
mcsure, les vues que le representant des EtatsUnis d'Amerique a exposees, le 10 mars, d'llne
maniere si convaincante [416cme seance]. En
particulier, nous pen sons, comllle lui, qll'on ne
peut avoir recours a une action militaire pour
e1iminer lme des parties au differend qui, depuis
si longtemp~, retient l'attention dn Conseil, et que,
311ssi 10ngte1l1ps que le GOl1vernement d'Indonesie ne IX:>Ufra se reunir comme un carps organise, on ne doit tJ3S s'attendre it. ce qu'il <:Issume,
conllne M. Austin l'a sigmI.le, les responsahilites
qui exigent et comportent des negociations en vue
d'un reglement politique, eCluitable et durable.
11 y a, clans la reSOLLltiol1 du COnseil en date
dn 28 janvier, un autre point unque1 ma delegation, C011IDle d'autres, attache une grande importance, a savoir le statut de la Commission des
Nations Unics. Ma delegation estime qu'il est
essentiel que la Commission soit autorisee a c..xercer, pendant que ~c derou1eront les ponrparlers
entre les deux parties, des fonctions pleinement
conformes aux dispositions de la resolution, Ceci
m'ament: D. parler du nauve} element introduit
par 1es Pays-Bas depuis que le Conseil a adopte
sa resolution du 28 janvier, Je fais <J.llusion a
l'invitation que le Gotlvcrnement des Pays-Bas
a adressee au Pl'esident de la Republique, aux
dirigeants inclonesiens autres que cet1x de la
Republiquc et a la Commission des Nations Unies
pour l'Indonesie, de partieiper a une conference
de la table ron&::: a La Haye en vue d'examincr
dans queUes conditions et de quelle maniere les
Pays-Bas pourraient hater le transfert a un gouvernement federal indonesien, reellement representatif, de la souverainde qu'ils exercent sur
l'Indonesie.
Certains orateurs, au cours des derniers debats
du Consei1, ont mis en doute la sincerite de~ propositions faites par le Gouvernement des PaysBas; la delegation du Royaume-Uni ne les suivra
pas sur ce terrain, Notre opinion est la meme que.
celle ou representant de la Chine; no us consideTons que ces propositions 5011t empreintes de liberalisme antant que de sens [Jolitiqne. Personne
d.'entre nous ne peut, cer)e;lldant, negliger le fait
que des doutes ant ete clairemel1t exprimes et qu'il
convient de les dissiper si l'on vent que 1es der-

23
tlwst:. doubts, if the lo.tcst proposals :l.re tn result nieres propositions, ab?utis~ent a tm reglement
in a settlement sta:isfac:tory to the parties directly susceptlble de sattsfalre les parties en cause
concerned and tu this Council. It is surely clear aussi bien que le Conseil. 11 est certain que ni
that neither the latest )letherlands plan, nor in- l~ plan propose en de.mier lieu par les rays-Bas,
deed allY other plan, CMl achieve thut re5ttlt unless nr, du reste, a:tctln autre plan, ne peut conduire
all the parties directly concerned willingly co- .a Cl' n~sultat si toutes les partjes e.n came n'aCCi:p,
operate in putting it into efl\:ct.
tf'nt pa~ or cooperer a l'execution.
The represt>f!t2tive of Indonesia ;las tada)'
l..e representant de l'Indonesie a demancle ausough: c:ladi.cation 011 points of impc:Htance in jourd'hui des explicaLiolls sur C,UdqllcS points
connexion with the plan of the Netherlands and itnpol'tants qui interessent, ci'ttne part, le pLan des
also in connexion with the suggestion made at the Pays~Bas et, c.'autre part, la proposition faitc au
last meeting by th", representative of Canada, I cours de la deTlllere seance par le representant du
am abOLlt to wme to that, but I would say here Canada, Je vais aborder c(:He l/ue:;tion, mats jc
that, as I understand it, thf' Canadian sug-gestion Yeux ~i~e d'abo~d que, si je cOO1prends bien, la
deals not with the proposed conference at The proposItion du Canada n'a pas trait a la wllfe~
Hague as such, hut with preliminary discussions rence que l'on envisage de tenir a La Haye, mais
in which the role of the United Nations Commis- bien aux discussions preJiminaires au cot:rs des~
sion would be to bring about ::l.T1 fLgreement tllat queUes le role de la Commission des >fations
would enable We Go....ernment of the Republic of Unics conEisteTait a oMenii la conclusion d"llfl
Indonesiz tu participate in the conference nt The accord permettant au Gotlvernernent de la RepuHague.
blique d'Indonesie de participer a la conference
df La Haye,
Quoi que nOllS puissiol1S penser du fait que les
W1Jatever we m:<y feel about the non-compliance of the Netherlands with the Security Pays-Bas n'ont pas npplique la resolution r.l!
Council resolution, n1y delegation feels that we Conseil de sccurite, la delegation du Royaumeshould loole at the latest Netherlands proposal Uni estime que nOll~ devonj cllvisager avee itnpar~
dispassionately, bearing in mind always the fact tialite la der:Jiere PTopo~.i!jon des Pays-Bas, et
that our object throughout the discClsslon of this que nous ne devons pas perdre de vUc que l'objet
question mtlst be the solntioTl of the problem de notre debat est de resoudre le problbne qui
befo:·e ttS, We feel that this Council, through the nOllS est s011mis. Nous pemOllS quc le Consetl
Unitell Niltions Co~nmision, shol1ld bend every doit, par l'entremise de la Commission des Natio:ls
effort toward estabHshing with the least possible Unies, faire tous les efforts en vue de (reer, dans
delay the conditions which wi1: make it possihle le pIllS bref delai, des conditions telles que le
for the Government of the Republic of Jndonesia GOllvernement de l<,. Republique d'InJollt:sie pUi~5C.
to agree to pa1iicipate in the rouml tnble con~ accepter de participer it la conH~rence de la table
ference proposed ':ly the Government of the ronde que le Gouvernement des Pay~-D"<ls pro~
Netherlands,
PO~i" de reunir.
Nom accueillons favorablement la proposition
Wc have been impressed by the suggestion
which the representative of Canada put forward (jet! a eLe faile par le representant tlu Camda lors
at the last meeting. to the efff'.ct that there should de la dernierc seance, i s<t\'oir que les discussions
be exploratory discussions to this end Ullcer tlIe preparatoires devraicnt nl'oir liell .~Oll<; les alls·
auspice.s of the Comlniss:on without prejudi..::e to pices de ]a Commission, toutes n~serves fa:tes
the resoh:tions of the Sectlrity Cotmcil or to the quant aux Iesolutioll~ tlu Conseil de securite et
righLs, claiws and positions of the parties. We quant aux droils, revendications et positions des
support that suggestion and we share General Mc- parties en cause, Nous appuyons cette propo.sition
Naughtull's view that no new ref:Olution of the et nous estimons, comme le general Mc NaughSecurity Council is required in order to implement ton, qu'il n'est pas be.;;oiI', pour la mettre a ~X{>_·
cutiOll, que le Conseil adopte une nouvelle resoit.
lution.
M. IaNATT£I'F' rCanada) (ii(Jduit de I'mIBlais):
Mr. IGNATIEliT (Canada): 1 just want to make
n'ai que quelqu'es mots a ~ire. It a he' quest,i01l;'
a very Lrief st;<temi"nt. As refere:Jce has been
made today to the meaning and intent of the aujourd'hui, de la significatlon et de la portee a
words used by the Can::.di:m representative in his attribuer a la declaration que le representant du
statement at the r417th] meeting of the Security Canada a faite all cours ele la seance de vendredi
Council lust Fdday, I ShOlll,..] Eke :0 say at this c1emier [417Jme] ;. je tiens adire que, pm suite
time tilat in the temporary absence of General de ,'absence IDmm:lltmcc du general McNaughton
M<:Na:.:ghton and withol1t prioT cnnsultation with et en raiso;). du :ait que je n'ai pas pt.: cons:.t1ter
my Government, I wO:.tld not venture to offer: mon GOllvernetut:.nt, je ne puis pas fournir d'ext:.xplallations of General McJNallg',hton'~ state~ p1ications sur cette declaration. Toutefois, je vais
ment. I shall, however, communicate immediately me mettre immediatement ell rapport aver /non
witll my Government, and I hope to be in a Gouvernement et j'espere, lors de la prochaine
position to be able to make a sta.:ement On the seance, etre en meSU1·e de [aire lIne c1ecbration
pl.iints whicll have bc'cn raised, 3t the next ml"~ting sur les c.ifferents points dont i1 a ete qtlestiun.
of the Security ColttJcil.
J'ai ccpcnd~nt une nhsl"/"vation it presenter, en
At this point, however, I ShOll1d like to address
one remark to the representative of the Republic reponse a l'intervention bite pa.r le representant
of Indonesia, jr. response to his statement of de la Rcpublique d'Ir.done~<;ie au caurs deia
today. .Tt i~ that General McNatlllhton's state- seance d'aujourd'hui. La declaration {aite vcr:·
ment last Friday did relate and spec1fically relates dredi delllier pt.r k gelled M"cNal1ghton a tralt
e.xc1mivement et specifiqucment a des <1isc:ussions
only to a preliminary and exploratory discussion
in the 8<lme way as did the remarks of the repre: preliminaires et prcparutoires; ell/' -a le meme senS

le

24
sentative of China. General McNaughton did not
attempt to deal with the conditions, as he saw
them, of tIle conference which mign.t take place,
as suggested by the delegation of the Netherlands,
at Tll(; Hague.

.

que les suggestions dn representant de la Chine.
Le general McNaughton n'a pas cherche a ex.pri~
mer' ~es vues sur les conditions dans lesq:..telles
pourrait avoir lieu la conierence que la delegation
des Pays·Bas propose de rennir a La Haye.

The PREsiDENT (translated from Spa.nish):
Before adjourning the meeting I shall call upon
the representative of the Netherlands to make a
short statement.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l' espagnol) :
Avant de lever la seance, j e vais donner la parole
au representant des Pays·Bas pour U:1e breve
declaration.

Mr. VAN RO!JEN (Netherlands): In the nTst
pluce, 1 should like to thank the President for
gtving me this opportunity to make these few
remarks by way of explanation and clarification.

M. VAN ROllEN (Pays·Bas) (traduit df' l'atlglais): Jevoudrais tout d'abord remercier le
President de me permettre de fnire que!qtlCS
remarql1es a titre d'eclaircissements et de pre~
cisions,
Je repondrai en premier lieu a une question qui
a ete p03ee au de0ut de la ·seance par :.\t.L Palar,
representant de la Repl.lbliquc d'Illdonesie. M. Pa~
tar demande si le tra.nsfert de souverainete sera.
reel, total et sans condition. Je fi'":rai, it la pro~
chaine seance, une plus longue declaration a ce
sujet, mais je tiens a affinner des maintenant, de
In fat;0n la plus nette, que, conformement a
l'accord du Renvillc, ~e transfert de souverainete
sera reel, total et sans condition.
-D'autre part, divers orateurs ont fait allusion
cet apres~rnidi aux. dirigeants politiques qui Se
trouvcnt encore it. Bankll_. Certains des orateurs
ont laisse entendre que les chefs politiq ues sont
internes; d'autres ont meme fait allusion a une
"ge6Ie", tout en se defendant d'employer re
mot. le tiens a. declarer de fa(j-on tres c1aire que
les dirigeants republicains qui se trouvent a Banka
et a Prapat, ont recouvre toute leur liverle; ils
ant l'autorisation de retoUfner a. Java ou a Sumatra, ou d'allf'r i l't~tranger s'ils le d~sirent. La
seuIe restriction qui leur est imposee, c'est de ne.
pas retourner a Djokjakarta, cette mesure leur
est apliquee, toll'lnlC a taus les habitar:ts d'Inoonesie, pour des raisons d'ordre militaire..
En conclusion, je voudrais dire que, desireux:
de parvenir a un accord, mon Gouvernement m'a
aute-rise a declarer qu'il est dispose a. accepter
la proposition uu Canada, clans les termes et a1l}(
nns qui ont ete precises l'autre jour par le general
McNaughton. Cela signifie, je repHe les mots
qu'a employes le representant du Canada, qu'il
s'agit d'''aider les p<lrties a se mettre d'accord sur
la datf' a laquelle la conference que l'on envisage
de reunir a La Hare pDurrait a,'oir lieu et les
conditions dans lesquelles elIe pourrait se tenir".
Le Gouv<:rnc:tnent des Pays-Bas est dispose a
prendre part it des discussions preHminaires sous
les auspices de la Commission des Nations Unies
pour l'Indonesie, toutes n~:;erve:; faites quant a la.
resolution du Conseil de securite et quant ."lUX
droits, revendications et positions des parties en
cause.

I should like tirst of an to answer a question
which was put by the Tepresentative of the Re-public or Indonesia, Mr. Palar, earlier this afternoon. He asked whether the transfer of sovereignty would be real, cornplete and unc~:mditiona1.
I should like to elaborate further on thts POint at
our next meeting, but 1. should now like to state
most emphatically that the transfer, according to
the Renvt'lle Agreement, will be teal, complete
and unconditional.
Further, se....eral speakers here this afternoon
hve referred to the political leaders who are still
in Bangka. Some speakers have implied that
they are interned there; others have even alluded
to the word "gaol", though disclaiming the wish
to l1se that word. I should like to make it very
clear tha.t the Republican leaders on Bangka and
in PTapat 11iL\'e been fully liberated. They are
allowed to return to Java or Sumatra or to go
abroad if they so wish. The only limitation im~
posed on them is with regard to their rctL~rn to
logiakarla, and this limitation they share with
other rE'sidellts of Indonesia in view of military
restrictions.
In conclusion, 1 should like to say that, in the
interest of reaching an agreement, my Government
has authorized me to declare that it is willing. to
accept the Canadian proposal in the terms and
with the objective formulated the other day by
General McNaughton. This means, ann r quote
his terminology, with a view to " ... reaching an
agreement betwi'":en the parties as to the time
and conditions tlnder which the prop<Jsed conference at The Hague could be held". The Neth·
erlands Government is prepared to take part in
exploratOry discussions under the auspices of the
United Nations Commission for Indonesia with.
put prejudice to the resolution of the Security
Council, and to the rights, claims. or positions of
the parties.

In conclusiun I should like to join General McNaughton in e.,<pressing the hope-and] trust that
although he is absent, he would not object to my
quoting him, "... that through the means of the
preliminary discussion . , , to be carried out
under the auspices of our Commission in Indonesia, it will be possible to develop the Netherlanuj;
proposals for a conference at The Hague into a
practicable and acceptable procedure whereby
there may be direct negotiation between the
parties, and that this may lead to an early settlement of the problems in Indonesia".

Pour condure, je partage I'espoir qu'a exprime
le general McNaughton - et j'espere qu'il me
permettra de tepetet ses paroles, en Son absence
<l ql1e ces discussions preparatoires, souS: les
auspices de notre Commission en Indonesie, peTmettront de hire de la proposition des Pays-Bas
tendant a rcunk une conference a rA H aye, un
moyen pratique et admissible de negociatiDns di.~
rectes entre les parties, ce qui pourra conduire cl
un reglement rapide des probleme,s qui ,se posent
en Indonesie".

25
The PRESIDENT: (translated from Spanish):
'There are still ~evt:raJ sptakers on the list, and

I propose ttat we adjou,n and' meet again at
3 ?m. on Wednesday next.

Mr. :YIALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (trans!JJ.ted ft'om Rmskm): r should like to
raise one question. The Council ~1as before it a
proposal cnncerning the convocation of a preliminary_ conference between the representatives
of H,e ~etherlands and the representatives of the
Ir:donesian f(epubJic, without implementation having been g-iven to the Secl1Ti:y Council resolution
of 28 Ja~uary 1949 <:oncerning the immediate

and unconditional release of the representatives
n; the Republic. Do not the authors of this pro·
posal consider that such a conference would be
like a conferente between prisoners and gaolers?
I should like to have ::;QlUe dari6cation on this

Le

PRESIDENT

(traduit

de

l' espagn!Jl) ;

J'ai encore plusicllrs orateurs inscrits sur ma liste;
je propose done de lever la seanCE ef de nOllS
rhmir nouveau mercredi ;Jrochain 15 het:res.

a

a

M, MALIK (Unian des RepubEques socialistes
sovietiques) (traduit GU ru.ue) : Jr. voudrai.s poser
une question, Le Conseil est saisi d'une proposition relative la convoca:ion d'une conference
preliminaire
IaquelIe par.ici?enient Les repre·
sentants des Pays-Bas et de la Republique d'Indonesie, sa!l~ q:.l'il soit donne cffct Q.ux dispositions
de la resolution du 28 janvie: 1949 qui exigent
la remisf' en liberte immediate et sans conditio:l
des re~resentants ie la Republique. Les auteurs
de cette prc.position ne pensent-ils pas qu'une
telle cO:lference ressemblerait aune etllrevue tlltre
un ge6lier et ses prisonniers? Je voudrais ayo:r
des prccisions a c:et eg'ard.

a
a

point.
The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish):
I apologise to representatives who had asked to
speak. I did nol grant their requests because it
was so late, and I thought at the time that the
representath'e of the Soviet Union was going to
speak on the agenda of the next meeting, or to
deal with a point of order.
I again propose that we adjourn and hold our
next mee'jng on 'N ednescay, 16 March, at 3 p,m.

The meeting rose at 6.15 i·m.

Le PRE~rvENT (tradldt dtr l'csp.:JgMI):
Je m'excL:se aupres des representants qui avaient
demande la parole. Si je ne la leur avlUs pas actorclee <:'etait en raison de l'heure avancee, et j'ai
eru'
l'instant que le representant de rUnion
sovietique allait parler de l'ordre du jour uu ce
de la prochaine reunion ou bien allait presenter
une motion d'orore.

a

cc

] e propose cl n?uve~u ~e lever la sea~ce et
tenir notre prochamc rctinum le merered! 16 mars
15 heures.

a

La seance est levee d 18 h. 15.
