S/PRST/2009/29

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 November 2009
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6213th meeting of the Security Council, held on 5 November 2009, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Guinea-Bissau”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls its previous statements and resolutions on
Guinea-Bissau, and notes the latest report of the Secretary-General on
developments in Guinea-Bissau, and on the activities of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) (S/2009/552).
The Council reaffirms its support for the continuing efforts to consolidate
peace in that country.
“The Security Council welcomes the peaceful presidential elections that
were held on 28 June and 26 July 2009, and the inauguration of President Malam
Bacai Sanha on 8 September. It also takes note of the President’s commitment
to combat impunity, foster national reconciliation and achieve socio-economic
development. The Council reiterates that human rights and fundamental
freedoms of the people of Guinea-Bissau must be fully protected. It urges again
the Armed forces of Guinea-Bissau to ensure that their commitment to abide
by the civilian authorities and respect constitutional order is fully honoured.
“The Security Council also takes note of the National Assembly’s plans
to convene a national conference on “Conflicts in Guinea-Bissau: causes,
prevention, resolution and consequences”, and underscores the need to conduct
an inclusive political dialogue process aimed at ensuring national
reconciliation in the country.
“The Security Council reiterates the importance of consolidating
democracy, security, the rule of law, national reconciliation and the fight
against impunity to ensure sustainable peace in Guinea-Bissau. In this regard,
it takes note of the ongoing consultations between the United Nations, the
African Union, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
and the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP), to assist the
Government of Guinea-Bissau, at its request, in carrying out a credible,
thorough, and expeditious investigation, in accordance with international
standards, into the political assassinations of March and June 2009. The
Security Council calls upon the Government of Guinea-Bissau to expedite this
process, and calls on the above mentioned organizations and the international
community as a whole, to bring their support to this end.
09-59565 (E) 051109

*0959565*

S/PRST/2009/29

“The Security Council underlines the challenges faced by the Government
of Guinea-Bissau, in particular to ensure that the Security sector is effective,
professional and accountable. In this regard, the Council emphasizes the
necessity of pursuing and implementing an effective and comprehensive national
strategy for security sector reform, to be supported by the international partners.
The Council reiterates its request for the Secretary-General, through his
Special Representative for Guinea-Bissau and the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), for an effective
coordination of the support provided by the international community to
security sector reform in Guinea-Bissau, taking into account the work already
undertaken by the European Union and other international actors in this area.
“The Security Council urges the Government of Guinea-Bissau to take
the necessary actions in the framework of the Guinea-Bissau anti-narcotics
operational Plan and the ECOWAS Plan of action against drug trafficking and
organized crime in West Africa. The Council further notes that the situation in
Guinea-Bissau continues to be extremely fragile in particular as a result of
increased drug trafficking and organized crime that could pose a threat to
regional stability, and should be addressed by an approach of shared
responsibility. In this context, the Council welcomes the progress in
implementing the West Africa Coast Initiative involving ECOWAS, commends
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Department for
Peacekeeping Operations, Department for Political Affairs and the International
Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) in support of the fight against
organized crime and drug trafficking in West Africa, and calls on the
international partners to continue supporting this partnership and the efforts of
the national authorities to strengthen activities on policing and internal
security, including law enforcement and border control, as part of the security
sector reform process.
“The Security Council calls on the international community to provide
timely and adequate support for the implementation of the Strategic
Framework for Peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau, adopted on 1 October 2008 by
the Peacebuilding Commission, including that of the quick-impacts projects.
The Council takes note of the importance of building synergies among the
donors. It further takes note of the preparations for the first review of the
Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau, and looks forward to
its finalization. The Security Council reiterates its support for the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission country-specific configuration on Guinea-Bissau.
“The Security Council welcomes the ongoing planning for the transition
of UNOGBIS to an Integrated Peacebuilding Office (UNIOGBIS) on 1 January
2010, and looks forward to the timely development of an Integrated Strategic
Framework, including a strategic workplan with appropriate benchmarks to
measure and track progress on the implementation of the new office’s mandate.
“The Security Council reiterates the importance of the regional
dimension in the resolution of the problems faced by Guinea-Bissau and, in
this regard, welcomes the role of the ECOWAS, the African Union, the CPLP,
and the European Union in the peacebuilding process in that country.”

2

09-59565
