UNITED NATIONS

, SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

UN LBWRY
JUN

THIRTIETH

YEAR

1865’”

MEETING:

m/s

r

16 DECEMBER

5 1984

~~cx3N

1975

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l865)

.. .. .. ... .. ... ... .. .. .... .. ... .. .. ...

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*............................

1

The situation in Timor:
Letter dated 7 December 1975 from the Permanent Representative of Portugal
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1899) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*............................

1

S/PV. 1865

NOTE

:

‘Symbols of Uhited NaSioixdocuments
are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol$/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OfJiciul Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions cd
DecisionS of thr Securitj Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1865th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 16 December
Mr. Ivor RICHARD
(United Kindgom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

President:

Present:
The representatives
of the following
States: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China,
Costa Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan,
Mauritania, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of Tanzania and United States of America.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l865)
1. Adoption

of the agenda

1975, at 10.30 a.m.

At the invitation
of the President.
Mr.
Hurlv
(Austruliu)
took the pl;c*e resewed for him at the si&
of the Council
chamber.

3.

Mr.

HUANG
Hua (China) (trunslution
from
Over a long period, the people of East Timor
have waged a protracted
heroic struggle against
colonial rule. On 28 November,
East Timor proclaimed independence and established the Democratic
Republic of East Timor. This not only reflects the
aspirations of the broad masses of the people of East
Timor but is the result of the protracted struggle of
the people of East Timor.

Chinese):

At the iwitution
of the President,
Mr.
Gulvfio
%eles (Portrrgul)
und Mr. Anwur
Suni (Indonesiu)
took pluces ut the Council
ruble.

4. The struggle for independence of the people of
East Timor has won the sympathy and support of the
people of the third world countries. However, the
Indonesian
Government
has constantly carried out
threats and intimidation
against the people of East
Timor. From the day of the establishment
of the
Democratic Republic of East Timor, the Indonesian
Government has openly indicated its intention to carry
out armed intervention.
Its officials declared more
than once that Indonesia would send its armed forces
to invade East Timor, and that in the event of resistance by FRETILIN
[Fwnte
Rewllrcioncjriu
de Timor
Leste Independente]
it would be ready to use its land,
naval and air forces. On 7 December, the Indonesian
Government
brazenly dispatched large numbers of
warships, paratroops and ground forces for large-scale
invasion of East Timor, occupied Dili, the capital of
East Timor, and is now suppressing the resistance
of the people of East Timor with its military strength.
The Indonesian
Government’s
naked aggression
against the Democratic Republic of East Timor has
fully revealed its wild ambition to exterminate
the
patriotic forces of the people of East Timor, strangle
the new-born Democratic Republic of East Timor and
thus realize its long-premeditated
scheme of annexing
East Timor.
The above acts of the Indonesian
Government constitute a gross violation of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
The Chinese delegation cannot but express indignation
‘at this and condemns it.

2. The PRESIDENT:
I invite the representatives
of Malaysia and Australia to take the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber on the
usual understanding that they will be invited to take
a place at the Council table when it is their turn
to address the Council.

5. It should be pointed out that no matter what
pretext the Indonesian Government may use to justify
its large-scale armed aggression, it is only deceiving
itself and others. The irrefutable fact is that, in order
to oppose colonial rule, the people of East Timor
have long persisted in unremitting and arduous strug-

2.

The situation in Timor:
Letter dated 7 December 1975 from the Permanent
Representative of Portugal to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1899)
The meeting

MWS culled

to order

ut II.05

u.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The ugendu

wus udopted.

The situation in Timor:
Letter dated 7 December 1975 from the Permanent
Representative of Portugal to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1899)

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken yesterday [/86&h meeting],
I propose now,
with the consent of the Council, to invite the representatives of Portugal, Indonesia, Malaysia and Australia
to participate in the discussion of the question before
the Council without the right to vote.

culties. However, its struggle is just and the sympathy
of the world’s people is on the side of the people of
East Timor who are resisting aggression, whereas
the Indonesian authorities’ aggressive acts have been
condemned by the great majority of States Members
of the United Nations ‘and the just world. With
unequivocal language, the resolution adopted by the
General Assembly on the question of East Timor a few
days ago’ strongly deplored the military intervention
of the armed forces of Indonesia, called upon the
Government of Indonesia to withdraw without delay
its armed forces from East Timor and called upon all
States to respect the unity and territorial integrity of
East Timor. These views reflect the just demand and
.unequivocal desire of the great majority of Member
States and the peoples of the world.
9. In our view, both Indonesia and the Democratic
Republic of East Timor are countries of the third
world. The Republic of Indonesia, which attained
independence earlier, ought to have respected and
supported the aspirations of the people of East Timor
for independence and should establish and promote
the relations between the two sides on the basis of
the five principles of peaceful coexistence so as to
join in the efforts for defence of peace in this region
against
super-Power I meddling
and rivalry
for
hegemony.
Since the Indonesian
Government
is
clinging to its obdurate course and continuing
its
aggression and expansion in East Timor, the Chinese
delegation maintains that, if the Security Council is
not to neglect its duty, it must ste’rnly condemn
Indonesia’s armed invasion and annexation of East
Timor, that all invading Indonesian troops must be
withdrawn
immediately
and unconditionally
from
the territory of East Timor, and that all States must
respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of East Timor. In view of the fact that
East Timor has already become independent,
the
internal matters of East Timor, including the negotiations between the various
organizations,
should
naturally be settled by the people of East Timor
themselves and should not be intervened in by foreign
forces. We believe that all countries which uphold the
principles of the Charter and stand for justice will
support the above just propositions.

gles under most difficult conditions and finally won
independence and proclaimed the establishment of the
Democratic Republic of East Timor on 28 November.
The former Portuguese colonies and peoples that have
now won independence
and the numerous other
third-world countries and peoples all rejoice in this.
Strangely enough, however, the Indonesian Government has openly opposed the independence of East
Timor. Not only has it rejected the earnest and legitimate demands repeatedly put forward by East Timor
for negotiations between the two sides, for avoidance
of border conflicts and the settlement of the refugee
problems, but it has ceaselessly stepped up its military
intervention in East Timor. Finally it has even openly
resorted to large-scale military aggression and military
occupation.
6.. One of the pretexts used by the Indonesian side
is that the situation in East Timor has “threatened”
the “peace” and “security*’
of Indonesia. Anyone
with common sense will ask: How can East Timor,
with a population of only a few hundred thousand
which has just won independence from colonial rule,
constitute a threat to Indonesia, a big country in
South-East Asia? Things are crystal clear: East Timor
has not invaded Indonesia, whereas the Indonesian
authorities have openly declared their intention to
annex East Timor and’ have dispatched their regular
air, naval and ground forces and paratroops for largescale aggression against East Timor.
7. Another pretext used by the Indonesian authorities is the maintaining
of the so-called “peace and
order” within East Timor. Such an argument is in
fact the same cliche used by all aggressors in history
to justify their acts of aggression. Have not many
third-world countries suffered a great deal from the
aggression committed
by the use of such cliches?
If such an argument is to be accepted tacitly by the
United Nations and the Security Council, would not
the principles of the Charter be cast to the winds,
would it not be permissible
for any State with
aggressive and expansionist designs to use the same
pretext for wilful invasion and occupation
of its
neighbours? It is still less convincing for the Indonesian Government to assert that the dispatch of its
armed forces to invade East Timor was an action
taken at the “request”
of certain organizations
of
East Timor. This is simply to delude the public
for the purpose of annexation.
The desire clearly
expressed by the people of East Timor is one other
than for the complete realization
of their national
independence
and the resolute defence of their
sovereignty and territorial
integrity. This is a wellknown fact which allows of no distortion.

10. The PRESIDENT:
I have received a request
from the representative
of Australia to speak this
morning. It has, however, been intimated to me that
he would prefer to speak after the Council has heard
the other three persons whom it agreed yesterday to
hear, under rule 39 of the provisional ruies of procedure. I shall therefore now call upon one of those
three, Mr. Mario Carrascalio, member of the Central
Committee
of the UniHo DemocrAtica
de Timor,
to take a seat at the Council table and make his
statement to the Council.

8. The pretexts used by the Indonesian
Government cannot in the least help it to cover up its
ambitious
design of aggression and annexation of
East Timor. The Democratic Republic of East Timor
is a small country with a small population;
it has
just attained independence and is facing many diffiI

11. Mr. CARRASCALAO*:
me to express my gratitude
his

2

* Mr. Carrascal5o
statement
was

spoke
supplied

Mr. President, allow
to you and the members

in Portuguese.
by him.

The

English

version

of

16. UDT is the most popular party in Timor,
since it counts on the support of 236 out of the 472
existing srrklrs in Timor, comprising about 50 per cent
of the population of the territory. Incidentally,
Peter
Hastings wrote in the Sydney Morning
Hertdd
in
August 1974 that “third party and the strongest to
date is the UDT which favours continued association
with Portugal but with some form of local political
,autonomy”.

of the Security Council for the opportunity afforded
to me to speak before the Council. As a representative of the 300.000 Timorese of my party the Uniao
Democrkica
Timorense (UDT), I shall submit to the
Council a brief account of what has been happening
in East Timor.
12. Before the fall‘of the Caetano regime, there was
in Timor only one political party, the Acao National
Popular (ANP), which was nothing else than the Uniao
National of the Salazar regime under another name.
ANP provided the essential support of the colonial
regime. After the fall of the Caetano regime brought
about by the military coup of 25 April 1974, five
political parties were formed in ‘Timor, each having
its programme and its own viewpoint on the political
future of Timor.

17. FRETILIN
also recognized the importance of
UDT. On 22 January 1975 UDT and FRETILIN
joined forces, having for their main goal the independence of the Territory. Later, during a meeting of the
two parties with the local decolonization
committee,
‘presided over by Governor Lemos Pires, UDT was
surprised by an intervention
by Mr. Reis Marques,
a member of that committee,
who accused some
leaders of FRETILIN
of having been informers for
PIDE/DGS,
among them Xavier do Amaral, President
of the party, and other leaders such as Nicolau
Lobato. Ramos Horta and Alarico Fernandes.

13. On II May 1974 UDT was formed by a group
of 23 Timorese,
including
three members of the
defunct ANP. Perhaps by an irony of fate, Jose Ramos
Horta, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Information of
FRETILIN
and former Secretary-General
of ASDT
[Asswitrpio
Socid Dcnwcrcitictr
Timorense],
forerunner of FRETILIN,
was also one of the founders of
UDT. However,
Ramos Horta refused to accept
office, saying that very soon he~would leave Timor in
order to attend a course at the University of Jakarta.
However, he did not fail to offer his services, saying
that whenever needed he would be present and would
collabo.rate with great pleasure. Later on, UDT found
out that Horta had belonged to ASDT, the forerunner of FRETiLIN.
Later on we found out that
Horta, before 25 April 1974, had been an informer for
PIDE/DGS,
the Portuguese secret police, whose fundamental aim was to detect and imprison all who
might be in disagreement with the regime.

18. After this discovery and after four months of
uneas y association UDT asked FRETILIN
that those
leaders should leave the coalition. Through its President, our proposal was refused. Thus on 27 May
1975 UDT decided to leave the coalition.
19.

However, in his statement yesterday [/864th
Mr. Horta, the self-appointed
FRETILIN
Minister for Information
and Foreign Affairs, said
that Indonesia was behind the break-up of the coalition. He may be better informed than I, but I do
not regret him since he has an informer’s mentality.
It is very difficult to find out the truth when dealing
with adventurers of the type of Mr. Hot-ta. UDT has
nothing to hide from the rest of the world, because
it has a clean record and is very proud of this.

nweting],

14. At first, Mario Carrascalao,
who was chief
of the Timor Agricultural
and Forestry Services as
well as Vice-President of ANP, was chosen to preside
over the Organizing Committee of the Party, whose
fundamental aim was to prepare a provisional statute
to form the basis for the election of the leaders of the
Party. Francisco Lopez da Cruz was elected President
of the Central Committee
and Domingos Oliveira
Secretary-General
of the Party.

20. What was the reason for the UDT coup? On
9 August 1975 UDT received information
from
other earlier
highly reliable sources, confirming
information that FRETILIN
was planning to carry out
an armed coup on about 15 August. FRETILIN
intended by that coup to eliminate not only the opposition party but also whoever opposed its power, in
order to make sure of complete control of the Territory. The Government
and the collaborators
were
repeatedly advised and informed of what was going to
happen, but the Governor never took any preventive
measures. It was evident that he had no intention of
taking such measures against the coup planned by
FRETILIN.

15. In those days the main goal of UDT was to make
Portugal responsible
for leading Timor gradually
towards independence
until a minimum
of socioeconomic development had been achieved that would
allow the people freely and consciously to exercise
its inalienable right to self-determination.
Later on, in
view of the impracticability
of this solution on the part
of Portugal, UDT opted for independence in the long
term, envisaging
a privileged
relationship
with
Portugal. In other words, it can be said that this
Party was against immediate total independence, since
it understood that conditions did not yet exist for its
achievement.

21. Unlike FRETILIN,
UDT decided to take part in
the meeting at Macau on 27 June 1975. After the UDT
coup and the FRETILIN
counter-coup, bloody fighting
began. UDT jointly with KOTA [Klihrrr Oun Thor
Aswtrin]
and the Labour Party signed at Batugade,
on 7 September 1975, a petition for the integration of
Timor into the Indonesian Republic. When FRETILIN
3

27. That is why UDT opted for integration with Indonesia. UDT is perfectly aware of what it is doing.
It was ‘not an easy decision,. but it was the best
possible choice, a,choice that the people ofTimor will
never regret. We saw Indonesia’s capacity to develop,
and we watched its development.
UDT is sure that if
Timor joins Indonesia the people will have a new life;
it will have a future, a more progressive, a better
one and a happier one: ’

proclaimed its independence on 28 November 1975,
UDT, jointly with the three other parties, on 30November 1975, ,proclaimed
the integration of Timor into
Indonesia. It was to .safeguard rights of the majority
of the people of Timor.
22. UDT, as the most powerful party in Timor,
supported by over 50 per cent of the population, had
no difficulty in regrouping its members,’ and then,
together with the forces of the other parties, it
attacked the FRETILIN
forces until Dili, the capital
of the Territory, was taken on 7 December 1975.

28. There is another thing that I should like to clarify
before the Council. The decision that my party took
was the decision of the leaders of the party-nine
leaders, not three as Mr. Hot-ta stated yesterday.
An opportunity
must be granted to all the people of
Timor to decide on their political future and the
future of their land, and when I say “all the people”
I am naturally including FRETILIN.
As soon as better
conditions
for peace and order are achieved, the
people shall be granted their right to self-detertnination
with the assistance and under the supervision of the
United Nations.

23. When on 11 August 1975 UDT took the headquarters of the police and the army, it did not fire
a single shot.,Throughout
the whole operation, whether
at Dili or in the interior, only one person died, at the
airport. Even after the attack launched by FRETILIN
against Dili, UDT, before leaving the city, freed all the
FRETILIN
prisoners it had taken. It could have killed
them, but for humanitarian
reasons it did not do so.
Hot-ta deliberately
omitted to tell the Council this.
Why did he not tell the truth? Everybody at Dili can
confirm the truth of my ‘story.

29. Finally, I .want to say that if perchance Indone:
sian troops’ are forced to leave the territory of East
Timor, then the situation will certainly become much
more chaotic. UDT will not be responsible for the
consequences of such a decision. It is;, however,
my desire, as well as the desire of 300.000 poor and
illiterate Timorese, that the Council should take a decision to spare us the traumatic repetition of what we
have already lived through. Let the sun shine again
in the eyes of our people.

24. It was FRETILIN
that killed innocent people
after gaining power with the help of the colonial
army, which had joined it. The army of UDT left
Dili. We were attacked with grenades by the colonial
troops helping FRETILIN.
We had a difficult task
saving more than 5.000 women, children and old
people. Some of them died, but the majority survived.
The massacre of innocent people, women and children,
the old and the young, the houses and properties
burned, the plundering and the terror launched by
FRETILIN
opened our eyes and forced us to ask ourselves what would become of Timor with FRETILIN
2
in power.

30. The PRESIDENT:
I thank Mr. Carrascalso, on
behalf of the Council, for the statement he has made.
In accordance with the Council’s usual procedure, I
now ask him to withdraw from the Council table and
resume-the place reserved for him at the side.of the
Council chamber. The next speaker on my’ list is
Mr. Guilhermo Maria Concalves, member of the Presidium at APODETI
[A.wo&~do
Poprrltrr
Denlocrdtiw
Tintowrue],
whom 1 now invite to take a place
’
at the Council table and to make his statement.

25. The leaders of UDT held an emergency ‘meeting
in order to discuss the political situation in Timor, and
reached the following conclusion. The Government of
Portugal had left Dili and settled in Atauro, leaving
their weapons in the hands of FRETILIN.
The .party
concluded that in those circumstances
its proposal
of independence
with certain ties with Portugal
could not be carried out. It was a pipe-dream. After
seeing the cruelty with which FRETILIN
treated its
was
own people, we realized that independence
impossible,
particularly
bearing in .mind the socio~
.;
economic conditions in Timor.

31.: Mr. GONCALVES*:
The party I represent;
APODETI,
was founded on 27 May 1974; and
Mr. Arnaldo dos Reis de Araujo was chosen as
President of the Presidium.
He was a former highschool teacher who for 29 years was isolated by the
Portuguese colonial authorities.
Mr. Jose Fernando
Osorio Soares, an employee of the Service of Social
Assistance, who had previousiy held the-functions of
Chief Administrator,
was appointed Secretary-General
of the Party by the,Presidium.

26. After a long discussion we finally arrived at the
conclusion that it was in the interest of the people of
Timor togain its independence through integration with
the Indonesian
Republic. As we understand it, an
undeveloped Timor with 93 per cent of its people
illiterate, could not survive, and if it became ,independent it would start to go from one country to
another begging alms, and would simply become a new
kind of colony.

32. The reason lAPODETl
always refused to give
advice to its militants concerning any type of political
ideal that would lead Timor to maintain its union
,* Mr. G&&es
spoke
his statement
was supplied

4

in Portu&ese.
by him.

The

English

version’of

had a small number of .sympathizers,
it remained-mindful of correct political-form.
While participating
at the Macau conference for the decolonization
of
Timor, it showed indeed its specific desire to collaborate against precisely what was done by FRETILIN
by not appearing. However, APODETI
did not take
up arms to impose its principles upon the people
as FRETILIN
did. Though APODETI
may lose the
votes of the majority of the people of Timor APODETI
would still not participate in such an undemocratic
manner. APODETI
has always.0 advocated. a referendum in Timor.

with Portugal is very simple, because it is a very
valid and profound reason. The wounds inflicted by
colonialism are evident in the flesh as well as .in the
spirit of those people of Timor, who tried to assert
their rights as sentient beings. Almost 500 years of
obedience to enforced subjection have left their mark
upon .a community
in its attitude to an enterprise
without issue. In view of a!! ,the wrongs committed
by Portugal in Timor, APODETI
could not desire any
closer relationship.
33. The alternative-independence-was
in reality
full of difficulties and doubts,.owing
to the absence
of adequate structures to help a young nation lacking
in everything.
APODETI
did not want to take, the
risks a fertile imagination
might suggest, but only to
be a sincere and practical party. Without the necessary structure or the means of creating it, to think
about independence for Timor was like trying to place
a ship upon the highest mountain.

38. APODETI,
feeling that the natural inclination of
the majority of the people of Timor would be to
integrate with Indonesia, endeavoured to ensure that
the Indonesian language was taught in schools wherever possible: It is interesting to note that a certain
number of APODETI
members at every level are men
who played an active part in the 1959 revolt in Vikeke
against the Portuguese colonial regime. In the suppression of the heroic resistance fighters of Timor, the
Portuguese
oppressors killed about 500 patriots.
Because of that revolt APODETI
,can claim that it
has within its ranks the true fighters for liberty and
freedom of East Timor.

34. As a consequence, aware of the insuperable
difficulties
involved
in the achievement
of independence, that is in not being dependent upon another
country, APODETI
opted for integration
based on
ethnic, moral and historical grounds; besides, such a
move would extend to Timor all the general structures
of the Indonesian
State, with all the consequent
advantages for a people that has nothing.

39. APODETI,
following the example of the other
parties-UDT,
KOTA and Trabalhista-planned
to
attend a conference of the parties with Portugal after
the meeting at Rome. However, typical lack of
interest on the part of the Portuguese Government led
to its failure. Jointly, with the other three parties,
APODETl
proclaimed the integration of East Timor
into the Indonesian
State on 30 November
1975.
APODETI
invited the Government and the -people of
Indonesia to protect .the lives and properties of al!
those who consider themselves to be Indonesian in
order to achieve a historical and moral goal. Also,
in proclaiming that integration, al! the militant members of APODETI
agreed to be protected by their
new State.

35. The action carried out by UDT on 11 August
was understood to be a highly justifiable
measure.
However, APODETI
did not participate in any type of
preparations for the coup, nor did it take part in it
because.it understood that it had to respect the fundamental principles agreed upon by APODETI
at the
conference of Macau.
36. Therefore,
it is not strange that APODETI
should have maintained absolute ‘neutrality during the
rise of movement. But later on, in view of the evolution of events and the responsibility
of FRETILIN,
APODETI
decided to associate itself with the parties
UDT, KOTA and Trabalhista in its struggle against
elements of FRETILIN.
Thus the Joint PoliticalMilitary Front that would eventually recover Dili and
Baukau was born. ‘After FRETILIN
launched its
counter-coup on 20 August 1975, sympathizers within
APODETI
started to be persecuted pitilessly. Then
there came the attacks against villages and populations that supported APODETI,
and massacres were
committed.
The militant
members of APODETI,
unable to remain indifferent to this, proceeded to form
groups, in distant and inaccessible places, so as to be
able to take part in the self-defence groups that were
being formed.

40. Many people, including the very militant members of FRETILIN,
are not fully aware of the atrocities and abuses of every kind which have been
committed by that association of
ETI LIN leaders
which so miserably betrayed our peo3 e. In view of the
genera! explanation which will be read later on, there
is little that can be said except that only the people
of Timor know how cruelly they have suffered. However, APODETI
has no hatred or ill feeling against
those who participated
in the evil designs of the
FRETILIN
leaders. APODETI
wants peace and social
order to be t-e-established as soon as possible so that
the people of Timor may have the time to reflect and
make their own free choice.

37. It is necessary now to recall certain other aspects
of APODETI.
While in Timor nothing was disturbing
the peace, APODETI,
calmly and most democratically,
obtained the support of 94 sukrrs-the
equivalent of
20 per cent of the local population. Although it only

41. APODETI
is confident that the United Nations,
through its representative organs,- will make an important contribution
to enabling the people of Timor to
express themselves freely.
5

/

42. I come from East Timor, but at this moment I
feel like a diiizen of Indonesia and am extremely
proud to be so. I shall not reply to the insulting
remarks made about me in the Security Council
by Mr. Ramos Horta. In due time those insults will
be turned against he who uttered them.

its own chief. Altogether
in East Timor.

there are about 472 slrkrrs

48. The liurcli, or traditional chief or ruler of a tribe,
has a certain number of srrkrrs under his control.
The influence of the lirrrcri depends on how many srrkrrs
he represents. The lirmi is left very much on his own
as to how to administer his SII~XS, but he is responsible for all taxes being collected on time and delivered
to the district chief, who is an official of the Govemment. The lirrrcri is in effect the native ruler of his
own tribe as far as customs and traditions
are
concerned.

43. The PRESIDENT:
On behalf of the Security
Council I thank Mr. Gonqalves for the statement hk
has made to the .Council. In accordance with the
Council’s usual procedure, I now ask him to withdraw
from the Council table and resume the place reserved
for him at the side of the Council chamber. In
accordance with the decision the Council took at its
meeting yesterday, I now invite Mr. Jo& Martins,
President of KOTA, to take a place at the Council
table and to address the Council.

49. Of the 472 s&r/s of East Timor, 236, or about
50 per cent, are under the influence of the UDT Party
and about 95 S&IS, or 20 per cent, are under the
influence of APODETI.
Thus 331 of the 472 S&I/S
have pledged their allegiance to those two parties,
which account for 70 per cent of the population.
Together with KOTA and the Trabalhista Party they
claim at least 75 per cent of the population.
The
effort of FRETILIN
to depose the traditional chiefs
of the s~~krrs and the lirrrtris and to replace them with
village councils is one of the main reasons why
FRETILIN
cannot gain a foothold in the kingdom.

44. Mr. MARTINS:
I should like to thank you,
Mr. President, and the other members of the Security
Council for giving me the opportunity
to acquaint
you with the current situation in Timor. The members
of my party, Mr. Mario Carrascal and Mr. Guilhermo
Gongalves, and I. and all the people of the Territory
entertain profound respect for the United Nations. We
are confident that in considering our case the Council
will rely upon the principles of justice and the ideals
of the Organization
enshrined in the Charter, which
we firmly support.

50. The Territory
is divided into 13 counties or
c*onc*&os. A c*onc~li~o is headed by an trtb~tirristrcrtbr
cltr c*orrcellro, who is directly responsible to the Govemment. Each county is divided into postos. A po.sto is
headed by an trtlrninistivr~~~r
ckr posto who is directly
responsible to the c~m*ell~o.
The cri~lllinistrcrtl~~r
drr
posto co-ordinates the work of the lirrrtris on behalf
of the trLlillilristrcrilr,r
clrr cwtrcx4ho.

45. 1 refer now to the problem of East Timor.
Portuguese Timor is located in the heart of the Indonesian archipelago.
It is one of the thousands of
islands which constitute the archipelago. Portuguese
Timor is part of the island of Timor; the other, or
western, part is Indonesian territory. The population
of Portuguese Timor, a little more than 600.000, is of
the same ethnic origin as the population of 800.000 in
the Indonesian part. About 25 per cent of the poptilation are Catholics. The majority, or about 65 per cent,
of the population
are Animists.
There are also
Moslems, Hindus and Buddhists, but exact figures
cannot be given.

The liwtri has a dual function, so to speak. On
the one hand he gets his instructions from the crdrninistrcrtior
tltr pwto regarding government affairs, such
as taxes and so an, while on the other hand he has
some autonomous authoir authority as a native ruler
within the s~rkrrs serving under him. The c/t& (ke
s&r, chief of the srrkr~, is a native authority, most of
the time acting on behalf of the liulvri who looks
after community
problems. According to tradition,
the <*/I& &J srrkrr is not elected but, according to
native laws and customs,, he inherits the power froin
his father. The clrefi &ltr powtrgtio, chief of the village, is directly responsible to the &$J (IL>s&r. That
is the lowest ranking chief in society, but he is still
a powerful person as regards the maintenance of peace
within his village. However, one thing should be
very clear about this colonial system: whatever the
circumstances,
the word of the crri~nhi.strtrri(,r
tlrr
c.orr&/ro is final in almost a!! cases.
51.

46. The Timorese people at-e at the stage of a traditional society. The sr&s and the lirrrcri~ still hold a
dominant
place in society. Mr. Joseph Lelyveld
wrote in Tltc iVl~rl* York Times in October 1974 that
“the nearly five centuries of Portuguese rule have left
Timor not underdeveloped
but undeveloped
in an
almost absolute’sense”.
This observation is an accurate description of the fact that the people of Timor
have been left to their own way of life more. or less
as it was on the day the Portuguese navigators landed
in Timor in 1514.

52. It is relevant tq. recall for a moment the experience of the last Governor in the Administration
at Dili. Mr. William
D. Hartley wrote in The Wtrll
Strut
Jorrrmrl
of 10 February 1975 as follows:

47. A SIII?II can be considered as a group of families
belonging to the same clan and living in a certain
area of the kingdom. The territory of a sulirr is the
small village in which the members live and the land
on which they grow their paddy or corn. It should be
mentioned that each srrkrr has its own territory and

“The people have always done what the Portuguese told them to do and making a decision is
6

strange to them. ‘The Governor would say ‘This
is what I want”. They would say “It’s O.K.” ‘,
says Mario Lemos Pires, the newly appointed
Governor, who is trying to create a council. ‘Now
I ask for advice, and then they say “You decide.” ’
He says the people are not prepared to make
decisions.”

56. FRETILIN
was the only Party which boycotted
the Macau meeting, which discussed the decolonization programme for Timor, hardly the action of a
party which’sincerely
wanted independence. In fact,
during the Macau meeting the leadership of FRETILIN
was in Mozambique,
attending the Independence Day
celebrations of that country. It was clear that they
intentionally
ignored the invitation of the Portuguese
Government,
and when the Portuguese Government
planned another meeting with a!! political parties to
discuss the process of decolonization,
they unilaterally proclaimed the independence of East Timor,
which is, of course, not accepted by the Timorese
people.

There is a basic truth in what Governor Pires has
experienced. The people in the village ask the chef<> de
s&r what to do and in normal circumstances it is the
chc$ de srrkrr or the litrrcri who makes the decisions
for the people. It may sound strange to Western ears,
but up to now these conditions were facts of life in
East Timor and in every community
at the same
stage of development as our people in Timor.

57. Those are the credentials of FRETILIN,
which
claims to represent the majority of the people of East
Timor. What it represents is no more and no less
than the colonial troops alone, which inherited al! the
weapons from the Portuguese Government.

53. The APODETI
Party, .former!y the Association
for Integration of Timor with, Indonesia (AITI), was
founded on 27 May 1974. Its first Chairman was
Amaldo dos Reis de Araujo, an exiteacher who for
29 years had been isolated by the colonial regime.
The Secretary-Genera!
of this party is Jose Fernando
Osorio Soares an offtcia! of the Portuguese Timor
Social Service who once held the post of district
head. The representatives
of UDT and APODETI
have already spoken and there is no need for me to
give information about those parties.

58. The KOTA Party, founded on IO November
1974, defends the existence and continuation
of the
liurcris as the traditional
leaders of the people, elected
by the assemblies of -people according to tradition.
The KOTA Party has about 28.000 members, located
in Baukau, Lolotoe,
Vikeke,
Kelikae,
Manatuto,
Laklubar, Laleia, Funar, Maubara, Maliana, Ermera
and Hato-Lia.

54. I should like now to touch on FRETILIN.
ASDT which later became FRETILIN,
is headed by
Francisco Xavier do Amara!, a regular clerk in the
Tax and Customs Section and an informer of the
colonial secret police. Jose Manuel Ramos Horta, who
now claims to be Foreign Minister of the so-called
Democratic Republic of East Timor, is a free-lance
writer on the newspaper A Vw de Timor and an
informer of the colonial secret police. He became
Secretary-Genera!
of FRETILIN.
Many Portuguese
Timorese were thrown into prison because of him.
In those days, he was in fact a too! of the colonial
regime.

59. This party is led by Jose Martins, whose father,
former lirrrcri of Ermera, was forced to abandon Timor
because of his non-acceptance of the colonial regime.
He has also been arrested by PIDE in 1964 in relation
to a liberation movement for the independence of
Timor. The KOTA party is also one of the signatories
of the petition for integration with Indonesia and for the
joint proclamation of 30 November 1975.
60. The Trabalhista, or Labour Party, was founded in
October 1974. Its main programme is the independence
of East Timor, under a system somewhat similar
to the Commonwealth
system, and is closely related
to the UDT Party. The leader of this party is
Mr. Abrago, who is represented in the Council by the
UDT leader, Mr. Mario Carrascalao. Although it has
a small following, that party was active during the
fighting against FRETILIN.

55. The FRETILIN
Party called for immediate
independence.
The Fur Eastern
Economic
Re~~icw
of 17 October 1975 stated:
“The Revolutionary
Front for Independent East
Timor has a!! the appearances of a hastiiy assembled
identikit
mode! of a .third-world
in-dependence
movement.
Up to six weeks ago, it would have
been hard to take too seriously a self-important
party of Dili intellectuals. that was formed only
after G.enera! Spinola’s coup in Lisbon on 25 April
1974 and busily acquired a FRELIMO-type
image
through a vague co!!ectiv/st
ideology, a flag and
an anthem. Although it still retains an amateurish
air reminiscent of a student council, FRETILIN
is
now the tie jircto
Government
of East Timor,
however long it will last. It has a lot of blood on its
hands getting there. FRETILINwon because it
had the guns and the soldiers.”

61. With respect to socio-economic
conditions in
genera!, and education in particular, it would be more
objective to quote the information
supplied by the
Governor of Timor to William D. Hartley of Tha Wrd
Street Joornd,
and which appeared in the 10 February
1975 issue, as follows: “We stayed here sleeping”,
says Governor Pires, “It has only been in the last five
or six years that Lisbon spent any real money”.
It has been only in the past four years that primary
schools were built outside Dili. There is still only
one high schoo!, and although there are about
75 university students’from Timor in Portugal, half of
them are in their first year. There are only one or
7

two university graduates on the island. The illiteracy
rate is put at 93 per cent.
62. With regard tohealth, there are two hospitals in
Dili: one for the military, and one for the public.
Although there are about 30 clinics in all in East
Timor, there are no doctors and no equipment, ,and
the medicine supply is poor.
63. With respect to agriculture, coffee is the main
source of the foreign exchange earnings of the Territory, accounting for an average of 80 per cent of
the value of its exports. Thirty per cent of its production is owned by the State enterprises; 10 per cent
belongs to white farmers and medium-scale farmers,
and 60 per cent belongs to small farmers. The annual
output of rice production is about 25.000 tons. To feed
the population 70.000 tons of rice a yearare needed;
thus there is a shortage of approximately
45.000 tons.
Annual imports amount to about 4.000 to 5.QoO tons
a year.; well below subsistence levels.
64. The production of corn is about 14.000 tons a
year. ,To, feed the population 40.000 tons are needed;
thus there is a shortage of 26.000 tons a year, which
is never imported. It is no -secret that the local production has been unable to meet the .growing needs
for domestic consumption.
65.’ I turn now to the economy and trade. The
economy is purely agricultural;
there is no industry
and no mineral prospecting. The economy is based on a
single crop: coffee. There is no energy infrastructure,
and transport is inadequate. According to the Portuguese Government,
Timor has had a continuous and
growing foreign trade deficit. This cannot be accepted
with 7.900 troops on the island, plus the civil service
and the more than 10.000 scgrrt~t~ lithr
or second
line defence.people whom the Government has to feed.
66. The general picture with relation to the socioeconomic conditions on the island, as I have mentioned, i.s of course, generally true in every colony
of Portugal. I have no intention to dwell much longer
on this subject; I just want to give the Council some
background, so as to assist members .in the exercise
of their responsibilities,
and to do justice .to’ the
people of, East Timor.
67. I shah now start on the Timor problem. As to
the exercise of democratic liberties, the .plan for the
decolonization
of Portuguese Timor as formulated by
the-Portuguese
Armed Forces Movement recognizes
the right of the people of East Timor to opt either
for independence or for integration with ,Indonesia.
The plan further provides the people of East Timor with
the opportunity to set up political parties. However,
certain developments
in Portugal had their repercussions on East Timor,. The.great hopes that the people
in East Timor would soon be able freely to express
their right to self-determination
were soon shattered
by the actions of the local Portuguese authorities.

Particular mention. should be made of Major Costa
Jonatas and Major Francisco, Mota, both sent by the
Portuguese Armed Forces to’ East Timor to act as
special advisers to the Government. Those two officers
took measures which have strengthened the influence
of FRETILIN,
.especially among the native troops of
East Timor and have also greatly limited the ,movements of other political parties.
‘68. One political party; KOTA, which has established
38 committees and has a membership of noless than
28.000 people, was refused recognition.
That party
stands strongly for the preservation of the traditional
societies and refuses to admit to membership those.
who had once served. the colonial Government.
It
.has thus become increasingly apparent that the principles of the free exercise of’ the right of selfdetermination
as professed by the Armed ‘Forces
of Portugal on 25 April 1974 are greatly contradicted
by’ their practice in East Timor, to such an extent
that they have made a mockery of the exercise of
democratic liberties.
69. I shall now speak of the events leading up to the
revolutionary movement of 11 August. After the Macau
meeting; certaingrave developments which occurred in
Timor led to the formation of the Revolutionary Movement of 11 August. That Movement was subsequently
joined by KOTA and Trabalhista. In the early part of
July 1975 FRETILIN
began a systematic campaign
of terror and intimidation
of the population.
For
instance, in the village of Aileu, a key-point controlling access to much of the southern part of the
island, FRETILIN
stationed groups of armed men who
could thus regulate the’ traffic of people through ,the
village, either on their waylto Dili or to the south.
Those armed members of FRETILIN
would authorize
the passage only of those who could prove FRETILIN
membership by displaying the party’s identity card;
all those who were affiliated with other parties were
forced to destroy their parties’ cards and ‘made to
accept a new card attesting to membership
in
FRETILIN.
Consequently,
only those who agreed
to accept the FRETILIN
card were allowed to
proceed to Diii, the capital of East Timor. Those
who refused to accept FRETILIN
membership were
forced to return to theirvillages,
taking with them the
goods they had intended to sell in the market at Dili.
70. It also frequently
happened that they were
physically punished for their refusal. The purpose of
those actions was to force the members of other parties to become members of FRETILIN
against their
will. These actions also resulted in a sharp reduction
of the food supplies in the Dili market. The situation
quickly became disastrous, for the supply,of essential
products quickly became acutely short, and the prices
of those still available skyrocketed.
Food prices
rose so high that most of the peopie of Dili were
simply unable to pay them.
7 1. The local Government was fully aware of all these
events but took no measures to improve the situation.

The Government’s
passiirity was interpreted as toleration of the oppressive activities of FRETILIN
and
as support for its policies. Despite the activities of
FRETILIN,
all the other,parties
were committed to
avoiding interference with one another, and to adhering
to the decisions of the Macao meeting in a strictly
democratic manner. At this critical time, FRETILIN
began to establish paramilitary
training camps at
Bukoli (Baukau), Metinario and Ai-Sim-Moy
(Aileu),
where their militants were instructed in the use of light
firearms’and hand-grenades. After having received full
and authentic reports of’ these activities from eyewitnesses, UDT informed the Governor of them and
requested him to send his confidential agent to inspect
these training camps. The Govertior sent Major Francisco Mota, the chief of the Political
Department,
to Bukoli on this mission. This Portuguese offi&
later reported to UDT that he saw nothing at Bukoii
except simple agricultural tools. It is not difficult to
understand the motives behind Major Mota’s report,
since he was the second-highest-ranking
Portuguese
officer aiding FRETILIN
in its repressive activities.

ness, of most of the roads leading into and out of
Dili. They maintained
this control by felling trees
across these roads in order to force any vehicles
using them to stop. They placed a sign bearing
the words “By order of FRETILIN”
on these ‘makeshift barricades. Dr. Ruiio, a member of the Army
Medical Corps, was a witness to these activities.
On one occasion he was forced to disderse the
tree-cutters by firing his pistol into the air.
75. On 8 August UDT received information from a
reliable source indicating that FRETILIN
intended to
follow up these activities by launching -an. armed
coup some time around 15 August. It was clear that
FRETILIN
intended to seize power in the whole
Territory of East Timor through this coup, which was
the logical culmination
of its earlier armed efforts.
It was reported that FRETILIN
intended to murder
its chief opponents as part of the coup, and the
leaders of opposing political parties, the Chinese and
the people of mixed blood who were not supporters
of FRETILIN.
This would effectively eliminate all
opposition in their attempt to secure total control of
the territory. For the success of its coup FRETILIN
was counting heavily on the help of its own members;
who had been given extensive military training at
Aileu by Major Costa Jonatas, the highest-ranking
member of the Portuguese Army to give aid and
guidance to FRETILIN.
The involvement
of Major
Jonatas was *of great importance
to FRETILIN,
since it provided them with training not available to
the members of the other parties and which they
could not have received in any other way.

72. During the first days of August 1975 a number
of FRETILIN
supporters, led by Hamis Bassarewa,
attacked the administrative
post of Remexio, from
which they stole arms and ammunition,
including
six Mauser rifles. They also detained the passengers
of a truck there for 24 hours. These passengers
included women and children, as well as some members of UDT. When the Governor learned of the
attack, he dispatched a military force, to Remexio,
which ‘released the prisoners. According to the commander of this force, however, it proved .impossible
to apprehend the FRETILIN
outlaws involved, who
fled before the arrival of the police.

76. The Major maintained close contact with the
leadership of FRETILIN,
meeting frequently with
them in his home in Dili from midnight until 4 or so
in the morning. These contacts were supposed to be
kept secret, but were detected and watched by members of UDT. As news of this intervention by members of the Pdrtuguese Army spread, the supporters of
UDT, KOTA and Trabalhista, as well as some citizens
not affiliated to any political party, demonstrated
before the Government
Palace on 8 August 1975,
demanding the immediate expulsion of the two officers
responsible, namely, Majors Costa Jonatas and Francisco Mota, from Timor. This demonstration
lasted
from the afternoon of 8 August until 1 o’clock the
following morning, but did not produce any positive
results. Since the Government had failed to respond to
the demonstration,
.on the following day, 9 August,
the public services staff began a general strike which
continued until 11 August. Their demand was the same:
the immediate expulsion of the two majors from the
Territory.

73. Between 1 and 8 August the leader of FRETILIN,
Xavier do Amaral, announced at a series of assemblies held at Same, Maubissi and Hatu-Builiko
that
from then onwards he was himself assuming the
authority of the Governor, and the Military
Commander of Timor. At the same time he called for all
FRETILIN
supporters to muster at Turiscai.
On
8 August Amarai was joined in Turiscai by about
5.000 men armed with metal weapons and bows and
arrows. Despite the fact that the !ocal civil and military
authorities had full first-hand evidence of what was
going on, they made no move to stop Amaral and
his followers from carrying out their plans to seize
power by force, but left. them free to act as they
liked. They quickly seized the opportunity
open to
them. On 9 August 1975 members of FRETILIN
launched a hit-and-run attack on the administrative
post of Laieia, and withdrew after stealing 6 more
Mauser rifles. The villagers naturally suffered a good
deal of fear from then on, since it was clear that the
authorities either could not or would not protect them
from FRETILIN..

77. On the same day, since it was evident that the
Government was either unable or unwilling to take the
actions necessary to prevent an armed take-over by
FRETILIN,
UDT decided that it was imperative to
take action in order’ to neutralize
the predicted
FRETILIN
coup, then expected within the next three

.74. In the period between 1 and 9August, FRETILIN
had already gained control, during the hours of dark9

:

.

or four days. As UDT became increasingly aware
of the imminent
threat of a coup by FRETILIN,
which would result in mass killings, it decided, on
11 August 1975, to launch an immediate action with
the means available. With the support of the local
police, UDT was able to take control of the Diii military
headquarters. Several military units soon announced
their support for UDT, KOTA and Trabalhista.
78. Owing to the fact that the Mohwnto
of
I I August made up of UDT, KOTA and .Trabalhista
exercised control over the greater part of the Territory,
the Governor of Timor, Colonel Lemos Pires, offered
to transfer his powers to the leaders of the Mmvinento.
These leaders declined the offer, as their reason for
establishing the Movimento
was not to obtain power
but to enable the people of East Timor to exercise
freely their inalienable
right to self-determination.
The main proposal. of the MmJrnento
was also to
prevent the recurrence of the evils brought about by
both FRETILIN
and the local Portuguese authorities.
79. Later developments
clearly demonstrated
that
local military authorities had given their support to
FRETILIN.
These authorities threatened to fire all
military personnel who dared to support the Modmenro. The commander
of the military units of Atabai
and Bobonaro even ,went so far as to threaten to
take harsh measures against military personnel as well
as the civilian population if they gave their support
to the Mo~*im~nto.
The Mouhwnto,
which meanwhile
was in full control of the city of Dili, handed over
responsibility
for the city to the Government on the
condition that the local armed forces would remain
neutral. The total negligence
of the Portuguese
forces, however, enabled some members of the
local army who sided with FRETILIN
to seize large
quantities ‘of heavy armaments
and ammunition,
including 160 G-3 machine guns. The superiority of
by FRETILIN
through
the
weapons obtained
negligence of the Portuguese forces finally enabled
FRETILIN
to take control of the Dili military headquarters and other military installations
which contained approximately
20.000 rifles and 80 per cent of
the heavy ammunition
in the Territory,
without
meeting with any meaningful resistance.
80. The actions of FRETILIN
led to the outbreak
of general hostilities all over the city of Dili, which
subsequently spread to other parts of the Territory.
The Governor made some efforts to act as mediator
between the warring parties, but without any success.
The Indonesian Consul at Dili, however, managed to
arrange, with the help of the commander of an lndonesian vessel, a temporary truce for the purpose of
unloading food supplies for the population
and of
rescuing Timorese and non-Timorese
civilians who
wanted to flee the horrors of war. Countless atrocities were’committed
by FRETILIN
in this civil war.
Let me just recount some of them. About 200 people,
including.women
and children, ‘were assassinated by
FRETILIN
at the s&r of Mau Lau in Maubisse.

FRETILIN
forces burned -houses and committed
violent actions against the civilian population at Maubisse and Turiscai.
By order of the FRETILIN
leadership, hundreds of houses in Dili were burned and
the greater part of the city was damaged by heavy
mortar firing. Many’ people were iounded
or killed.
At the s&r of Se-Loe, near Aileu, more houses were
burned and some civilians were assassinated. At
Atsabe, FRETILIN
massacred about 300 people
without any apparent motive beyond their usual support for APODETI
in the Atsabe region. At Tibar,
near Dili, FRETILIN
forces, while trying to attack
the position of the Mmvhento
forces, forced women
and children to advance in front of their troops. In
order to avoid the massacre of innocent people used
by FRETILIN,
the Movimmto
decided to move to
new positions in the hills.
81. The Portuguese Government withdrew to Atauro,
an island near Dili, after having handed over to
FRETILIN
forces the control of the strategic points,
which it had received from the Movinwnro,
as related
earlier. An exodus of thousands of people to Indonesian
territory followed, owing to the total incapacity of the
Government
to guarantee their safety. The Govemment invited all the white staff to proceed to Atauro,
in disregard of the sufferings of their Timorese
staff. At Railaku and Likisa hundreds of people were
murdered by FRETILIN.
‘About 40.000 refugees,
Timorese-born
and some Chinese, are living now in
Indonesian territory with the financial support of the
Indonesian Government. According to the monitoring
system of the Mnvinwnto,
in a communication
from
radio station BRAVO-Portuguese
Government
in
Atauro-to
radio station PERA-FRETILIN
headquarters-the
former recommended
that FRETlLlN
should unilaterally proclaim independence.
82. The atrocities committed by FRETILIN
against
the people of East Timor greatly strengthened the
conviction
of the Parties of UDT and Trabalhista
that integration was the only available means of putting
an end to the immeasurable
suffering of the people, a
course that would guarantee peace and social welfare
for the people.,1 apologize for taking so much of the
time of the Security Council, but to put the record
straight I have to explain events which Mr. Horta
tried to twist before the Council.
83. The desire for integration with Indonesia was not
caused solely by FRETILIN
‘atrocities. The deep
awareness of ethnic and cultural affinity existing
between the people of East Timor and their Indonesian kinsmen has always evoked a deep desire on the
part of the people of East Timor to reunite with their
kin across the border. Almost five centuries of
separation caused by Dutch and Portuguese colonialism has not been able to obliterate this deep
desire. It- has made it even more deeply feit and
profound.
84. Four centuries of Portuguese colonialism
has,
furthermore, left East Timor not only underdeveloped

Timor,
citizens.

but undeveloped.
Conditions
which prevailed four
centuries ago in East Timor remain the same even
now. Only political and economic integration
with
Indonesia can help East Timor rise from the quagmire
of underdevelopment
and enter a stage of full economic
and social development. Furthermore, the destruction
of the traditional structures of society by FRETILIN
could not but cause a feeling of abhorrence on the
part of the members of KOTA, who stand strongly
for the preservation of these traditional
structures.
Indonesia’s consistent policy of giving autonomous
status to traditional societies might provide a guat-antee for the preservation
of such societies in East
Timor.

who

regard

themselves

as

Indonesian

89. As we have stated previously, the Government
of Portugal is responsible for the worsening developments in Portuguese Timor. Portuguese negligence
and failure to prevent the oppressive acts of FRETILIN
before 11 August and its moral and military support
for that party cast further doubts on the sincerity
of Portugal% commitment
to promote a fair and
even-handed
process of decolonization.
Had the
Portuguese
Government
been more conscious of
its responsibility
towards the people of East Timor,
and had it carried them out more faithfully,
there
can be no doubt that it would not have been necessary to bring this matter before the Security Council.

85. As a result of the Rome meeting on 1 November
1975 between the Foreign Minister of Indonesia,
Mr. Adam Malik, and the Foreign Minister of Portugal, Mr. Melo Antunes, a memorandum
of understanding was issued reiterating their views with regard
to the future political status of Portuguese Timor:
In the memorandum
Indonesia emphasized its respect
for the right to self-determination
of the people of
Portuguese Timor, and reaffirmed the role of Portugal as administering
Power in this respect.

90. We do not believe that the people of Portugal
would ever have sanctioned the undemocratic
and
improper procedures carried out by their officers
against the fundamental rights of the people of Timor.
At the present time, owing to our superhuman efforts
on the battlefield,
our parties effectively
control
all the territory of East Timor. We do not wish, however, to imitate FRETILIN
and attempt to impose
our ideas on the people by armed force despite
our strong position. What we insist on is that the
people of our country be able to exercise fully its
right to self-determination.
This is what we have
fought for. We ,therefore wish to demand of the
Security Council that the right of the people of East
Timor to express its choice between independence
and integration in a free manner be respected and
implemented.

86. However, Portugal stated ambiguously
that it
promised to carry out its responsibility
and would
organize a meeting which was to be attended by
Portugal and all the political parties concerned. While
Portugal had announced that such meeting was to be
held at Darwin, Australia, it failed to explain clearly
the date, circumstances and objectives of the meeting.
For our part, we could not but regard Portugal’s
commitments
as merely a bluff aimed at obtaining
concessions from the four political parties, which
had previously relied on Portugal’s good intentions,
to their regret. However, notwithstanding
the fact
that the problems and difficulties faced by APODETI,
UDT, KOTA and Trabalhista resulted from political
oppression and military
brutalities
committed
by
FRETILIN,
we decided to respond with the best will.
We, therefore, informed the Portuguese Government
that we were ready to attend such a meeting at .Bali,
Indonesia, instead of Darwin. The Portuguese Government has never stated its position in response to that
proposal.

91. A referendum should be carried out and guarantees must be given by all the parties of East Timor
that they will accept without any reservations or
equivocations the results of the people’s choice thus
freely expressed. We also fervently hope that the
results of that vote and the right of .our people to
decide its own destiny will .be strictly respected by
all the nations of the world. The people ‘of Timor
urgently
need peace and time for the wounds
inflicted by this tragic nightmare, into which, through
no fault of our own, we have been plunged, to heal.
I pray that God will help our people to attain these
goals, and that .after so much suffering and sacrifice
by the men, women and children of Timor we shall
be able to smile once again.

87. Suddenly, on 28 November,
FRETILIN,
in its
characteristic
way, proclaimed
the unilateral independence of East Timor. Such an attitude on the part
of FRETILIN
can only be interpreted as complete
disrespect for the inalienable right of the people of
Portuguese Timor to self-determination.

92. The developments in Portuguese Timor, particularly those since August of this year, make it crystalclear that the Portuguese administration
bears the
full responsibility
for the deterioration
of conditions
in the Territory. Its failure to stop the mounting toll
of FRETILIN
atrocities, a few of which I have
detailed for the Council, and above all its inability
to take action to thwart the planned FRETILIN
coup, for which their advance evidence was overwhelming, constituted a total abdication of its responsibilities and rights as the administering
Power-rights

88. With great reluctance and as a direct reaction
to this flagrant action by FRETILIN,
APODETI.
UDT, KOTA and Trabalhista decided, on 30 November 1975, to proclaim the integration of Portuguese
Timor
with Indonesia.
At the same time, we
demanded that the Indonesian Government
protect
the lives and property of the people of Portuguese
II

to freedom of the Portuguese colonial empire, East
Timor should not become an area of great Power
rivalry or instability
in our region: We are most
conscious that a stable settlement can rest only on the
free choice of the people concerned.

and responsibilities
which are clearly and specifically
defined by the United Nations itself.
93. Far from adhering to the neutral role demanded
by its statutes as administering
Power by devoting
itself impartially
to promoting the process of decolonization in the Territory, the Portuguese administration permitted
some of its members, notably the
Special Assistant of the Governor,
Major Mota,
to aid and encourage FRETILIN
in its undemocratic
efforts to impose its will on the majority
of the
people of Timor by armed force. Those Portuguese
in positions of authority who did not actively assist
FRETILIN
took no effective action to prevent it
from improperly gaining dominance. In the afermath
of the fighting, the Portuguese Government
completely abandoned the Territory. The Governor is now
at Lisbon and the Acting Governor has left us for
Australia. No attempt, however feeble, has been made
to restore order to the Territory, so that the people
can exercise its sacred right to self-determination
in
a meaningful way.

98. The history of East Timor in the period since
the change of regime in Portugal has been recounted
in varying detail by the representatives of Portugal,
Indonesia and Malaysia, and by the representatives
of the political parties. The Australian attitude to these
events, including
our view on the use of, force,
has been stated by our. delegation in the Fourth
Committee2 and in the plenary meeting of the General
Assembly.-’
99. We hope that the Security Council; instead of
seeking to apportion blame for the situation which has
arisen, will propose practical measures and actions
with a view to enabling the -people of Portuguese
Timor to exercise their right to self-determination
and
decide their own road to an independent future. The
immediate requirement as we see it, is for a cease-fire,
to spare the people of Timor further bloodshed and
to create a climate in which a constructive programme
of decolonization
can be resumed.

94. The Portuguese Government indeed has much to
answer for at the bar of history concerning its conduct at the close of its role in Timor. Those of us
who were left behind have had to pick up the pieces in
an attempt to exercise our right to self-determination
and to rebuild our shattered lives. The four combined
political parties, which together represent the majority
of the people of Timor, unquestionably
have the right
to seek aid from Indonesia, or from any other source,
in order to restore peace and order to our land. Having
done this, although we practically control the whole of
the Territory and represent most of its .people, we
have no wish to impede the process of decolonization.
On the contrary, we strongly desire that the process
be implemented
and that all of the people of East
Timor,
including
those who are members
of
FRETILIN,
be able to,exercise freely their right to
determine their own political future in the presence
of representatives of the United Nations.

100. Clearly, however, some time and organization
will be needed before’ the actual process of selfdetermination
can begin. Meanwhile it seems to us that
we must avoid the creation of a vacuum or a retrogression into chaos in the Territory. There must be
some effective civil authority to restore economic
activity, to ensure the food supply, to arrange medical
attention for the victims of the fighting and also to
make the initial preparations for a subsequent act
of self-determination.
101. Portugal has, of course, the continuing
legal
responsibility
but since the Portuguese Government
does not seem to be in a position to restore the
framework of civil government
even after fighting
has ceased, or to make the administrative
arrangements
under which the people could freely exercise their
choice, we must make the best of existing possibilities.
Some United Nations presence is also clearly required
to assist with arrangements for self-determination,
and we are glad to note that this is desired by all the
parties concerned, including Indoneha. The practical
question which faces the Council is what type of United
Nations presence would be appropriate, and how soon
conditipns on the spot will have returned sufficiently
to normal for a United Nations mission to begin work.

95. The PRESIDENT:
On behalf of the Security
Council, I thank Mr. Martins for the statement he
has made to the Council. In accordance with the
Council’s usual procedure, I now ask him to withdraw
from the Council table and resume the place reserved
for him at the side of the Council chamber. I now
invite the representative of Australia to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
96. ,Mr. HARRY (Australia): My delegation is grateful for the opportunity
to make a short statement to
the Council on the question of Portuguese Timor.
We appreciate very much the courteous and skilful
manner in which you, ‘Sir, are conducting the Council’s proceedings and we extend to you our full
co-operation and best wishes in ‘your efforts to find
a satisfactory solution to this problem.

iO2. The Australian delegation takes it for granted
that the Council will require a cessation of hostilities
and that a cease-fire will be observed. We are also
confident that the Indonesian elements will withdraw
as soon as fighting between the political parties has
ceased.
103. It is regrettable that the various political parties,
whose representatives are now appearing before the

97. The Australian Government and people have for
several decades been concerned that, in the evolution
12

Council, failed over many. ‘months to respond to
efforts-with
which Australia as one of the countries
in the immediate region of Timor was associated-to
bring them together in order to organize jointly
the preparations for self-determination.
We hope that
they will all now co-operate with the United Nations
in finding a satisfactory way in which the process of
orderly decolonization
can be resumed and can be
completed.

the statement made before the Council by the representative of Indonesia, whereby he endeavoured to
prove and justify the reasons that led his Government
to invade and military occupy the Territory of Timor
under Portuguese administration.
109.. I shall not remind the Council again of the
efforts made by the Government of Portugal to carry
out the process of decolonization
of Timor s’uccessfully, in accordance with the principles of the Charter
and the relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
in particular the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in General
Assembly
resolution
1514 (XV). But I wish to
emphasize that my Government,
bearing in mind the
specific circumstances of this case, has always been
in close contact with the Jakarta authorities-in
vain,
as everyone.can note. Indonesia has chosen to exercise
a negative influence on the parties closest to it and
that in order to justify, if need be, the use of force
in the Territory.
I

104. I have said that some form of United Nations
presence is clearly required, but it is difficult, in view
of the sometimes conflicting ‘information
as to the
precise situation in Timor, to determine what would
be the appropriate form and dimension of United
Nations involvement, and the right timing. The Australian delegation feels that the best course might be, as
a first step, for the Secretary-General
to be asked to
appoint a special representative who could consult with
the parties principally concerned, both in New York
and on the spot, and who could recommend further
action. Such action might be by the Council, which
will, we assume, remain seized of the question; or if,
as we hope, hostilities quickly cease and security is
restored, it might be possible for responsibility
to be
assumed by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples under its mandate from the General
Assembly.

1IO. As.‘he did before in the General Assembly,
here once again the representative
of. Indonesia
invoked the “criminal
negligence” of the Portuguese
authorities in regard to the events which have taken
place on the Territory of Timor. My delegation is
sincerely astonished. at the speed with which the
delegation of Indonesia changes its mind on, the action
of Portugal and as regards Timor. In the opinion of
the Government of Jakarta, “the positive attitude of
the administering
Power”-according
to the draft
resolution
of which Indonesia was a sponsor on
3 Decembeti-has
now become “criminal negligence”
simply in order to justify the Indonesian, invasion of
Timor.

105. The representative of Malaysia suggested yesteri
day [/8641/r r~eetin~] that the countries of the region
may have a special responsibility
in assisting the
administering Power. The Australian delegation endorses the principle of this approach but would like to
see what sort of action the Council may have in mind
to give effect. to such a principle.
Meanwhile the
Australian Government, as it has already informed the
administering Government and Indonesia, stands ready
to resume its humanitarian
aid and the facilitation of
appropriate international
aid to the distressed people
in Timor, while continuing, of course, its assistance
to the many hundreds of people who have sought in
Australia refuge from the fighting.

111. The representative of Indonesia has affirmed
that UDT, APODETI
and the other groups in favour
of the integration of Portuguese Timor with Indonesia
represent the majority of the population of the Territory. In so far as no plebiscite of any kind has taken
place, we may observe that Indonesia has a very
curious conception
of the self-determination
of a
people, since it believes that the reply can be known
before the question is even put. Such an attitude,
which clearly reveals the partiality of Indonesia as
to the political future of Timor, proves how dangerous and harmful it would have been for Portugal
to appeal -to Indonesia for the restoration of “peace
and order”4.
I
112. ‘I believe, in fact, that there is no doubt in
anyone’s mind, least of all after the events of these
last days, that any intervention
by Indonesia in Portuguese Timor would have been aimed essentially
at the achievement of ,its own designs over that Territory. It, is therefore difficult to challenge the fact
that if Portugal refrained from appealing to Indonesia
to intervene to settle problems pertaining to order
and the preservation of calm in Timor-problems
the
existence of which is not in doubt and which we

106. In conclusion, I would once. again emphasize;
as indeed the General Assembly did in its resolution
3485 (XXX), that the purpose and aim of the United
Nations, underlying
any action which the Council
may decide, is to enable the people of the .Territory
freely to exercise their right to self-determination.
The main question now is to establish conditions in
which the people of Timor can make its own free,
choice.
107. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of ,Portugal has asked to speak in exercise of his right
of reply and accordingly I now call on him.
108.

Mr. GALVAO

tionfiw99

French):

TELES (Portugal) (inturpretqI have listened most attentively to
13

have endeavoured
to solve by all means at our
disposal-we
did so solely in order to guarantee
respect for the will of the people of Timor. It is unjust
therefore to accuse Portugal of not having resorted
to a solution which we would even have found convenient, but which would have been a contravention
of its duties as administering
Power towards the
population of Timor.

116. Manifestly, it had a compelling desire to enter
the house of its neighbour. Regrettably, in this case
as in many others, the damage caused by the water
was far greater than the damage caused by the fire.
The hundreds of innocent victims of the aggression
of Indonesia are irrefutable’lproof
of this. If Indonesia had simply wished “to restore peace and order”
in the Territory, why did it not resort to the United
Nations? The armed attack against Dili, the hundreds of dead, wounded and missing persons, are
these the best means to achieve the “peace and
order” which the Indonesian authorities profess to
desire?

113. We have furthermore observed with pleasure,
after the statement today of the representative
of
UDT, that the people of .Timor has not decided in
favour of the integration of that Territory with Indonesia and that, for this reason, that Party is prepared
to accept a plebiscite for the free exercise of the right
to self-determination
and independence.

117. Can we really believe that Indonesia intervened impartiahy
and objectively
in the internal
affairs of Timor? Certainly not. And if any doubt
should still subsist, the latest news concerning the
official annexation of the enclave of Ocussi-Ambenu
would dispel that doubt completely.

114. It is therefore the hope of Portugal that the
policy of decolonization
which we have proposed
may yet be applied, with the agreement of all the
parties concerned, the more so since it is obvious,
after the statements made this morning before the
Council, that the positions of those parties are,
after all, rather different from one another, since
only one of those representatives took up a defence
of the position of Indonesia. The acts of that country
have been and are, unfortunately,
of a different
kind.

118. The PRESIDENT:
of Indonesia.

I call on the representative

119. Mr. ANWAR
SANI:
I should only like to
reserve the right of my delegation to reply to these
latest remarks made by the representative of PortugaL
In fact, I would have referred to my own statement once again and to the statements which have
been made by the representatives
of the parties
this morning, but I thought it would be good to
reply to the representative
of Portugal in the way
his statement merits. So I should like to reserve my
right to reply to the Portuguese remarks at the next
meeting of the Council.

115. The recent evolution
of events in Timor,
moreover,
enables us better to understand
the
various steps taken by Indonesia so as to prepare
the intervention
which was carried out a few days
ago. It leads us to conclude-to
use the imagery
employed by the representative
of Indonesia-that
Indonesia has not only set fire to everything in
Timor (and the image of a famous pyromaniac firefighter inevitably comes to mind), that it has not
only done everything in its power so that things
would come to such a point in order that the selfless mission of a voluntary firefighter that it claims
to be carrying out would appear to be justified, but
that it has even constantly acted so as to prevent
others from being able to extinguish the fire.

The meeting

rose rrt I .I0 p.m.

I See General Assembly resolution 3485 (XXX).

z See Ojj%ial
Rrcords
ofthe
Gmrrul
Asstmhly,
Thirtieth
Srssicm.
Forrrfh
Committcv,
2178th. 2185th and 2188th meetings.
3 ibid.,
77Grtkth
&r&m.
Pl~nn~y Matings,
2439th meeting.
4 Ibid..
7hirtirth
Session,
Anrw.ws.
agenda item 88, document

A/10426, para. 8.

14
Litho in UnitcdNationr,

New York

00300

82-6 1202-December

1983- 2,200
