A /72/PV.82

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

82nd plenary meeting

Thursday, 12 April 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Perera (Sri
Lanka), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 12
Improving global road safety
Note by the Secretary-General (A/72/359)
Draft resolution (A/72/L.48)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I am very pleased
to join Member States today to speak on an extremely
important subject — the debate on road safety.
Road traffic deaths and injuries have become a
serious and urgent global concern. Every year, some
1.3 million drivers, passengers and pedestrians die and
up to 50 million people are injured on the world’s roads.
Traffic accidents are the primary cause of death of
young people and are responsible for keeping millions
of people in poverty each year.
In the past week alone, we have been reminded
of the deeply distressing personal realities behind
such stories. Tragic road accidents in Canada and
India, to name but two countries, have left families
and communities utterly distraught. I would like to
convey my sincere condolences to all those affected by
the events.

Draft resolution A/72/L.48, under this agenda
item, recognizes that the number of accidents globally
remains unacceptably high and that, at the current rate
of progress, target 3.6 of the Sustainable Development
Goals — to halve, by 2020, the number of global deaths
and injuries from road traffic accidents — will not
be met. I thank the Russian Federation, as the main
sponsor of the draft resolution, and all Member States
for highlighting that tragic and preventable situation
and for setting out a series of steps to address it.
Looking ahead, it is important to recognize the
projected increase in urbanization, motorization,
infrastructure development and vehicle ownership
around the world. We must put in place measures to
prevent road traffic fatalities and injuries, which
continue to take an increasing toll. The proposed third
Global Ministerial Conference on Road Safety, to be held
in Sweden in 2020, can make an important contribution.
In addition, following the General Assembly’s
request to the Secretary-General, I am pleased to report
that the United Nations Road Safety Trust Fund has now
been established to support the implementation of the
Global Plan for the Decade of Action for Road Safety
2011-2020 and the road-safety-related Sustainable
Development Goals.
Reaching that point has involved a significant
journey by many. I thank the Economic Commission for
Europe and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Road Safety, Mr. Jean Todt, for their commitment
and leadership. I would also like to thank other partners
of the United Nations system, Member States, civil

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-10446 (E)

*1810446*

A/72/PV.82

society and additional stakeholders for their support,
and I would like to acknowledge those private-sector
entities that have pledged initial contributions to the
United Nations Road Safety Trust Fund for their time
in helping us to shape those ambitions.
We must now begin to pool our resources and
expertise to make a real impression on our global
targets during the remaining three years of the Decade
of Action for Road Safety and the duration of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
With the draft resolution submitted under this
item and the establishment of the United Nations
Road Safety Trust Fund, there is a new opportunity
to ensure synergy, efficiency and coordinated action
towards results on the ground. With it, we have a real
chance to save millions of lives around the world and to
prevent injuries, suffering and the loss of opportunity
associated with road accidents. I call on all road safety
stakeholders, including Member States, to contribute to
the Fund and to step up efforts towards achieving our
global road safety targets.
The Acting President: I thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for her statement.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Russian Federation to introduce draft resolution
A/72/L.48.
Mr. Gorovoy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Road safety has been and remains one of the
most pressing issues facing modern society. Deaths
and injuries resulting from road traffic accidents have
a negative impact on the socioeconomic progress and
sustainable development of States.
It is important that the topic of road safety not
only has firmly taken its place on the agenda of
General Assembly but also has become an integral
part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The incorporation of the corresponding targets of the
relevant Sustainable Development Goals demonstrates
the international community’s acknowledgement of the
need for coordinated action in this area.
We have consistently implemented a range of
measures to improve road safety in Russia. That work is
taking place pursuant to the decisions of the President
and the Government of the Russian Federation on the
basis of the federal target programme on improving
road safety until 2020 and the road safety strategy for
the Russian Federation, adopted by the Government six
2/27

12/04/2018

weeks ago. We are focusing on six priority key areas,
including nurturing a culture of ethics of road users
and the proper level of legal awareness, increasing
the safety of children and pedestrians to protect them
from accidents and the related consequences, and
developing a system for assistance to victims. As part
of the implementation of innovative projects, new
opportunities are emerging to make road traffic safer,
including by minimizing the influence of the human
factor on the functioning of the various systems.
Thanks to the measures taken, the number of road
traffic deaths has decreased by one third over the past six
years. At the same time, we have succeeded in reducing
the mortality rate of vulnerable road users, namely,
among minors by a quarter, among pedestrians by a
third and among motorcyclists by half. This progress
has been made in the context of a steep increase in the
number of vehicles, which grew by 20 per cent over the
same period of time. There are now 55 million vehicles
on the road.
International cooperation in the area of road safety
has been significantly strengthened since the inclusion
of the item on road safety on the agenda of the General
Assembly at the initiative of Oman in 2003. As a
follow-up to the decisions of the first Global Ministerial
Conference on Road Safety, held in Moscow in 2009,
the General Assembly declared the period from 2011 to
2020 as the Decade of Action for Road Safety.
The process of the practical implementation of
steps for integrating the Decade of Action within the
framework of the Sustainable Development Goals
began after the second Conference, held in Brasilia
in 2015. It led to the launch of large-scale actions to
stabilize and subsequently reduce projected road traffic
accident mortality rates. We would also like to highlight
the special role of the United Nations Special Envoy for
Road Safety, Mr. Jean Todt, in the implementation of
those initiatives.
We also welcome the decision of the SecretaryGeneral to establish the Road Safety Trust Fund.
Decisive steps have already been taken by the
international community and have yielded positive
results. Therefore, over the past few years in many
States, we have witnessed a decrease in mortality
and injury rates resulting from road traffic accidents.
However, much remains to be done. It is for that reason
that Russia is honoured to put forward its draft resolution
entitled “Improving global road safety” (A/72/L.48).
18-10446

12/04/2018

The draft resolution is based on relevant General
Assembly resolutions and reflects the achievements
made by the international community on the issue of
road safety. It focuses on strengthening multilateral
cooperation with the aim of reducing the number of road
traffic injuries. It highlights the fact that an effective
response to global road safety challenges is feasible
only if all stakeholders participate, including the
private sector and civil society. It commends the efforts
undertaken by international organizations within the
United Nations system. The draft resolution welcomes
the steps taken by Member States to accede to the
relevant international legal instruments and to develop
a comprehensive national legislative framework in the
area of road safety, while taking into account the major
risk factors. It also welcomes the attention given to the
link between road safety and sustainable mobility in the
New Urban Agenda — Habitat III. Particular reference
is also made to the activities undertaken during the
fourth United Nations Global Road Safety Week, where
emphasis was placed on excessive speed as a primary
risk factor.
The text calls on all States Members of the United
Nations to use the 12 global targets for road safety risk
factors, which were developed by the World Health
Organization to monitor progress nationally, globally
and regionally. The draft resolution welcomes the offer
by the Government of Sweden to host the third Global
Ministerial Conference on Road Safety in 2020 to
review the progress made in achieving the Decade of
Action objectives. At that event, we expect that the set
of measures adopted as part of the Decade of Action
will be reviewed and progress towards achieving target
3.6 assessed. We would like to inform our Swedish
colleagues that our country is ready to provide any
additional assistance needed in organizing and holding
the conference, and we wish them every success.
We express our sincere gratitude to all delegations
that contributed to the consultations that led to
agreement on the draft resolution, as well as to
all interested parties. We would like to thank our
colleagues at the World Health Organization and the
United Nations Economic Commission for Europe
for their considerable contributions to our common
cause. We urge all Member States to support the draft
resolution and invite them to become sponsors.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.

A/72/PV.82

Mr. Van Den Akker (European Union): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
The European Union welcomes the upcoming
adoption by consensus of the draft resolution entitled
“Improving global road safety” (A/72/L.48). We would
like in particular to thank the Russian Federation and
commend it on its leadership and efforts to facilitate
that outcome.
Every year 50 million people are injured because
of road traffic accidents, which are a leading cause
of death globally and the main cause of death among
those between the ages of 15 and 29. That situation
is unacceptable, and it shows that our road transport
systems around the world are inherently unsafe and that
one human mistake can lead to disaster for individuals,
families and societies.
Europe has taken a clear stand on this major health
problem. According to our white paper on transport, by
2050 Europe will move closer to the goal of zero fatalities
on the road — a clear vision that will not be achieved
overnight. A system of intermediate, voluntary targets
and safety indicators is a useful tool to guide our efforts
along the way. To that end, we agreed on the Sustainable
Development Goals in September 2015, including
target 3.6, which aims to halve the global number of
death and injuries from road traffic accidents by 2020.
In that regard, the upcoming third Global Ministerial
Conference on Road Safety, to be held in Sweden in
2020, coinciding with the end of the Decade of Action
on Road Safety and the period leading up to 2030,
the establishment of the United Nations Road Safety
Trust Fund, which will be launched today, and the draft
resolution on improving global road safety offer a clear
and recent illustration of ongoing international efforts
to achieve our challenging goals.
To prevent road traffic injuries and develop a
safe road transport system, we need a comprehensive
and holistic approach with the involvement of all
stakeholders. The European road safety policy
framework for the period 2011-2020, which guides
our efforts towards contributing to safer roads, is a
good example. It focuses on new key priorities such
as reducing the number of accidents on rural roads
and those involving vulnerable road users, such as
pedestrians, cyclists, motorcyclists, children and the
elderly. In addition, we build on previous commitments
to strengthen controls and penalties, support national
initiatives to combat driving under the influence of

18-104463/27

A/72/PV.82

alcohol and drugs, invest in road infrastructure and
improve traffic conditions, legislation on driving
licenses and fitness standards for driving. Such
measures have resulted in a 20 per cent reduction in the
number of road fatalities between 2010 and 2017.
Even if the regional road fatality rate in the
European Union is the lowest worldwide, it remains
unacceptable. We are committed to reinforcing our
efforts, as European Union Transport Ministers clearly
demonstrated in March 2017 in the Valletta Declaration
on Improving Road Safety. That political impetus is
guiding our work on a new ambitious policy framework
for period 2020-2030. We must continue to share best
practices and exchange information at the national,
regional and global levels, with the active participation
of civil society and the private sector.
We must also strengthen our efforts to integrate
safety into a broader agenda of sustainable cities
and transport. We know the main killers on the
roads — inappropriate speed, drunken driving,
distraction and the failure to wear a seatbelt. To make
roads safer, work is needed on safer road infrastructure,
safer vehicles and safer road users. That includes the
implementation and the enforcement of adequate laws,
but also soft measures such as awareness-raising and
education efforts.
Although road traffic injuries are a major public
health problem and the challenges sometimes feel
overwhelming, we believe that there is hope. Many
countries around the world have already shown that it is
possible, through a holistic and multisectoral approach,
to prevent people from being killed or seriously injured
in road traffic. Let us build on those experiences. We
cannot afford to be complacent on road safety. Millions
of human lives are at stake.
Ms. Picco (Monaco) (spoke in French): Too many
people are killed on the roads. It is a violent and silent
epidemic that takes the lives of children going to
school and of innocent people, their lives taken away
by persons driving under the influence of alcohol or
drivers of vehicles that should not be on the road. More
than 1 million lives are lost every year. To that are added
tens of millions of injured, many of whom will be left
disabled. Road accidents are the main cause of death
among young people aged 15 to 29 of years, and almost
half of the people killed on roads are vulnerable users.
Another alarming statistic is the gap between highincome countries and low- or middle-income countries,
4/27

12/04/2018

where 90 per cent of the deaths due to road accidents
take place although they account for only 54 per cent
of the vehicles in circulation worldwide. We therefore
emphasize the importance of the draft resolution
(A/72/L.48) that we will adopt later, which Monaco has
co-sponsored and which calls for working to improve
road infrastructure, enhance vehicle safety, change the
dangerous behaviour of road users, increase capacity to
respond to accidents, and, for those countries that have
not yet done so, to adhere to and implement fully the
relevant United Nations legal instruments.
We commend the exemplary commitment of the
Special Envoy for Road Safety, whose efforts led to the
establishment of the United Nations Road Safety Trust
Fund. That is a new tool that will allow us to support
the implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals connected to road security and to encourage all
actors to take part in the effort.
The global status report on road safety (see
A/72/359) submitted by World Health Organization
(WHO) takes stock of the results obtained by various
actors in efforts to achieve the goals of the Decade of
Action for Road Safety 2011-2020, ahead of our meeting
in Sweden in 2020. Monaco emphasizes in particular
the relevance of the recommendations made by WHO
encouraging Member States to do more, including
strengthening legislation, investing in innovative
technological solutions, both in terms of infrastructure
and transport systems, and improving the quality of
data on road safety by implementing strategies that
focus on vulnerable road users.
Monaco shares the conclusion of the report that
urges States to deal comprehensively with road safety.
My country prioritizes prevention and first and
foremost the education of future users. For that reason,
Monaco’s authorities pay special attention to educating
all types of road users about the risks and applicable
rules. That teaching is mandatory and is part of the
curriculum in schools from secondary school. It is also
a way to recall the significant vulnerability of certain
categories of users, in particular pedestrians, cyclists
or drivers of two-wheeled vehicles, which young people
are the first to use. With those actions, the Government
of Monaco aims to foster an understanding of the
relationship between regulations, risks and accidents.
Moreover, the Government attaches great importance
to compliance with traffic regulations and actively
fights all manner of disrespect on the road. That is why
the authorities have developed a robust legal arsenal,
18-10446

12/04/2018

which was recently strengthened, to punish offenders.
Monaco also severely penalizes users who behave
in a dangerous manner, including driving under the
influence of alcohol or psychoactive substances.
Regulating traffic is a major challenge for road
safety, at both the national and international levels. The
increase in the world population and daily commuting
have put our countries and cities and their infrastructure
under increasing pressure. That is a daily concern for
my country, where the influx of people increases daily
because of the number of people coming in to work. In
that regard, my country is implementing considerable
measures to develop innovative and flexible solutions
to make our roads safer. Because our territory is a
small one, soft mobility is prioritized. The Government
launched a programme in 2017 to identify so-called
smart city solutions. The Government has appointed an
interministerial delegation responsible for the digital
transition. Technology should facilitate the control
of road flows, offer alternatives to users and manage
cases of emergencies and accidents, thereby making
our infrastructure safer and more responsive.
Monaco also supports many initiatives and projects
aimed at testing, improving and promoting methods of
transport for the future. At this very moment, and as it
has done since 2006, Monaco is hosting the Ecologic
Vehicles-Renewable Energies exhibition, which brings
together many actors in the soft mobility sector to share
knowledge and reflect on solutions for the future.
Anyone who has been a road accident victim can
attest to the extent to which words must be followed by
actions where road safety is concerned. Road accidents
cost most countries 3 per cent of their gross national
product. Road safety policies are therefore not just a
public safety need, but an invaluable investment. Our
commitment cannot focus on a single aspect but on all
of its components, namely, infrastructure, vehicles,
users and post-accident care. The realization of the
Global Plan for the Decade of Action for Road Safety,
which we proclaimed in 2010, is an imperative need for
every State represented in this Hall and, for each of us,
a pressing need.
Mr. Bausch (Luxembourg): According to the 2015
statistics of the World Health Organization, 3,400 people
will not make it home tonight. Why? Simply because
they had the bad luck to be killed in a car crash. That is
3,400 human souls who will not come home to say good
night to their kids, wives, husbands, parents or friends.

A/72/PV.82

In less than 200 days, the population of my home
country, Luxembourg, would be erased completely.
Road safety is a global public health issue, a
universal responsibility and, hence, an international
challenge for all of us. Road safety is an issue that
affects each and every one of us no matter what
language we speak, where we are from or what social
class we might fall into. Whether we are pedestrians,
cyclists, drivers or passengers, road safety is a common
challenge. Therefore, it is a great honour for me to speak
in front of an audience representing the United Nations.
To be candid, road safety is too important for us to be
modest or to act humbly. Throughout history, New York
has never been a place for small actions. Let me say it
very clearly: I have a goal that cannot be negotiated or
questioned, a goal that means nothing else than zero
fatalities and zero severely injured in road traffic.
During In the 1970s, Luxembourg recorded more
than 100 road fatalities per year. Through a number of
serious repressive measures, such as introducing the
demerit-point driving-license system; declaring war on
the use of alcohol and drugs while driving; enhancing
driver training, in particular by implementing postlicensing measures for novice drivers; improving the
network of roads; introducing an efficient periodic
technical vehicle inspection; and launching awarenessraising campaigns on a regular basis, we managed to
reduce the number of fatalities to 32 in 2010, meaning a
decrease of 68 per cent. The first figures I had to present
as a newly appointed Minister for Transport in 2013
showed an increase in the number of fatalities to 45 — a
41 per cent increase as compared with 2010. The main
cause was still exceeding speed limits or inappropriate
speed. I did not hesitate for a single moment. I aimed
high and took bold action by introducing speed cameras
in Luxembourg. Human error, be it speed, fatigue,
drunken driving or the use of mobile phones and other
devices, are the main factors in road traffic collisions
in Luxembourg, as well as in most other countries.
They are common challenges, but there is no need to
reinvent the wheel.
The current Government of Luxembourg
launched a road safety action plan in 2014 comprising
29 measures — a mixture of prevention and
repression — aiming to tackle the reasons behind road
accidents, one by one. The core measures consist of a
reinforcement of the demerit-point system and of the
fines and safety measures related to road infrastructure,
residential areas, 30-kilometre-per-hour zones, shared

18-104465/27

A/72/PV.82

spaces, safer crosswalks, bicycle lanes and road safety
audits — broadly speaking, the design of the streets.
In less than four years, the number of road fatalities
dropped to 25 people, that is to say, from 45 people in
2013 to 25 in 2017, which shows that political courage
saves lives.
But despite that encouraging trend in road fatalities,
efforts must continue, because every death and serious
injury on the road is one too many. I have a goal that
I keep believing in. I know that nothing comes from
belief alone, but we can and will reach this figure. The
United Nations has a clear target — to halve the number
of road deaths and serious injuries by 2020, even though
reaching that target has become very challenging. My
vision remains zero fatalities and zero seriously injured
by road traffic, not only in my country but all over the
world. The heartache, the human suffering and the
misery must come to an end. Let us do it together. Let
us aim high, work hard and dream big.
Ms. Rawet (Sweden): Sweden fully aligns itself
with the statement made by the observer of the European
Union and would like to make some additional remarks
in its national capacity.
First, let me congratulate the General Assembly in
advance for adopting the draft resolution on improving
global road safety (A/72/L.48). I would also like to
thank the Russian Federation for its leadership and
efforts in facilitating the draft resolution.
More than 1.3 million people are killed each year in
road traffic accidents, with 50 million injured. Ninety
per cent of those casualties take place in developing
countries, leading to increased poverty for many who
are already poor. Road traffic incidents are the main
cause of death for young people between 15 and 29
years of age and therefore constitute a huge challenge
for our society today.
However, road safety is one of the areas where
working together at the United Nations can deliver
tangible results. Today we have made such a contribution.
The adoption of this draft will be an important step
not only in promoting work on road safety, but also in
bringing about a sustainable society and achieving the
Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
First, I would like to express Sweden’s strong
support for the guidelines set up in the draft resolution.
We hope that it will motivate Member States and other
stakeholders in their work on road safety. I also hope
6/27

12/04/2018

that it will pave the way for more focused and concrete
work on road safety, with a better set of tools.
Secondly, let me also express our gratitude to one
and all for welcoming the offer from Sweden to host the
third Global Ministerial Conference on Road Safety in
2020, as mentioned in the draft resolution. Before the
agenda is set for the conference, we will make sure that
all stakeholders concerned are consulted on their views
on how to achieve progress, starting with the United
Nations Road Safety Collaboration this afternoon.
Sweden seeks to continue the important work of the
first United Nations Global Road Safety Week in
Muscat in 2007, and the two successful first high-level
conferences on road safety — the first in Moscow in
2009 and the second in Brasilia in 2015.
The third high-level conference will bring together
delegations of ministers and representatives dealing
with transportation, health, education, safety and related
traffic law enforcement issues, as well as business
leaders, non-governmental organizations, members of
academia and international organizations, that is, all
relevant stakeholders with an interest in reducing or
eliminating road traffic fatalities and serious injuries.
The aim of the conference will be to review the
progress in achieving the goals of the Decade of Action
for Road Safety 2011-2020 and the relevant targets
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, as
well as to provide an opportunity for Member States to
further discuss ways to achieve the goals of the Agenda.
An important task for the conference will also be to
prepare a forward-looking declaration on the period
leading up to 2030.
In conclusion, since 1997 Sweden has continuously
worked according to our Vision Zero that no one
will be killed or seriously injured in traffic. We have
learned many things along the way. Perhaps the most
important lesson is the need to collaborate holistically
and systematically, in a multi-sectoral approach and
with all stakeholders concerned at all levels of society.
There is much that can be said on road safety, there
are interesting experiences to be shared and most of all,
there is important work to be done. Let us get to work as
soon as possible. Therefore, I will conclude by thanking
one and all once again, and I would like to extend to
everyone a warm welcome to Sweden and to the third
Global Ministerial Conference on Road Safety, in 2020.
18-10446

12/04/2018

Mr. Al Mughairi (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to thank the Russian Federation for its efforts
leading to the adoption later today of draft resolution
A/72/L.48. I would also like to thank all delegations
that took part in the consultations and in the relevant
meetings. Finally, I would like to pay tribute to the
constructive efforts of the international community in
this area.
Each year, 1.25 million people die in road accidents,
which are the main cause of death for young people in
the 15-29 age group. Others, too, lose their lives in
such accidents. In 2011, the United Nations proclaimed
2011–2020 as the Decade of Action for Road Safety.
In September 2015, that goal was supplemented by
the framework of the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs), especially with regard to safety, calling for a
50 per cent reduction of accidents. Our delegation voted
for that resolution in order to complement the role of
the Sultanate of Oman in the area of road safety. The
Sultanate of Oman took the lead in suggesting this
topic at the United Nations in 2003 and played a role in
organizing the first United Nations Road Safety Week
in 2007.
The efforts made by the Government of my country,
the private sector and civil society in the Sultanate of
Oman, along with the increased awareness among all
segments of our society, led to positive results in the area
of road safety. Statistics show that despite the growing
number of cars on the road in Oman, the decline in the
number of road accidents continued, from the decrease
of 5 per cent registered in 2013 to a decrease of 25 per
cent in 2016. That reduction led to a 45 per cent drop
in road traffic deaths from 2012 to 2016, for which we
thank God.
Our Ministry of Transport and Communications
has implemented road projects that meet modern
requirements and are environmentally friendly and
consistent with safety requirements by road users. It
has adopted laws to organize the road transport process.
During this period, the Ministry has been implementing
a master plan for public transportation in the Sultanate
of Oman, in order to provide a complete system that
serves all segments of society according to quality
standards. The aim is to reduce traffic congestion, gas
consumption and environmental effects.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my thanks
to the President of the General Assembly and to the
Secretary-General. We hope to improve road safety

A/72/PV.82

by strengthening international efforts, with the aim
of working together to achieve our common goal of
protecting human lives.
Prince Michael of Kent (United Kingdom): I am
delighted to be representing the United Kingdom in
this important and timely debate. I am very grateful to
the British Government for the opportunity to address
the General Assembly on road safety, which for many
years has been a strong concern of mine. Already in
this twenty-first century more than 20 million people
have been killed and many millions more seriously
injured in road accidents around the world. According
to the World Health Organization, every day 3,500
lives are lost in road accidents that are predictable and
preventable. That is far too heavy a price to pay for our
essential mobility.
In Britain today, we are fortunate to have one of
the safest road networks in the world. That is not just a
matter of luck. It has come about through difficult and
at times bitter experience. In 1931, when our highway
code was first introduced, we had only 2.3 million
motor vehicles on our roads, but we lost more than
7,000 people in traffic crashes. Today there are
38 million motor vehicles in Britain, and we are losing
each year just over 1,700 people. However, that is still
far too many, and we share the determination of all the
Member States participating in this debate to further
reduce those figures.
Our experience over many decades shows that
there is nothing inevitable about rising levels of road
casualties, but that to improve road safety requires
action on all fronts. We need safer roads, safer vehicles
and safer road users. We came to recognize the
combined benefits of all three areas painfully slowly.
Our early attempts to educate drivers to be safer were
not effective until we backed them up with strong
enforcement. Similarly, the design of our roads has been
made much safer through advanced engineering, and
the safety of vehicles has been dramatically improved
by the fitment of life-saving technologies, such as
seat belts, air bags and electronic stability control. All
countries can benefit from adopting a similar integrated
approach, but adapted to their own traffic conditions
and the profile of injuries.
A powerful example has been Britain’s successful
experience with seat belts. They were first required to
be fitted in cars in 1967, but wearing rates remained low.
Educational campaigns were launched in the 1970s to

18-104467/27

A/72/PV.82

encourage seat-belt use and raised rates to about 40 per
cent. Then in the early 1980s, as a result of a crossparty initiatives by members of Parliament, wearing
seat belts became compulsory. I am delighted that
joining the British delegation in the Hall today is one
of the members of Parliament who led that life-saving
campaign, Mr. Barry Sheerman, MP. Today Britain’s
seat-belt wearing is above 94 per cent, and tens of
thousands of lives have been saved.
Britain still faces the challenge of how to
further reduce the toll. In 2015, the United Kingdom
Department of Transport released a new road safety
strategy, entitled “Working together to build a safer
road system”. It sets out the Government’s vision,
values and priorities for improving the safety of
Britain’s roads. Recent initiatives flowing from that
strategy are policies to encourage cycling and walking
so as to reduce car dependency, and investment in the
future deployment of autonomous vehicles.
One important aspect of Britain’s road safety
policy is our international engagement, especially
through the United Nations. We actively support the
work of the World Forum for Harmonization of Vehicle
Regulations and the Global Forum for Road Traffic
Safety, both hosted by the Economic Commission
for Europe in Geneva. It is vital that more countries
adhere to the United Nations road safety norms and
standards, and we commend the efforts being made by
the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for Road Safety,
Mr. Jean Todt, to encourage more Governments to
become contracting parties.
Our Government’s Department for International
Development is also active in road safety, serving as a
donor to the World Bank’s Global Road Safety Facility,
which is currently chaired by a senior official of that
Department. It would be to everyone’s advantage to
establish close cooperation between the Facility and the
newly proposed United Nations Road Safety Trust Fund.
Britain has also been a dynamic contributor to
global road safety through the efforts of its independent
charitable sector. In 2001, the International Automobile
Foundation was registered as a United Kingdom charity
with a permanent endowment of $300 million. Since
then the Foundation has supported some very powerful
initiatives. Those include the Commission for Global
Road Safety, of which at one point I was patron, which
led the call for a United Nations decade of action and
for the inclusion of road safety in the Sustainable
8/27

12/04/2018

Development Goals. It included the World Bank’s
Global Road Safety Facility, which serves as a donorcoordination mechanism for the road-safety activities
of the multilateral development banks; the Global New
Car Assessment Programme, which provides a platform
for cooperation among consumer crash-test and rating
systems worldwide; and the Global Initiative for Child
Health and Mobility, which is an innovative coalition
promoting the objective of safe and healthy journeys to
school for all children by 2030.
The FIA Foundation has supported all of these
initiatives. I am very familiar with them because the
Foundation, the World Bank Facility and the Global New
Car Assessment Programme have all been recipients of
my international road-safety awards, which I set up 30
years ago to recognize outstanding achievements in
road-injury prevention.
There is always a need to shine a spotlight on our
road-safety successes to act as an incentive to others.
The need for effective road-injury prevention has never
been more pressing. I would also like to highlight the
work of another British charity, the Towards Zero
Foundation, on which I serve as patron. The Foundation
hosts the Global Network for Road Safety Legislators,
which was launched in London in 2016. The Network
encourages the exchange of best practices in road safety
policies and laws among parliamentarians, and I am
delighted that Barry Sheerman, M.P., whom I mentioned
earlier, is leading a high-level delegation of 14 members
of Parliament from different countries to this debate of
the General Assembly and for a meeting later today of
the United Nations Road Safety Collaboration.
Finally, I would like to welcome the offer made
by the Government of Sweden to host the third highlevel global ministerial meeting on road safety. This
important event will not only mark the end of the
United Nations Decade of Action for Road Safety
2011–2020 but will also lead to a new level of global
commitment to road-injury prevention. The Decade of
Action was launched with the aim of stabilizing and
then reducing the level of road fatalities, but at best
we can say that there has been some stabilization but
not yet any significant reduction. We know that the
Sustainable Development Goal target to halve road
deaths and injuries by 2020 will not be met, so now
is the time to redouble our efforts and use the last two
years of the United Nations Decade to set a new path of
road-safety progress for 2030.
18-10446

12/04/2018

Mr. O’Brien (Australia): Road traffic accidents
place a heavy burden on communities and economies
globally. Since Australia co-sponsored the General
Assembly resolution establishing the Decade of Action
for Road Safety 2011–2020 (resolution 64/255), we
have been proud to support global efforts to address
road safety. Today we are pleased to sponsor the draft
resolution entitled “Improving global road safety”
(A/72/L.48).
Australia welcomed the adoption of the Sustainable
Development Goals as part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, particularly the inclusion of
specific targets relating to road safety. We recognize
the importance of setting ambitious targets to reduce
deaths and injuries from road crashes. This year’s draft
resolution on improving global road safety expresses a
concern that at the current rate of progress, the target
to halve global deaths and injuries by 2020 will not be
met. We need to pick up the pace to improve road safety.
Australia welcomes the development of voluntary
global performance targets and corresponding
indicators for road safety and is participating in this
process. We have adopted a safe-systems approach to
road safety through our national road-safety strategy,
and we are always willing to share our experience and
to learn from others. We recognize the need to work
with countries in our region and the mutual benefits
that come from sharing knowledge.
To signify our leadership on this issue in our region,
we hosted a launch event at the Sydney Opera House for
the United Nations Global Road Safety Week in 2017,
on behalf of the World Health Organization’s Western
Pacific region.
Australia strongly supports the call made by
the General Assembly for member States to scale up
action on all areas of road safety, including through
the implementation of strong legislation, addressing
key factors, improving infrastructure by targeting the
roads with the highest volumes and high crash rates,
and improving the quality of data so that we can
monitor progress.
Mr. Candu (Republic of Moldova): I am honoured
to address the Assembly and to commend the efforts
of the countries that are pioneers in the area of global
road safety and strive to keep the attention of the
international community and the United Nations
focused on this issue. I would also like to welcome
the report of the Secretary-General (see A/72/359),

A/72/PV.82

which highlights the important efforts made by various
bodies and organizations of the United Nations system,
in partnership with other stakeholders, to tackle the
critical challenges in the area of road safety, which
affect all countries, in particular developing ones.
I am honoured to stand at this rostrum today as the
Moldova Road Safety Ambassador appointed by the
Eastern Alliance for Safe and Sustainable Transport.
While I am delighted by this distinction, I also view
it as a great responsibility involving championing
partnerships and greater financial mobilization
internationally as well as spearheading comprehensive
legislative and public awareness-measures in my own
country, the Republic of Moldova.
As we approach the conclusion of the Decade of
Action for Road Safety 2011-2020 and its Global Plan,
we can see that a great deal of positive progress has
been made, marked by several regional and global
initiatives for road safety. However, there is still little
room for complacency, and we need to remain diligent
and committed to saving lives in the area of road traffic,
a goal that is absolutely in our power to achieve.
We all know the figures, and they are unsettling.
The lives of nearly 1.3 million people are lost in traffic
crashes every year. This is a leading cause of death,
especially among young people. Without resolute
measures, the projections for the future are even
grimmer, as more people are going to be affected.
This means that the road-safety-related targets of the
Sustainable Development Goals, which aim to halve,
by 2020, the number of global deaths and injuries from
road-traffic accidents, will not only be missed but also
totally compromised.
However, this trend can be prevented through
legislative measures, observing basic safety standards
in the car industry and good road design and traffic
management, as well as public awareness and education.
Building international partnerships and ensuring
adequate funding to support these measures and fight
the scourge of traffic fatalities will be also instrumental.
Therefore, our gathering here today is an opportunity
not only to highlight the prominence of this global
health and development concern, but also to address
concrete actions that can be carried out jointly so as
to make such a basic aspect of our daily life safer and
more sustainable.
The Republic of Moldova is committed to
promoting and ensuring road safety. We acknowledge

18-104469/27

A/72/PV.82

what is a frightening problem in all its complexity
and its consequences for our country’s development.
Although road fatalities in the Republic of Moldova
decreased by more than 30 per cent for the period
from 2010 to 2016, increases were once again noted
in recent years. That gives us no relief in employing
greater and constant vigilance in terms of our main
legislative body, Government authorities, partners and
society at large to ensure that our roads, infrastructure
and road users remain safe. Last year, on behalf of the
Moldova Parliament, I co-signed the Manifesto for
Road Safety, launched by the Global Network for Road
Safety Legislators, which sets forth ambitious targets
and commitments, such as cutting by half the number
of road-crash victims by the next decade, improving
and expanding the network and accessibility of roads,
improving data collection and leveraging funds for
safer roads.
Applying the best international standards and
practices in the management of traffic safety is
particularly indispensable since a new programme for
better roads in Moldova was launched in January. The
programme is designed to build and restore local and
national roads throughout the country. It is estimated
to be the largest-ever infrastructure project in Moldova
financed by the national budget, and it is a sustainable
investment in the safety of our population, mobility,
accessibility, commercial exchanges and development.
That ambitious infrastructure programme has a strong
road-safety component and is aligned with national
campaigns to raise awareness about road safety for
our people by using roadside billboards, leaflets, the
distribution of reflective accessories and advertising on
nationally televised channels.
I was personally involved in one such campaign
with the slogan “Keep your kids safe in cars”, and I am
happy to lead and encourage parents to use child safety
seats at all times to show what it means to shoulder
responsibility and truly care for our loved ones. I
can also proudly say that Moldova is among the 53
countries that meet best-practices criteria with regard
to child-restraint laws, according to the World Health
Organization.
At the institutional level, while seeking to achieve
better inter-agency coordination and the implementation
of the best international practices, in particular by
adopting the European Union legislation on roadsafety standards, we have introduced a platform for
parliamentary control over road safety in our country.
10/27

12/04/2018

Only this past month, that parliamentary platform set
the stage for the introduction of an education safety
module, beginning with the preschool cycle and the
establishment of a national legal entity for roadsafety management. We are glad that our international
partners, including the World Bank, the European Bank
for Reconstruction and Development and the World
Health Organization, among others, have stood by our
side in realizing those accomplishments, and we look
forward to their cooperation and contribution.
Much, however, remains to be done, and many
improvements and projects remain to be implemented
that will require much more than our political will or
good legislation. I cannot but echo here the SecretaryGeneral’s conclusion that greater engagement by the
international community is needed to scale up funding
for road-safety activities, including through innovative
financing mechanisms.
In conclusion, I remind everyone that road safety
is not merely a privilege of modernity but is about
saving lives on a daily basis. I hope that the messages
expressed today in the Assembly will encourage
additional activities and partnerships.
Ms. Simonyan (Armenia): Armenia welcomes the
convening of today’s meeting and the introduction of
draft resolution A/72/L.48, entitled “Improving global
road safety”. We thank the main sponsor of the draft
resolution, the Russian Federation, for its leadership,
support and commitment to this important initiative.
Armenia has consistently co-sponsored this
landmark draft resolution, which we see as a blueprint
for action to prevent road accidents resulting in
injuries and deaths. As we embark on our new national
programme for road safety, we are determined to
translate the commitments of this draft resolution into
tangible, life-saving measures in Armenia. We are
pleased to note that resolution 70/260, as well the road
-safety-related Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs),
have been integrated into our national programme
for the next five years as a comprehensive policy
framework for improved legislation, enforcement and
road-safety compliance. The Decade of Action for Road
Safety has been a period of remarkable improvements in
Armenia. Much has been done to increase road safety,
including through the implementation and enforcement
of appropriate laws, as well as soft measures such
as awareness-raising and educational efforts, with
a special focus on rural populations, children and
18-10446

12/04/2018

youth. Partnerships involving local authorities have
contributed to safer and more resilient communities.
Despite
many
improvements,
road-traffic
accidents continue to remain a major public-health
and development concern. Developing countries
face particular types of challenges related to road
safety. The poor condition of roads and inadequate
infrastructure negatively affect trade from rural areas,
while connecting local populations to markets remains
a fundamental challenge for poverty eradication. There
is a need for additional coordinated efforts to ensure
safer road infrastructure, safer vehicles and safer road
users, and we support the call to intensify national,
regional and international collaboration to that end.
Armenia welcomes the establishment of the United
Nations Road Safety Trust Fund to support progress in
achieving road-safety-related SDGs and relevant global
targets.
We would like to convey our appreciation to the
Special Envoy for Road Safety for his leadership and
support in mobilizing political commitment and global
action. We also thank the United Nations Regional
Commissions and commend the role of the Economic
Commission for Europe in particular for its longstanding commitment to road safety instruments.
Mr. Sarmiento (Philippines): I thank you, Sir,
for giving me the floor to deliver this statement on
behalf of the Philippines in support of draft resolution
A/72/L.48, entitled “Improving global road safety”.
The Philippines expresses its solidarity with
Member States in reducing global deaths and injuries
caused by road crashes and providing access to safe,
effective and sustainable transport systems. Roadtraffic deaths and injuries not only adversely impact the
economy, but devalue human life and send a signal of
despair and hopelessness to the public in general.
The Philippines is addressing this issue. Everyone
is aware of the enormity of the problem. The Philippines
has enacted the following seven laws that address key
risk factors identified by the World Health Organization
in support of the adoption of evidence-based global
road-safety laws: first, the seat-belt use act of 1999,
requiring the use of seat belts; second, the motorcycle
helmet act of 2009, requiring the use of helmets; third,
the anti-drunken or drugged driving act of 2013,
prohibiting driving under the influence of alcohol, drugs
and other intoxicating substances; fourth, the children’s
safety on motorcycle act of 2015, generally prohibiting

A/72/PV.82

any person from driving a motorcycle with a child on
board; fifth, the anti-distracted-driving act, penalizing
distracted driving or the use of mobile or electronic
devices while driving; sixth, the road speed limiter act of
2016, addressing speeding by requiring the mandatory
installation of speed limiters; and, seventh, the law
extending the validity period of driver’s licenses, which
also mandates a strict driver’s examination to weed out
unqualified applicants. Moreover, the additional law
mandating the use of child-restraint systems has passed
the House of Representatives and will be deliberated
upon soon in the Senate.
We take note of the enhanced cooperation in the
international community and the support and assistance
of various international organizations such as the
World Health Organization and road-safety advocates
such as the Towards Zero Foundation and the Global
Network for Road Safety Legislators on this issue. Our
synergized efforts have enabled the Philippines to push
for those road-safety laws and meet the road-safetyrelated Sustainable Development Goals.
Despite those efforts, the number of road-traffic
crashes globally remains unacceptably high. We are
very concerned that, at the current rate of progress,
the goal of halving the number of global road-crash
deaths and injuries by 2020 may not be met. We in the
Philippines are also having a hard time meeting that
target. As of the end of 2016, road crashes were killing
an average of 31 people a day, making it a major cause of
death for our young people. This figure shows a 40 per
cent increase in the number of deaths as compared with
2006.
What is happening in the Philippines and globally
is demoralizing, but it is not for us to lose hope. The
majority of road accidents are preventable. Let us
strengthen our resolve to address this issue so that we
can prevent lives from being lost and individuals from
being injured. Many families have lost a member to a
tragic road accident that could have been prevented had
laws been observed or strictly implemented. We can do
something, and we will make our best effort to address
this issue.
We support the draft resolution contained in
document A/72/L.48, which, inter alia, recognizes the
United Nations Road Safety Trust Fund in supporting
progress towards achieving the road-safety targets,
invites national and international collaboration with a
view to meeting the set targets, and explores the need

18-1044611/27

A/72/PV.82

to define a new time frame for the reduction of roadcrash deaths and injuries. We take special note as well
of actions cited in the draft resolution that we believe
will address the road-safety issue at the cultural level.
This is what is needed in the Philippines: to create a
culture of road safety among our people.
The invitation to intensify national collaboration,
particularly in the area of law enforcement, would help
instil discipline and deter unsafe driving behaviour.
Promoting awareness through social marketing will
increase people’s desire to prioritize road safety on a
daily basis. In addition, multi-stakeholder collaboration
with academia and youth organizations could highlight
education and produce a new generation of commuters
that have due regard for road safety. More important,
remembering the victims and working with them and
their families would remind people of the names and
stories behind death-and-injury statistics and inspire
them to take appropriate actions to prevent such
accidents and unfavourable events from occurring
in future.
I wish to underscore that every life is precious, and
one death is too many. Through concerted efforts, we
continue to strengthen our resolve in this battle. We
put ourselves at the forefront, together with others,
to advance this goal in all these facets, politically,
economically, socially and even culturally, for the sake
of road safety. We reiterate our support for this draft
resolution and the continued implementation of the
global programme on improving road safety.
Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil): It is a pleasure
and an honour to be in this Hall today to talk about
road safety, an issue that is of relevance to all of us,
especially in the context of the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
At the outset, I want to highlight the importance of
the biennial General Assembly resolutions on improving
global road safety, which promote awareness of this
issue at the global level. In that regard, I would like to
commend the efforts made by the Russian delegation
in its role as the facilitator of the negotiation process
of the draft resolution to be adopted today (A/72/L.48).
According to the most recent World Health
Organization report on road safety, 1.3 million people
die annually as a result of road-traffic accidents,
90 per cent of which occur in developing countries.
Reversing this trend and achieving global reductions
in the number of deaths by traffic accidents is going
12/27

12/04/2018

to require stronger and more coordinated action from
all stakeholders. The establishment of the United
Nations Decade of Action for Road Safety 20112020 provided us with a meaningful framework for
international cooperation and action. I would like to
take note of the significant work done by the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Road Safety, who
has continuously advocated, together with Member
States and all relevant stakeholders, the promotion of
the cause around the world.
Brazil is a strong supporter of road safety in the
context of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
Therefore, we are pleased to see the issue addressed
in both SDG 3, on health, and SDG 11, on cities, in
the context of sustainable transport. Greater awareness,
stronger political will and increased investments will be
crucial for us to be able to achieve target 3.6, of halving
global deaths and injuries from road-traffic accidents
by 2020. I also wish to underscore the importance of
Target 11.2, which places a particular focus on the needs
of those in vulnerable situations, including women,
children, persons with disabilities and older persons,
all of whom tend to be disproportionately affected by
road-traffic injury and death.
Last year, Member States agreed upon 12 voluntary
global performance targets on road-safety risk factors
and service-delivery mechanisms to reduce road-traffic
fatalities and injuries. We encourage all countries to
work together with the World Health Organization in
the implementation of the targets and in developing
indicators to assess their progress and achievements so
as to maintain momentum and action towards national
road-safety efforts.
Over the years, Brazil has developed comprehensive
legislation to tackle the issue of road safety, in particular
with regard to the federal zero-tolerance law on drinking
and driving, which has reduced the number of accidents
attributed to excessive alcohol consumption. This
issue has been extensively dealt with by our National
Congress, in consultation with local Governments and
civil society. In that regard, I should like to announce
that in January the Brazilian Congress passed a law that
creates a national plan for reducing traffic injuries and
deaths. The main objective of the plan is to halve the
number of road traffic-related deaths in 10 years.
In a spirit of partnership and collaboration
among Governments, international organizations,
non-governmental organizations, academia and the
18-10446

12/04/2018

private sector, we must step up national action and
international cooperation in order to improve road
safety. In that connection, I congratulate the World
Health Organization and its partners for organizing the
twenty-fifth United Nations Road Safety Collaboration
meeting this week. As the host country for the second
Global Ministerial Conference on Road Safety, held in
2015, Brazil would like to commend the Government
of Sweden’s proposal to host the next meeting in 2020.
I also welcome the initiative taken by the SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations system in formulating a
road safety strategy to reduce the number of accidents,
casualties and injuries among United Nations personnel
and the civilian population in the host country.
Finally, I would like to point out that Brazil supports
the initiative of establishing a new decade of action
in 2020, as well as of convening a high-level General
Assembly meeting on road safety in upcoming years.
Please allow me to add a personal note to my
statement. I know how important this issue is, as I
lost a brother because he was not wearing his seatbelt.
Consequently, I strongly support this initiative.
Ms. Sehnalová (Czech Republic): I wish to align
my statement on behalf of the Czech Republic with the
statement of the observer of the European Union (EU)
delivered this morning.
Road safety is a major societal issue worldwide
which must be seriously addressed. From the European
point of view, the number of road fatalities decreased
from 31,500 cases in 2010 to 25,300 road deaths last
year, which was achieved thanks in part to the legislative
measures adopted at the European level.
Nevertheless, the number of people killed in
traffic accidents is still too high. One of the legislative
measures, with the potential to save around 2,500 lives
on European roads every year, is a deployment of the
public emergency call system, the so-called “eCall”.
In the case of a serious traffic accident, the system
automatically dials the European emergency number,
112, and calls the rescue service. That will significantly
reduce the arrival time of rescue services, by up to half
in rural areas and 40 per cent in cities.
In that context, let me mention that, as a Czech
member of the European Parliament, I have been
working on that legislation as the main rapporteur in
the European Parliament. Together with the EU member
States, the European Parliament adopted that important

A/72/PV.82

regulation in 2015, and it finally came into force at
the beginning of this month. The system will now be
installed in all new models of cars and light commercial
vehicles that fulfil the conditions to operate within
the EU.
An important role in the eCall system is played
by the Galileo Navigation System, which is operated
by the European Global Navigation Satellite System
Agency, based in Prague. The Czech Republic also
actively participated in the development and testing
of eCall and was among the biggest supporters of its
implementation. Although the deployment of the eCall
system was an important achievement, we need to
continue with our efforts in different areas to decrease
not only the number of road fatalities but also the
number of injured and seriously injured victims of road
accidents. The European Commission furthermore
committed to publishing another legislative instrument
to improve pedestrian protection, vehicle safety and
road infrastructure safety. That is likely to happen in
the upcoming weeks.
Despite all the legislative measures and
developments in road safety, too many people die or
are seriously injured on roads in the world every day.
We must persist in our efforts. That is why we consider
it of the utmost importance to set a strategic goal in
the next decade similar to what we have aimed for in
this decade — to halve the number of road deaths and
serious injuries by 2030 as compared with the 2020
level. A call for setting such a goal has already been
highlighted in a global challenge called the Manifesto
#4RoadSafety, issued by the Global Network for Road
Safety Legislators. I am personally very honoured to
speak here as a member of the Network. The Manifesto
#4RoadSafety calls on members of all Parliaments
worldwide to take measures to substantially reduce
the number of road deaths, and I would like to bring
it to the attention of the members of the Assembly and
encourage them to adopt the proposed measures,
We also very much welcome the proposed United
Nations Road Safety Trust Fund. We believe that it
could contribute to achieving the strategic goal of
reducing the number of road accidents and serve as an
effective measure to finance important projects that
will help to improve road safety all around the globe.
We would like to urge everyone to strengthen
efforts to reduce the number of road accident victims
worldwide. The measures must be more intense and

18-1044613/27

A/72/PV.82

targeted, and they must also effectively enforce the
existing rules aimed at combating the most risky
behaviour on the road. Indeed, our roads can be safer.
Mr. Poudel Chhetri (Nepal): It is alarming to note
that road accidents are responsible for the deaths of
more than 1.3 million people each year and that it is the
tenth leading cause of death worldwide, especially of
youth. Those figures are self-explanatory; we must take
urgent action to reduce accidents. For that reason, we
must work together to reduce accidents through various
initiatives that ensure road safety and thereby make
progress towards achieving Sustainable Development
Goal 3, on halving the number of accidents by 2020.
Nepal attaches great importance to all global road
safety initiatives. We thank the Russian Federation
for its leadership on, and support for, draft resolution
A/72/L.48, entitled “Improving global road safety”,
to be adopted today. I also take this opportunity to
thank the Deputy Secretary-General for presenting the
report of the World Health Organization (see A/72/359)
under this agenda item, and to appreciate the role of
the World Health Organization in preparing the report
by incorporating all relevant information to that effect.
We all want our roads to be safe. Many factors
contribute to road safety. One thing that we should be clear
on, therefore, is that we should effectively implement
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development with
a view to achieving holistic development. We should
also make the vision of the Decade of Action for Road
Safety 2011-2020 a reality, including by implementing
all the recommendations of the Global Ministerial
Conference on Road Safety, including the one Brazil
held last year, as well as the full implementation of the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction and the
New Urban Agenda of Habitat III, which was adopted
in Quito.
It is also important to highlight that the
recommendations of the Global Status Report on Road
Safety 2015 should underline our collective action
towards achieving all the goals and targets related
to road safety. That demands more collaboration
and partnerships from all stakeholders. Our actions
also need to be guided by the shared commitments
agreed in the resolutions that we have adopted in the
General Assembly.
Nepal is a mountainous country, more than 85 per
cent of which is covered either by mountains or by
hills. The construction and maintenance of roads in that
14/27

12/04/2018

difficult terrain are extremely demanding. That has
made our transportation not only dangerous but also
challenging and costly. The high risk of natural disasters
in the country has further added to the problems. The
result is that in Nepal accidents frequently occur, and
the number of fatalities is also increasing. In a period
of just one year, from July 2016 to June 2017, there were
5,530 accidents, of which 201 were serious. Twenty
years ago, the total number of accidents was only 2,390.
Those figures exclude Nepalese nationals who died in
traffic accidents abroad.
The Government’s actions are focused on
minimizing or eliminating all key risk factors of
accidents, such as controlling the problem of speeding
through various legal provisions, improving road
traffic conditions, making drivers more responsible
with regard to the use of alcohol and other substances,
enforcing all safety regulations and taking other
measures, as required. Raising road safety awareness
through education, orientations and training is also an
ongoing activity.
Finally, I wish to highlight the fact that challenges
remain, and we need to work collectively towards
addressing them. Nepal therefore focuses on effectively
addressing the key gaps and challenges pointed out in
the report of the Secretary-General, in particular with
regard to better informing our decisions through data,
the need for greater emphasis on meeting the goals of
the Decade of Action for Road Safety, the mobilization
of more funds, resources and partnerships, treating
road safety holistically and scaling up action on all
areas of road safety.
In order to ensure road safety, Nepal stands ready
to work collectively for the desired results. In that
regard, we seek even greater collaboration with all road
safety stakeholders.
Ms. Giron (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf
of Spain, I would like to express our gratitude for this
memorable moment in the adoption of the new draft
resolution on improving global road safety (A/72/L.48)
in the context of the Millennium Development Goals
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
with the specific inclusion, under target 3.6, of halving
the rate of road traffic accidents by 2020. The draft
resolution also seeks to achieve increased road mobility
that is safer, more inclusive and more sustainable and
will reach everyone by the year 2030, which will allow
18-10446

12/04/2018

A/72/PV.82

for the greater economic development of nations and
improved social well-being for their citizens.

cooperation and inter-institutional support of other
State, regional and municipal authorities.

Given that the Decade of Action for Road Safety was
adopted in 2010 (resolution 64/255), it would be fitting
that we ask ourselves what we have learned that will
enable us to continue to make progress towards safer
road mobility. Allow me to briefly mention the situation
of road safety in Spain, whose significant improvement
is closely linked to our active participation in and
cooperation with the United Nations and the World
Health Organization in particular, as well as other
international, multilateral and regional organizations
and entities that work to improve global road safety.

Citizens must be an integral part of the process of
improving road traffic safety in their country. To that
end, there must be a consultative and participatory body
for all citizens, in particular victims and their families.
In addition, it is necessary to obtain reliable road data
for decision-making, to continuously update road safety
regulations and to focus efforts on vulnerable users.
There must also be training and road safety education
for all Government bodies and officials involved in
road safety, as well as legal consideration of technology
that has a positive impact on reducing the number of
road accidents by fostering research and achieving
agreements and accords among Governments and
public and private entities that cooperate on promoting
measures to improve road safety.

We in Spain have a population of 46 million
inhabitants, a floating tourist population that exceeded
82 million people in 2017, a census of 28 million
drivers and 33 million registered vehicles. In the year
1960, the number of road traffic deaths was 1,300,
with 1 million registered vehicles. The highest number
of road traffic deaths recorded in Spain dates back to
1989, when 5,940 people died in road accidents. In the
period between 2004 and 2014, there was a cumulative
decrease of 62.5 per cent in the road accident rate.
In 2016, with the much greater and better supported
mobility of both resident drivers and tourists and an
exponential increase in mobility, the number decreased
to 1,810 deaths and 9,755 people injured and requiring
hospitalization. However, efforts to prevent stagnation
in the reduction or an upward trend continue. Spain
is working on amending the law on road safety and
revising the national strategy, as well as a new State
strategic plan for bicycles and the implementation of a
connected vehicle platform.

In conclusion, we would like to say that it is
crucial to share experiences and good practices among
countries, with the ultimate aim of having better road
security. And as an example of good practice, next
week we will celebrate the seventh General Assembly
of the Ibero-American Road Safety Observatory. That
is an example of regional commitment to security and
road mobility, and this important draft resolution will
certainly be of great help.
Mr. Bolaji (Nigeria): I wish to thank the President
of the General Assembly for convening the 82nd plenary
meeting to consider the draft resolution on improving
global road safety (A/72/L.48).

First, we want to say that it is possible and that the
proposed results can be achieved. The most effective
way is to coordinate joint actions of the broadest possible
scope both nationally and in particular internationally.
The political commitment to including the promotion of
road safety in political agendas is vital.

Nigeria welcomes the imminent adoption of the
draft resolution by consensus, and we acknowledge the
commitment of and the leading role played by the Mission
of the Russian Federation in this process. We welcome
the work being done by the World Health Organization,
the United Nations regional commissions, the United
Nations Road Safety Collaboration, regional economic
commissions and national road safety commissions
in establishing, implementing and monitoring various
aspects of the Global Plan for the Decade of Action for
Road Safety 2011-2020.

Countries must have a specific national organization
for implementing Government policy on road safety
and its strategy. In Spain, the Directorate General for
Traffic devotes a large proportion of its actual capacity
to ensuring the effectiveness of that task, with the the

My delegation strongly welcomes and supports the
establishment of the United Nations Road Safety Trust
Fund, which is being launched today. We would also
like to commend the Secretary-General for his report
(see A/72/369) on the theme of the draft resolution.

Today, at a moment of such significance for global
road safety, with this draft resolution, we would like
to share the lessons learned in Spain on improving
road safety.

18-1044615/27

A/72/PV.82

According to recent data, every year around
1,000,350 people are killed, and around 50 million are
injured in road traffic crashes, which makes it one of
the most pressing emergencies and development issues
of our time. Every day, 500 children lose their lives
because of road crashes, and road accidents remain
the leading cause of death of young people globally.
At this time, if we are to achieve target 3.6 of the
Sustainable Development Goals by 2020, the number
of global deaths and injuries from road accidents must
be reduced.
While road traffic and road safety are recognized
as a key Sustainable Development Goal, inadequate
funding, bad road networks, lack of awareness, as
well as an absence of emergency health-care services
have remained major challenges in keeping with our
commitment to reduce road traffic deaths by 2020.
Nigeria has intensified efforts in tackling these
challenges by mainstreaming the work of the National
Road Safety Commission into State policies, with a
particular focus on rural transport safety, to ensure
that no one is left behind. In October 2017, Nigeria
also approved a road trust fund that is expected to
accelerate delivery of significant construction of safe
roads and road infrastructure, especially in rural
areas and industrial clusters affected by bad roads. In
2018 an estimated $37 million was earmarked for the
construction of those roads. With around $70 million
of grant funding per year over the coming decade,
the fund will save 5 million lives and prevent about
50 million serious injuries in low- and medium-income
countries. Nigeria not only supports the trust fund, but
anxiously looks forward to being the beneficiary of the
envisaged financial support, which is necessary to tilt
our ongoing intervention efforts to meet the Sustainable
Development Goal of reducing fatalities by 50 per cent.
Once again, Nigeria welcomes the launching of
and pledges its support for the trust fund as a vehicle
to leverage additional funding, which I believe will
strengthen the Federal Road Safety Corps in Nigeria
and yield benefits worldwide.
Mr. Mero (United Republic of Tanzania): My
delegation appreciates the inclusion of road safety on
the global agenda of General Assembly, in particular
the road-safety-specific target among the Sustainable
Development Goal Targets. We thank the Russian
Federation for facilitating the draft resolution before us
(A/72/L.48).
16/27

12/04/2018

Injuries represent a significant cause of morbidity
and mortality worldwide. Road traffic crashes account
for a significant proportion of those injuries. Tanzania
is among the countries with high rates of road traffic
crashes. Road traffic injuries in Tanzania are an
important public-health problem, predominantly among
the adult male population, due principally to motorcycle
crashes. It is therefore important to reinforce preventive
measures at the pre-hospital emergency services.
Tanzania is cognizant of the key factors of road
accidents, including, among others, high-speed driving,
driving while intoxicated and failing to use motorcycle
helmets, seat belts and child restraints. Those factors
must be addressed worldwide by improving regulations
and enforcing their implementation. However, for
developing countries, the quality of some roads as well
as vehicles may also contribute to the problem.
Recalling that the Sustainable Development Goals
and targets are integrated and indivisible and balance
the three dimensions of sustainable development
and points to the importance of reach the road safety
targets, such as target 3.6, which aims to halve by 2020
the number of global deaths and injuries resulting from
road traffic accidents, and also target 11. 2, which aims
to provide by 2030 access to safe, affordable, accessible
and sustainable transport systems for all, as well as
improving road safety. The importance of the 12 targets
in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals cannot
be overemphasized.
We have to establish a comprehensive national road
safety action plan with time-bound targets by 2020;
accede to one or more of the core United Nations legal
road safety instruments by 2030; enact regulations for
driving time and rest periods for professional drivers;
and comply with international regulations. Most
importantly, legislators need to support and push these
efforts. The concerted efforts of all stakeholders and the
people in general is needed. In our region, legislators
have formed various networks of parliamentarians for
the purpose of creating and initiating good strategic
conditions and reducing crashing. Now, we are glad
that we are seeing a light at the end of the tunnel, as the
number of accidents is being reduced.
Bearing in mind that road accidents reduce the
workforce, the Government undertook a number of
initiatives and interventions to strengthen road safety
management in Tanzania. Goals include strengthening
the institutional framework and organization of road
18-10446

12/04/2018

safety; improving road safety legislation, strategy and
policies; improving accident data and data collection,
and increasing access to data, including in-depth
accident investigations; improving regulations of road
freight and passenger transport; securing funding
from different sources; promoting monitoring and
evaluation; improving road safety research; introducing
public-awareness campaigns concerning road safety
rules; and teaching road safety in primary schools.
Our efforts are yielding results. According to traffic
statistics in Tanzania in 2017, reports show a 6.1 per
cent reduction in deaths and a 5.1 per cent decline in
injured persons — compared with 2016.
Pre-hospital emergency care to ensure that severely
injured patients arrive at hospitals as soon as possible is
crucial. The Government considers it a priority, though
shortages of emergency care equipment due to a lack of
funds remain a challenge.
My delegation also recognizes and appreciates the
work of the World Health Organization (WHO), the
coordinator of road safety for the United Nations system.
We thank the WHO for its regular preparation of the
Global Status Report on Road Safety, which it brings
to our countries’ attention. The reports have been an
eye-opener to our policymakers and have helped us to
improve our road safety. We take note that road traffic
crashes constitute the tenth leading cause of death and
are responsible for more than l.3 million deaths among
15-to-29-year-olds and between 20 to 50 million fatal
injuries globally. This is a cause for concern.
In conclusion, my delegation fully supports the
draft resolution on improving global road safety
(A/72/L.48), and we will sponsor it.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the International Federation of Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies.
Ms. Ghukasyan: I thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to provide this brief statement on behalf
of the International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies (IFRC) and its 190 national Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies.
The IFRC is the largest humanitarian network in the
world, whose mandate is to prevent and alleviate human
suffering in all its forms. In that context, it was one
of the first international organizations to call attention
to the unspeakable pain and suffering caused by road
crashes in its World Disasters Report 1998. Since then,

A/72/PV.82

our National Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
have worked tirelessly to address this humanitarian
disaster through first-aid services and trainings, and
by working with their authorities to develop robust,
evidence-based road safety laws and policies.
They are supported in this work by our hosted
programme, the Global Road Safety Partnership, which
works to establish partnerships with Government,
private-sector and civil-society organizations to
enhance road safety, particularly in lower- and
middle-income countries where the needs are greatest.
Using a multisectoral approach to improving global
road safety, the Global Road Safety Partnership is
currently operating in more than 40 countries, working
in the areas of advocating for stronger road safety laws
and policies, improving enforcement capacity and
supporting interventions to enhance child road safety.
Road safety is an issue that is easy to overlook. Two
decades ago, our World Disasters Report called it “a
silent humanitarian crisis” because even though it has
touched nearly every one of us in this Hall, few people
understand the sheer magnitude of the problem or that
it is the tenth leading cause of death globally, with
1.34 million people killed every year on the world’s
roads. In that respect, the adoption eight years ago
of resolution 64/255, proclaiming the United Nations
Decade of Action on Road Safety 2011-2020, and the
subsequent creation of the United Nations Road Safety
Collaboration were brave, bold steps by the Assembly.
However, we are nearing the end of the Decade
and must ask ourselves some difficult questions about
where we are today and whether we have done enough
to reduce the catastrophic impact of road trauma on
individuals, families, communities and nations. While
it is true that road deaths have stabilized in relation to
population increases since the beginning of the Decade,
it is also true that they have continued to increase in
absolute terms, from 1.28 million in 2010 to 1.34 million
in 2015, according to World Health Organization
(WHO) global health estimates.
But beyond the overall figures is another story
about who is being left behind. As recognized in this
year’s draft resolution on improving global road safety
(A/72/L.48), road traffic deaths and injuries remain a
social equity issue in that the road trauma burden is
experienced disproportionately across age and gender
divides and among the most vulnerable. In that regard,
we draw the Assembly’s attention to the fact that road

18-1044617/27

A/72/PV.82

crashes remain the leading cause of death among those
aged 15 to 29 years and can thus be considered a disease
of the young. Among youth, boys face approximately
twice the risk of harm as girls, and children living with
financial disadvantages are also at dramatically higher
risk. The associated burden placed on communities
means that there has not yet been sufficient progress.
So much remains to be done. In that regard, we
welcome the decision by Member States to hold a third
high-level global conference on road safety in Sweden
in 2020 to bring leaders together again to continue to
work at the highest level in promoting road safety for
all citizens. Indeed, political will remains a vital and
critical necessity, and we must be very careful not to let
our attention flag.
However, meaningful action does not have to
wait until the end of the decade. There are steps that
Governments can and should take immediately to
enhance road safety. We encourage Member States to
implement the comprehensive range of evidence-based
interventions contained in the WHO Save LIVES
technical package, and to incorporate them into
their national road safety strategies. In particular,
we encourage the effective enforcement of strong,
comprehensive laws and urge all Governments
to actively work to strengthen legislation and to
implement sustained resourcing of a robust enforcement
programme. Such activity can offer immediate and
affordable benefits if resources are correctly prioritized
and focused.
For its part, the IFRC, together with our national
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies and the Global
Road Safety Partnership, will continue to work with all
Member States and the relevant organizations to realize
the goals of this draft resolution, and we look forward
to making a meaningful contribution to the 2020
Ministerial Conference on Road Safety in Sweden.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/72/L.48, entitled “Improving global road
safety”. I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
18/27

12/04/2018

the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/72/L.48: Andorra,
Angola, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde,
Canada, Chad, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar,
Palau, the Philippines, Qatar, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the Sudan, the
Syrian Arab Republic, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Turkey, Uganda, the United Republic of
Tanzania, Uzbekistan and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/72/L.48?
Draft resolution A/72/L.48
(resolution 72/271).

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
the speaker in explanation of position, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
United States of America.
Mr. Bagwell (United States of America): The
United States joined other member States today in
adopting resolution 72/271, on global road safety.
However, the United States finds it necessary to
disassociate from agreement with paragraphs 5, 6,
9, 17, 21, 22 and 24. We also strongly maintain that,
while the objective of resolution 72/271 may be well
intentioned, we continue to question the need for it
given the extreme particularity of local and national
issues related to road safety.
We take this opportunity, as we have done on other
occasions, to make important points of clarification on
language related to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. We underscore that the 2030 Agenda
is non-binding, does not create or affect rights or
obligations under international law, and does not create
any new financial commitments.
The United States recognizes the 2030 Agenda
as a global framework for sustainable development
that can help countries work towards global peace and
prosperity. We applaud the call for shared responsibility,
including national responsibility, in the 2030 Agenda
18-10446

12/04/2018

A/72/PV.82

and emphasize that all countries have a role to play in
achieving its vision. The 2030 Agenda recognizes that
each country must work towards implementation in
accordance with its own national policies and priorities.
The United States understands that paragraph 18 of
the 2030 Agenda calls for countries to implement the
Agenda in a manner that is consistent with the rights
and obligations of States under international law.

in some cases, only a small number of United Nations
Members are contracting parties and which have been
used, in some cases, by contracting parties to pursue
trade policy objectives that are not always consistent
with WTO obligations. In particular, the United States
has strong concerns about the use of the statement to
encourage members to join those agreements.

We also highlight our mutual recognition in
paragraph 58 of the 2030 Agenda that implementation
must respect and be without prejudice to the independent
mandates of other processes and institutions, including
negotiations. It does not prejudge or serve as a
precedent for decisions and actions under way in other
forums. For example, the Agenda does not represent a
commitment to provide new market access for goods
or services, and does not interpret or alter any World
Trade Organization (WTO) agreement or decision,
including the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property.

The United States disassociates from agreement
on paragraphs 9, 17, 21, 22 and 24. The United States
objects to the specific reference to United Nations
standards, as it gives the appearance that there is
somehow a preferred United Nations-approved type
of standard, when in fact the standards are developed
in a regional body and in a way that is not consistent
with the WTO definition of international standards.
Specific mention of a particular type of standard is also
not necessary for the objective of those paragraphs, or
indeed this resolution, which is to advocate for road
safety. A neutral formulation advocating the adoption
of vehicle safety regulations for all new vehicles should
be adequate for the purpose and intent of this statement.

With regard to the twentieth preambular paragraph,
the United States has concerns about the inclusion
of the phrase “technical standards” in this type of
document. Standards and technical regulations have
specific meanings within the context of the World
Trade Organization, and there are WTO commitments
related to those terms. The United States believes that
the use of the term “technical standards” in the text,
without further explanation, could lead to confusion
with regard to which standards are being referenced
and with regard to whether such standards conform to
the definitions and the commitments members have
taken under the WTO.
Also, in paragraph 3, we want to note a concern
regarding the language concerning consensual approval
and encouraging the adoption and use of indicators. We
would not want those phrases to imply that the World
Health Organization (WHO) targets and indicators
were approved by all WHO member States, or that we
would encourage the adoption of both the targets and
indicators. This year’s meeting to discuss the indicators
did not reach final consensus, and no firm plans exist to
continue the discussion in an open forum.
The United States disassociates from agreement on
paragraphs 5 and 6. The United States objects to the
specific reference to, and praise for, agreements that, in
many of the reference cases, were undertaken pursuant
to a regional United Nations sub-organization to which,

Finally, the United States maintains that national
Governments are best positioned to balance the safety
and other factors that inform their adoption of standards
and regulations, and we do not support any references
or attempts to create a United Nations standard.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 12?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: In order for the Assembly
to take action on draft resolution A/72/L.43, it will be
necessary to reopen consideration of the item.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen its consideration of agenda item 11?
It was so decided.

18-1044619/27

A/72/PV.82

Agenda item 11 (continued)
Sport for development and peace: building a
peaceful and better world through sport and the
Olympic ideal
Draft resolution (A/72/L.43)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Turkmenistan to introduce draft
resolution A/72/L.43.
Mrs. Ataeva (Turkmenistan): On behalf of
the delegation of Turkmenistan, allow me to thank
all delegations for their constructive and fruitful
negotiations, as a result of which the substantial draft
resolution A/72/L.43, on World Bicycle Day, was
drawn up.
The global Goals stipulated in the Sustainable
Development Goals seek to realize the human rights
of all. Cycling is already delivering on these goals
worldwide, which is a good reason to invest more in
cycling. Making transportation more sustainable is of
critical importance for humankind and the planet.
The bicycle plays a major role in personal mobility
around the world. Given the convenience, health
benefits and affordability of bicycles, they could
provide a far greater proportion of urban passenger
transportation, helping to reduce energy use and carbon
dioxide emissions worldwide. An estimated 1 billion
people ride bicycles every day, for transport, recreation
and sport.
As we all know, the bicycle is a mode of transport
that has served humankind for two centuries and is
also used in sport. In this connection, I would note
that transport and sport are one of the key directions
of the policy of Turkmenistan. Noting the importance
of sport as an important factor in ensuring sustainable
development, our country reaffirms its firm commitment
to strengthening international sports cooperation
aimed at implementing the principles of development
and peace, empowering people and addressing health,
education, social integration and other issues.
In this regard, Turkmenistan, as a member of the
Group of Friends of Sport for Development and Peace,
as well as one of the initial countries to promote
transport, decided to combine transport and sport in the
form of the bicycle in this draft resolution.
A recent example of the promotion of bicycling in
Turkmenistan was the cycling event held on 7 April in
20/27

12/04/2018

Ashgabat. On that day, together with the international
community, Turkmenistan widely celebrated World
Health Day. A mass cycling race, as well as numerous
other sports activities involving the whole country and
uniting thousands of people around the idea of a healthy
lifestyle, were scheduled for that date.
The primary purpose of the establishment of
World Bicycle Day is to celebrate, on an annual basis,
the bicycle, which has been in use for two centuries.
One of the secondary goals is the global unification of
bicycle enthusiasts’ efforts to present the role of cycling
as a solution to worldwide problems in such areas as
transportation, pollution, climate change, poverty,
health and education, with a common aim and under
the leadership of the United Nations. Creating a United
Nations-endorsed World Bicycle Day would help to
unite the diverse civil and citizen-led initiatives into a
global undertaking.
Many noteworthy days of recognition are
celebrated by the United Nations, all of which highlight
meaningful efforts and accomplishments. The bicycle,
as a loyal instrument of humankind, deserves a day of
recognition, too.
We express our gratitude to those delegations
that sponsored the draft resolution and look
forward to a consensus on the adoption of the draft
under consideration.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/72/L.43, entitled
“World Bicycle Day”. The draft resolution has closed
for e-sponsorship.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed therein, the
following countries have also become sponsors of draft
resolution A/72/L.43: Afghanistan, Angola, Argentina,
Australia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bhutan,
Burkina Faso, Canada, Chad, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Cuba, Egypt, Estonia, Honduras, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Ireland, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Maldives, Monaco, Morocco, Myanmar,
the Netherlands, Pakistan, Palau, Peru, Qatar, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Serbia, Singapore, Sri Lanka,
18-10446

12/04/2018

A/72/PV.82

the Sudan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Tunisia, Uzbekistan and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/72/L.43?
Draft resolution A/72/L.43
(resolution 72/272).

was

adopted

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 11?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft decision (A/72/L.47)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft decision A/72/L.47, entitled “Theme
and sub-themes of the second High-level United Nations
Conference on South-South Cooperation”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft decision A/72/L.47?
Draft decision A /72/L .47
(decision 72/554).

wa s

adopted

Development: challenges and opportunities”, upon
the recommendation of the Secretary-General. SouthSouth cooperation is a manifestation of solidarity
among the peoples and the countries of the South that
contributes to their national well-being, their national
and collective self-reliance, and the attainment of the
internationally agreed development goals.
Furthermore, as laid out in the Nairobi outcome
document of the High-level Conference on SouthSouth Cooperation, South-South cooperation and its
agenda have to be set by countries of the South and
should continue to be guided by the principles of
respect for national sovereignty, national ownership
and independence, equality, non-conditionality,
non-interference in domestic affairs and mutual
benefit. South-South cooperation offers opportunities
to strengthen international cooperation to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals. Nevertheless, let me
be clear in reiterating that South-South cooperation is
not a substitute for, but rather a complement to, NorthSouth cooperation.
The Group of 77 and China would also like to take
this opportunity to reiterate Member States’ request
through resolution 72/237 for the Joint Inspection Unit
to present, by the end of the seventy-second session
of the General Assembly, a progress report on its
recommendations to the United Nations development
system on implementing measures to further strengthen
the United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation.

At the outset, allow me to express my appreciation
on behalf of the Group to President Lajčák for having
convened the current meeting and to congratulate us
all for having adopted the decision on the theme and
sub-themes of the second High-level United Nations
Conference on South-South Cooperation, to be held in
Argentina from 20 to 22 March 2019.

Lastly, I would like to express our appreciation
to the Permanent Representative of Uganda for
his leadership role as the Chair of the High-level
Committee on South-South Cooperation, as well as the
other members of the Bureau. Let me also commend the
continued commitment of Argentina to strengthening
South-South cooperation. Forty years ago, Argentina
hosted the first United Nations Conference on Technical
Cooperation among Developing Countries. Next year,
Argentina will organize the second High-level United
Nations Conference on South-South Cooperation. We
have high expectations that the upcoming Conference
will step up South-South cooperation based on the
Buenos Aires Plan of Action and the Nairobi outcome
document of the first High-level Conference on SouthSouth Cooperation.

In this regard, we welcome the overarching theme
of the “Role of South-South cooperation and the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable

Mr. Bagwell (United States of America): The United
States strongly supports South-South and triangular
cooperation. Although we joined the consensus on the

The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of position, may I remind
delegations that explanations of position are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. El Ashmawy (Egypt): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China.

18-1044621/27

A/72/PV.82

theme and sub-themes of the High-level Conference on
South-South Cooperation to be held in Buenos Aires in
2019, we take this opportunity to reiterate our call for
transparency and consultative processes going forward.
We look forward to an open and transparent negotiation
on the draft outcome document in lieu of a simultaneous
Second Committee draft resolution. To that end, we
expect a detailed timeline for all negotiations and
consultations leading up to the conference, which we
understand remains in development.
Lastly, although we note the Secretary-General
background paper, we strongly oppose the use of
multilateral platforms to elevate bilateral initiatives
or programmes that promote an individual country’s
economic and political policies or agendas. It is
one thing for Member States to do their utmost to
deconflict their national parties or policies with
multilateral instruments. It is another thing, and
entirely inappropriate, for a Member State to attempt to
use United Nations forums to glorify its current leader’s
political musings and lend a veneer of legitimacy to
mercantilist economic initiatives. The purpose of SouthSouth cooperation should be genuine partnership that
leads to sustainable development, not the asymmetrical
export of one country’s excess capacity into another in
an exploitative neocolonial fashion.

12/04/2018

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 14.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
at its 72nd plenary meeting, on 15 September 2017, the
General Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 19 to
the Second Committee. In order to enable the General
Assembly to take action expeditiously on the document
before it, may I take it that the Assembly wishes to
consider agenda item 19 directly in plenary meeting
and proceed immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 19 (continued)
Sustainable development
Draft resolution (A/72/L.42)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Turkmenistan to introduce draft
resolution A/72/L.42.

Mrs. Pape (European Union): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union and its member
States.

Mrs. Ataeva (Turkmenistan): I have the honour
to introduce draft resolution A/72/L.42, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea”. We are
pleased to underscore the broad interregional support
for this draft resolution. During the negotiations
process on the text of the draft resolution, we made
every effort to maintain a constructive atmosphere and
achieve consensus.

We welcome the background note of the SecretaryGeneral on the preparatory process for the second
High-level Conference on South-South Cooperation,
to be held in Buenos Aires in March 2019, as well as
decision 72/554, adopted today. We look forward to
a timely, open, inclusive and transparent negotiation
process for the draft outcome document of the Highlevel Conference, which should begin no later than
November. In that context, we also suggest replacing
the annual Second Committee draft resolution on
South-South cooperation in 2018 with a draft decision
referring to the Conference draft outcome document
and the preparations.

The name “Aral Sea” is today associated with an
ecological disaster in the Central Asian region. The
Aral Sea was formerly the fourth-largest lake in the
world before it began to shrink. There were ports and
fish-processing factories, and fishing fleets navigated
off its coasts. But, since the 1960s, its sea level and
water volume have rapidly declined owing to the lack of
water from the its main feeder rivers. Over the past 50
to 55 years, the volume of water in the sea has decreased
more than 15-fold. Its level has decreased by 29 metres,
and 5.5 million hectares of salt sand have formed on its
surface. That has had a negative impact on the ecology,
the flora and fauna and the lives of people of the region.

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position.
We will now hear statements following the adoption
of decision 72/554.
I give the floor to the observer of the European Union.

22/27

18-10446

12/04/2018

A/72/PV.82

The menacing impact of the Aral catastrophe has
been noted throughout the world today. According to
international experts, poisonous salts from the Aral
Sea region are present in various areas, such as off the
coast of Antarctica, on the glaciers of Greenland, in the
forests of Norway and in many other parts of the world.
Now, tragically, it is clear that making the Aral Sea
whole again is already impossible. The most important
task of our time is to reduce the destructive impact of
the Aral Sea crisis on the environment and the survival
of millions of people living in the Aral Sea basin.

I give the
the Secretariat.

In 1993, the Heads of State of Central Asia
established the International Fund for Saving the Aral
Sea, with the aim of overcoming the ecological crisis and
improving the social and economic situation in the Aral
Sea basin, recognized by the international community as
one of the biggest catastrophes of the twentieth century.
With draft resolution A/72/L.42, the sponsor countries
want to draw the attention of the States Members of
the United Nations to the fact that, without the support
and assistance of international financial institutions
and developed countries, and without the leading role
of the United Nations, it will be impossible to solve this
problem. The draft resolution takes into account the
fact that the negative humanitarian, environmental and
social economic consequences of the Aral Sea basin
tragedy go well beyond the region and are of global
concern. In that regard, the draft resolution reaffirms
that achieving international cooperation in solving
international problems of an ecological, economic,
social and humanitarian nature is one of the purposes
of the United Nations. We are convinced that this draft
resolution will provide increased opportunities for
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea.

The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to adopt draft resolution A/72/L.42?

In conclusion, we express our hope that this
important draft resolution will be adopted by consensus.
We call on all countries to join the sponsors in
supporting draft resolution A/72/L.42, which will give
an additional impetus to our common efforts. I would
also like to take this opportunity to thank the countries
that have already sponsored the draft solution.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/72/L.42, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea”. The draft
resolution is now closed for e-sponsorship.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution,
in addition to the delegations listed in document
A/72/L.42, the following countries have also become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Austria, Azerbaijan,
China, Ecuador, Gabon, Georgia, Latvia, the Republic
of Moldova, the Russian Federation, South Africa
and Turkey.

Draft resolution A/72/L.42
(resolution 72/273).

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of position, I would like
to remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mrs. Moldoisaeva (Kyrgyzstan) (spoke in Russian):
In 2016, the Kyrgyz Republic adopted a decision to freeze
its participation in the International Fund for Saving
the Aral Sea (IFAS) and its related bodies because of
their ineffectiveness and owing to expectations that
they would soon be subject to amendment and reform.
However, the negotiations held among experts in the
region led nowhere, and therefore it was decided that
IFAS reform should occur through negotiations among
all its members and include experts from all member
countries, including those that had managed the Fund.
All the States of Central Asia, including the Kyrgyz
Republic, took part in the negotiations. It is our hope
that the Central Asian countries will soon come to
an agreement on how to reform the Fund in order to
improve its effectiveness, taking into account the
various interests and serious concerns of all Central
Asian States.
Mr. Salarzai (Afghanistan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Permanent Mission of Turkmenistan
for its leadership in submitting the draft for resolution
72/273 and for working towards consensus for its
adoption. In expressing our support for the resolution
on the strengthening of the cooperation between the
United Nations and International Fund for Saving the
Aral Sea, we would like to highlight a few points.

18-1044623/27

A/72/PV.82

12/04/2018

First, Afghanistan attaches great importance to the
fostering and strengthening of regional cooperation
in all its forms. In that regard, we see common water
resources as elements in providing platforms for
constructive engagement and cooperation. In using
common water resources, Afghanistan believes in
the principles of comprehensive and sustainable
management. Finally, as an observer State in the
International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea, Afghanistan
assures the Assembly of its continued engagement and
positive role in fostering international cooperation to
address the challenges faced by the Aral Sea.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 19.
Agenda item 117 (continued)
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium
Summit
Draft resolution (A/72/L.46)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/72/L.46, entitled “Scope,
modalities, format and organization of the third highlevel meeting of the General Assembly on the Prevention
and Control of Non-Communicable Diseases”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/72/L.46?
Draft resolution A/72/L.46
(resolution 72/274).

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of position, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Bagwell (United States of America): The United
States supports the adoption of the modalities resolution
on the prevention and control of non-communicable
diseases (NCDs) (resolution 72/274). We appreciate
all of the work of the resolution’s facilitators, Italy
and Uruguay. We also thank Uruguay for convening
and leading the World Health Organization Global
Conference on Non-Communicable Diseases, with
Chairs Finland and Russia, and the effort spent
developing its outcome document, which we consider
to be a snapshot of the discussions at that time on
non-communicable diseases.
24/27

There is continued need for global urgency to
address non-communicable diseases as the major
cause of premature death worldwide and the cause of
60 per cent of the global disease burden. There is a
significant body of work to underpin the national and
international action to reduce the overall mortality due
to non-communicable diseases and on a range of riskreducing actions and control measures.
We look forward to sharing the United States’
experience in addressing NCDs and contributing to
advancing the NCD agenda at the high-level meeting,
which presents an important opportunity to take stock
of progress and challenges, encourage collaboration
across sectors and stakeholders and accelerate efforts
to prevent and address NCDs.
The high-level meeting’s theme — “Scaling up
multi-stakeholder and multisectoral responses to the
prevention and control of non-communicable diseases,
in the context of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development” — rightly emphasizes the critical need
to work together across disciplines and stakeholders to
make significant sustained progress towards the goal of
reducing by one third by 2030 the premature mortality
from NCDs through prevention and treatment, as well
as promote mental health and well-being.
There is a tremendous amount of positive work
being done in all sectors to address NCDs, and the
high-level meeting provides a platform to amplify those
initiatives that are most effective in helping Member
States reach our 2030 Agenda. The United States
welcomes the opportunity to share our experiences in
addressing NCDs and looks forward to the moment
when we can mobilize the resources of academia,
civil society and the private sector in working towards
real and practical solutions that save the lives of those
suffering from NCDs.
We look forward to the contribution of the
interactive hearing that will allow all stakeholders an
opportunity to offer innovative approaches for progress
on the prevention and control of NCDs. The United
States would like to share the following observations
and concerns regarding the report of the SecretaryGeneral (A/72/662) on progress on the prevention and
control of NCDs, and on the report of the DirectorGeneral of the World Health Organization (WHO) as
well, both of which are noted in the resolution.
We understand that there is a revision of the
WHO report, and we look forward to its reissuance
18-10446

12/04/2018

as revised. We also look forward to the reissuance of
the Secretary-General’s report. We would appreciate
confirmation from both WHO and the Secretariat that
the updated reports will be made available in the near
future and that those updated and revised reports will
be the basis for further work in relation to the highlevel meeting preparations.
The United States shared our position regarding
the Montevideo road map, which remains relevant as
we continue in planning for the high-level meeting.
We would like to emphasize that, given the complex
risks, factors and causes of NCDs, we cannot base NCD
strategies primarily on experience with tobacco — an
addictive product that is not comparable to processed
foods and beverages. NCD strategies must be
comprehensive, cost-effective, evidence-based and
multisectoral in nature. Recommendations and measures
taken must be grounded in science and supported by
evidence of their effectiveness in improving public
health outcomes, rather than simply their effectiveness
in shifting purchasing patterns, without corresponding
public-health improvements.
Finally, we also look forward to a consensus
approach to the work of the co-facilitators ahead and
the adoption of a concise outcome document that will
renew the political commitment on NCDs and set the
course for greater partnership approaches to solving the
challenges of NCDs.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position.
We will now hear statements following the adoption
of resolution 72/274.
I give the floor to the representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay): On behalf of
Ambassador Cardi, Permanent Representative of Italy,
and on my own behalf, I wish to thank the President
of the General Assembly for the co-chairmanship
entrusted to us and all delegations for their constructive
engagement and commitment to the negotiations on
resolution 72/274, entitled “Scope, modalities, format
and organization of the third high-level meeting of the
General Assembly on the prevention and control of
non-communicable diseases”.
We celebrate the consensus reached on the adoption
of the resolution today, and we look forward to working
together in the upcoming months in preparation of the
2018 comprehensive review of the progress achieved

A/72/PV.82

in the prevention and control of non-communicable
diseases, which is a most substantive issue for the
entire world.
Let us reassure members that we are committed to
guaranteeing that the process of consultations on the
draft outcome document to be adopted by the General
Assembly is inclusive, transparent and Member
State-driven. Alongside Ambassador Cardi, I remain
at the disposal of Member States to work towards
achieving the bold objectives of our agenda.
The Acting President: I would like to express
my sincere thanks to Ambassador Sebastiano Cardi of
Italy and Ambassador Elbio Rosselli Frieri of Uruguay,
co-facilitators of the informal consultations, who
demonstrated great ability and patience in their conduct
of the discussions and the complex negotiations on
resolution 72/274. I also thank members for their
valuable contributions to reaching an agreement on
the resolution.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 117.
Agenda item 123 (continued)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
Draft resolution (A/72/L.45)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Honduras to introduce draft resolution
A/72/L.45.
Ms. Flores (Honduras): I have the honour, under
item 123 of the agenda of the General Assembly at this
seventy-second session, to introduce draft resolution
A/72/L.45, entitled “International Association of
Permanent Representatives to the United Nations”. We
extend our gratitude to the delegation of Belarus for
its leadership in the drafting and consultation process,
and to all the sponsors and Member States for their
constructive participation in support.
In May 1948, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 257 (III), regarding the establishment of
permanent missions, considering their presence served
to assist the realization of the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and the necessary
liaisons between the Member States and the Secretariat
in periods between sessions of the different organs of
the Organization, and referenced the generalization

18-1044625/27

A/72/PV.82

12/04/2018

of the institutions of permanent missions and the
accreditation of Permanent Representatives.

I give the
the Secretariat.

The International Association was founded
on 2 February 1988 at Headquarters by a group of
like-minded Permanent Representatives, acting
in their personal capacity, with the objective of
serving as an institutional forum of continued
communication between present, former and future
Permanent Representatives to the United Nations. The
establishment of the Association furthered the role of
the diplomatic community that served with distinction
in harmonizing the actions of all nations for the
attainment of common ends.

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/72/L.45, in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have also
become sponsors: Bangladesh, Cabo Verde, Cuba,
Iceland, India, Kazakhstan, Malaysia, the Netherlands,
Pakistan and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.

In the words of President Samir S. Shihabi of the
International Association,
“Those who shoulder the responsibility of
representing their countries have a duty in respect
to society at large. The qualities, the experience,
the perspective of the International Association’s
distinguished membership constitute a unique
asset for the United Nations and for the community
at large.”
Secretary-General Pérez de Cuellar, a member and
first patron of the Association, stated that
“As a former Permanent Representative to the
United Nations myself, I am convinced that you are
resolved to help the United Nations in its mission
of securing peace, promoting and protecting
human rights and in the achievement of sustainable
development. It is my sincere hope that the
Association will enjoy great success as a reward to
the remarkable imagination and industry that has
launched it on its way”.
The International Association of Permanent
Representatives — in three decades, by means of the
Presidents of the Association, the Executive Boards and
membership at large through dedicated efforts and joint
cooperation — has advanced intercultural dialogue and
strengthened the work and prestige of the Organization
and the international community.
Finally, allow me to express my sincere hope that
the draft resolution will be adopted by consensus.
The Acting President: The Assembly will
now take a decision on draft resolution A/72/L.45,
entitled “International Association of Permanent
Representatives to the United Nations”.
26/27

floor

to

the

representative

of

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/72/L.45?
Draft resolution A/72/L.45
(resolution 72/275).

was

adopted

The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Belarus, who wishes to speak in
explanation of position on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Dapkiunas (Belarus): Two months ago, the
International Association of Permanent Representatives
to the United Nations (IAPR) turned 30 years old.
Today, through resolution 72/275, it is finally getting
its due acknowledgement, a promise of improved
accommodation and the much-needed informational
support of the United Nations information
technology experts.
It is never too late to do the right thing — and the
reason that the IAPR was established is good and right.
The IAPR is not a leisure club. It is not even a trade union
of Ambassadors, in the conventional understanding
of the word. In my opinion, the IAPR is the single
most undervalued tool for breaking through the walls
of United Nations formality. Often unintentionally
or against our will, those walls are built with bricks
of impersonality and detachment. Those bricks are
cemented with a glue of double-talk and wordiness.
Through its continued existence, the IAPR conveys
a simple, yet very potent, idea. Notwithstanding the
power of the institutional, people continue to matter
most. If the hope and the promise of the Charter of
the United Nations are ever to be fully realized, it
will happen not through the magical concurrence of
policy instructions sent to the United Nations from
the myriad of world capitals. However, it may happen
if United Nations Ambassadors, encouraged and
18-10446

12/04/2018

supported by IAPR activity, use their extraordinary
and plenipotentiary powers to stay in personal touch,
to rally their courage to connect, to be open and to seek
ways to build greater trust and more sincere empathy.
The IAPR is not a machine. At any given moment,
it is defined by the personal features of its leader and
inspirer. That is why today I would like to pay tribute
to all the IAPR Presidents, whose selfless service kept
the Association going.
On a more personal note, I would like to make
a specific mention of the IAPR Presidents whom I
know and remember and whose work from the heart
provided inspiration for the support of Belarus to the
cause of the IAPR: Ambassador Mihnea Motoc of
Romania; Ambassador Hjálmar Hannesson of Iceland;

A/72/PV.82

Ambassador Byrganym Aitimova of Kazakhstan;
Ambassador Daniele Bodini of San Marino, honorary
President of the IAPR, whom we are most honoured
to see here with us in the Hall; and Ambassador Mary
Elizabeth Flores of Honduras, current President of
the Association and the dedicated mastermind of the
IAPR’s greater prominence and visibility. As one of
the co-authors of the resolution’s initial text, I would
like to humbly dedicate this document of the General
Assembly to her.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 123.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

18-1044627/27
