S/2015/962*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 December 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and
2191 (2014)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the twenty-second submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of Council resolution 2165
(2014) and paragraph 5 of Council resolution 2191 (2014), in which the Council
requested the Secretary-General to report, every 30 days, on the implementation of
the resolutions by all parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on the data available to Un ited
Nations agencies on the ground, from the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
and from open sources. Data from United Nations agencies on their humanitarian
deliveries have been reported for the period from 1 September to 30 November
2015. More recent data have been included, where available.

II. Major developments
A.

Political/military
3.
Widespread conflict and high levels of violence continued throughout the
Syrian Arab Republic in November. Indiscriminate and disproportionate aerial
bombings and ground attacks in places with a large civilian presence, including the
use of barrel bombs by government forces and indiscriminate shelling by non -State
armed opposition groups and designated terrorist groups, 1 continued to kill, injure
and displace civilians. The conduct of hostilities by all parties to the conflict
continued to be characterized by a widespread disregard for international
humanitarian law and the obligation of all parties to protect civilians.
4.
Heavy fighting continued to be reported in Damascus and Rif Dimashq during
the reporting period. Government forces carried out several offensives. For
example, on 25 November, government forces advanced towards the village of

__________________

* Reissued for technical reasons on 18 December 2015.
1
On 30 May 2013, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and the Nusrah Front were
designated as terrorist groups by the Security Council in accordance with resolution 1267 (1999).
The two groups operate in the Syrian Arab Republic.

15-21919* (E)

181215

*1521919*

S/2015/962

Marj al-Sultan and regained control of the strategic Marj Sultan-Hawash road. In
eastern Ghutah, the town of Duma was repeatedly hit by government forces, with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR)
documenting at least four attacks between 2 and 22 November. According to sourc es
on the ground, a minimum of 43 civilians, including 12 children, were killed and
many more injured by the airstrikes. Elsewhere in Rif Dimashq, six air -to-surface
missiles hit a residential area connecting the towns of Saqba and Hamouria on
7 November, killing two women and three children. OHCHR received reports of
frequent attacks in Darayya. For example, on 8 November, six civilians were killed
and three others injured when government helicopters reportedly dropped barrel
bombs on the town. On 21 November, four civilians, including two children, were
killed and at least 10 more injured in a similar attack in Darayya.
5.
Non-State armed opposition groups continued to launch mortars and to shell
Damascus city during the reporting period. OHCHR reported t hat, on 7 November,
one civilian was killed when mortars hit the al-Adawi area of Damascus city. On
10 November, according to OHCHR sources, two civilians were killed and 11 others
injured when mortar rounds fell onto the Qassa’, Bab-Tuma and Bab al-Salam areas
of Damascus city. Separately, on 12 November, eight civilians, including six
children, were reportedly injured when a mortar struck a school in the Bab -Tuma
neighbourhood of Damascus. According to reports by the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic, non-State armed opposition groups shelled Government-controlled
areas in Damascus city with more than 28 mortars during the first week of
November, which reportedly killed two persons and injured 14 others. From 9 to
13 November, Damascus was also hit by 76 mortar attacks, reportedly killing three
people and injuring 32 others. From 19 to 23 November, the city was the target of
87 mortar attacks in several neighbourhoods, which reportedly killed 5 persons and
injured 45 others.
6.
On 15 November, according to sources on the ground, ISIL launched an
offensive against non-State armed opposition groups, including Jaysh al-Islam
(Army of Islam), in Yalda city, south of Damascus, making some minor advances in
the western parts of the city, in particular in the al-Hajar al-Aswad and al-Zein
neighbourhoods. The advance caused an unknown number of families to flee the
area into Yalda. Non-State armed opposition groups mounted a counter-attack days
later, capturing areas around al-Hajar al-Aswad. As a consequence, representatives
from key non-State armed opposition groups imposed restrictions on the movement
of civilians between Yalda and Yarmouk, limiting it to 10 hours per day. The route
between Yalda and Yarmouk was also closed for a 24-hour period on 12 November.
Restrictions on movement were lifted in early December.
7.
During the reporting period, intensified fighting between the parties to the
conflict continued in the northern governorates of the Syrian Arab Republic. On
10 November, government forces retook Kweiris airbase in the western countryside
of Aleppo. Government forces have since made limited advances on ISIL, towards
the village of Dayr Hafir. In the northern countryside of Aleppo, non -State armed
opposition groups made advances on ISIL, seizing two small villages, Harjalah and
Dahla, reportedly with support from Turkey and the coalition led by the United
States of America.
8.
On 13 and 14 November, government forces advanced against non-State armed
opposition groups in the southern countryside of Aleppo, gaining control of

2/12

15-21919

S/2015/962

additional territories, including the villages of al-Hader and al-Eis, less than 3 km
from the Aleppo-Hama highway. On 23 November, non-State armed opposition
groups conducted a counter-attack, restoring their control over several hilltops and
villages in the area. Between 3 and 22 November, OHCHR documented the killing
of at least 40 civilians, including five children, in five separate attacks by
government forces in different parts of Aleppo governorate, including the towns of
Hayan, Kafr Karma and Qanatir, in addition to the opposition -controlled
neighbourhoods of Aleppo city. OHCHR also reported that, in Aleppo city on
23 November, non-State armed opposition groups fired dozens of mortars on th e
civilian-populated area of Sheikh Maqsoud, which is controlled by Kurdish forces,
reportedly killing at least seven civilians.
9.
On 24 November, a Russian warplane was shot down by Turkey close to the
Syrian-Turkish border. While Turkey asserted that the warplane was flying in
Turkish airspace when it was shot down, the Russian Federation denied that and
said the warplane was flying in the airspace of the Syrian Arab Republic. The
United Nations does not have independent means of verification to certify the claim
of either Member State. The Russian Federation officially invited international
experts to take part in the opening of the “black box” of the Russian plane.
10. Fighting continued between government forces and non -State armed
opposition groups in the northern countryside of Homs governorate. On
23 November, government forces made significant advances against ISIL in the
eastern countryside of Homs, gaining control over the cities of Hawarin and Mahin.
Advances by government forces were reportedly supported by Russian air strikes on
ISIL positions, including in Palmyra city and al-Qaryatayn.
11. In Ladhiqiyah, in the north-western part of the Syrian Arab Republic, fighting
intensified between government forces and non-State armed opposition groups,
causing casualties and displacement among civilians. OHCHR sources reported that,
on 10 November, at least 17 civilians were killed and dozens injured following two
mortar attacks by non-State armed opposition groups on the city of Ladhiqiyah. On
16 November, government forces launched a ground offensive, reportedly with the
support of joint Russian-Syrian air strikes, against Ghamam, Zwawik,
al-Dighmshlya and Dayr Hanna. On 17 November, non-State armed opposition
groups recaptured Dayr Hanna, while on 19 November government forces regained
control of several hills in the northern part of Turkmen Mountain.
12. Reports indicate that heavy air strikes were carried out by France, the Russian
Federation and the United States-led coalition in Raqqah governorate during the
reporting period, including repeated targeting of the New Raqqah bridge, public
buildings and other critical infrastructure. The air strikes also led to interruptions in
electricity and water service in Raqqah city. The National Hospital in Raq qah city
has been closed since 4 November, after air strikes damaged the facility and forced
patients to be relocated to neighbouring facilities. Separately, ISIL fired three
medium-range missiles on 10 November, hitting villages located south of Tall
Abyad and reportedly killing four civilians, including a child in Sakhrat Abdel
Sheikh.
13. In Hasakah governorate, the newly established anti-ISIL, Arab-Kurdish
coalition known as the Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) launched an offensive on
ISIL on 30 October. On 13 November, SDF seized the strategic village of al -Hole,

15-21919

3/12

S/2015/962

reportedly with support from the United States-led coalition, and cut the main
ISIL-controlled highway between Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic.
14. There were reports of fighting in Dar ’a governorate during the reporting
period. According to OHCHR sources, on 19 November, at least 20 civilians,
including women and children, were killed when government forces fired a rocket at
an olive press located along the road linking Dar ’a city and Sheikh Miskine. On the
same day, seven civilians, including four children, were reportedly killed in Sheikh
Miskine in an attack said to have involved barrel bombs.
15. French, Russian and United States-led coalition forces continued their
operations in the Syrian Arab Republic throughout the month. OHCHR reported that,
between 23 and 26 November, Russian authorities confirmed that they had carried out
134 military sorties against 499 targets in the governorates of Aleppo, Damascus,
Dayr al-Zawr, Hama, Homs, Idlib, Ladhiqiyah and Raqqah. At the same time, the
United States Central Command confirmed that it had conducted at least 132 air
strikes in the governorates of Aleppo, Dayr al-Zawr, Hasakah and Raqqah in
November. OHCHR received a number of reports alleging that the air strikes had
resulted in civilian casualties; the origin of the strikes could not, however, be
adequately ascertained. On 2 November, two air strikes reportedly hit al-Kasrat
village in Raqqah governorate, killing nine civilians, including a chil d. In al-Soura
town in Dar’a governorate, an air strike reportedly killed six civilians on
28 November. In Dayr al-Zawr governorate, a local market in Albu Kamal was hit by
two air strikes on 5 November. According to OHCHR sources, 96 civilians, including
women and children, were killed in the attack, and at least 124 civilians were injured.
On 20 November, at least 50 civilians, including women and children, were killed and
many others injured when fighter jets carried out numerous air strikes on several a reas
in Dayr al-Zawr. In Hasakah, three civilians were reportedly killed and one woman
was seriously injured on 10 November when an air strike hit al-Buthah.
16. Civilian displacement continued throughout the Syrian Arab Republic in
November, with over 121,500 people displaced from areas in Aleppo, Dar ’a, Dayr
al-Zawr, Hama, Hasakah, Homs, Idlib, Ladhiqiyah and Raqqah governorates. For
example, in Aleppo, intensified fighting in the governorate further displaced some
30,000 people who had already been displaced from the Jabal as Samman subdistrict
to Idlib governorate. Additionally, 10,000 people fled the southern countryside of
Aleppo to al-Atarib. In Hama, some 6,000 people fled from Kafr Zayta, Madiq
Castle, Hamra and Suran to Hama city during the first week of November owing to
intensified air strikes. In Ladhiqiyah, more than 10,000 people were reportedly
displaced by fighting between government forces and their allies and non -State
armed opposition groups.
17. Civilian infrastructure continued to be targeted during the reporting period. In
Aleppo city, the al-Khafseh water treatment and intake facility on the Euphrates
River, located in an ISIL-controlled area, was hit by air strikes on 26 November.
The entire facility was shut down for one day, cutting off water supplies to
3.5 million people in Aleppo governorate, including over 1 million children, before
resuming partial operation the following day. Approximately 1.4 million people
continue to be cut off from water supplies in rural Aleppo as a result of the incident.
In Idlib governorate, a large-capacity mill and a bakery serving 50,000 people per
day in Saraqib town in Idlib was hit by air strikes on 27 November. The following
day, air strikes hit another bakery that supplied more than 50,000 people a day, as
well as a water-pumping station in Ma’aret Numan town in southern Idlib. At least
five schools were reportedly hit in eastern Ghutah between 2 and 25 November,

4/12

15-21919

S/2015/962

causing significant damage to their facilities. On 19 November, a number of medical
clinics were also damaged, including one in Duma and another in Irbin.
18. During the reporting period, there were developments regarding a number of
local agreements. In Qadsiya city, north-east of Damascus, the Government and
non-State armed opposition groups reportedly signed a new local agreement that
included provisions on the delivery of humanitarian assistance, the release of
detainees, freedom of movement, the evacuation of fighters and the resumption of
public services. Under the auspices of the agreement, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
relocated a total of 139 unarmed fighters to Idlib governorate. In the Wa ’r district of
Homs city, negotiations between non-State armed opposition groups and
government officials resulted in an agreement that includes th e evacuation of at
least 300 fighters and their family members, the surrender of medium and heavy
weapons and the provision of humanitarian assistance to people in need.
19. The week before the second meeting of the International Syria Support Group,
44 non-State armed opposition groups, including Jaysh al-Islam, met in Istanbul and
agreed to form a united military council for all of the Syrian Arab Republic. A
number of the participating groups subsequently met with the National Coalition of
Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition Forces umbrella group on 13 November to
coordinate positions for future negotiations under the Vienna process. Several
non-State armed opposition groups from the southern part of the Syrian Arab
Republic met with representatives of the military operations centre in Jordan to
discuss the implications of the Vienna meetings.

B.

Human rights
20. The scale and severity of abuses and violations of international human rights
and humanitarian law remained grave during the reporting perio d. OHCHR
continued to receive allegations and to document cases of arbitrary detention, sexual
and gender-based violence, torture and other forms of ill-treatment and deaths while
in custody inside government detention centres. On 17 November, according to
information gathered by OHCHR, inmates in Homs Central Prison protested against
the ill-treatment of prisoners. Prison guards reportedly used live ammunition and
tear gas in an attempt to put down the protest, injuring some of the prisoners.
21. OHCHR reported on incidents of women being detained by the “al -Khansaa
women” and al-Hisba factions of ISIL in Dayr al-Zawr. The reasons for their
detention included, but were not limited to, violating the ISIL -imposed dress code
for women and adultery. Reports were also received by OHCHR of men being
detained for not paying zakat, delaying prayer time and shaving their faces.
22. On 2 November, ISIL reportedly crucified and killed a man accused of robbery
near the “Big Mosque” in Albu Kamal town in Dayr al-Zawr governorate. On the
same day, ISIL reportedly beheaded an 80-year-old man in al-Mayishiya village
who had been accused of blasphemy.
23. In Raqqah governorate, ISIL continued to impose heavy restrictions on civilian
movement outside the governorate, reportedly denying requests by some
communities to leave and placing considerable taxes on travel. These impediments
have reportedly interfered with attempts by civilians to flee Raqqah in recent weeks
amid heavy air strikes.

15-21919

5/12

S/2015/962

C.

Humanitarian response
24. United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners continued to reach millions
of people in need between 1 September and 30 November through all modalities
from within the Syrian Arab Republic and across borders, pursuant to resolutions
2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014). The World Food Programme (WFP) delivered food
assistance for an average of 3.8 million people per month. The World Health
Organization (WHO) distributed medicines and supplies sufficient for an average of
700,000 treatments per month. The United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
provided an average of 4.3 million people per month with multisectoral support,
including water, sanitation and hygiene services and supplies for 4.2 million people,
and routine immunizations, polio vaccines and health-care services to 3.34 million
children and mothers. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) provided an average of 247,226 people per month with core
relief items. An additional 55,000 people per month received protection serv ices.
United Nations Population Fund partners delivered reproductive health services and
services relating to gender-based violence to around 102,000 people per month on
average. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations reached
310,000 people with food and agricultural assistance from 1 September to
30 November. The International Organization for Migration delivered basic relief
items for nearly 40,000 people per month. The United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) provided support to more
than 200,000 Palestine refugees per month. The Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic continued to provide basic services to areas under its control as well as to
many areas beyond its control.
25. Cross-border deliveries continued during the reporting period. As at 30 November,
the United Nations and its implementing partners had sent 222 shipments —
72 from Jordan and 150 from Turkey — to the Syrian Arab Republic under the
terms of resolutions 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014). These shipments included food
assistance for over 2.4 million people, non-food items for 1.6 million people, water
and sanitation supplies for 1.3 million people and m edical supplies sufficient for
4.1 million treatments in six governorates. In line with resolutions 2165 (2014) and
2191 (2014), the United Nations notified the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic in advance of each shipment, including the details of it s contents, its
destination and the number of beneficiaries. Between 26 and 29 November, air
strikes hit major supply routes into the Syrian Arab Republic, temporarily
interrupting humanitarian programmes and blocking commerce with populated areas
through the key border crossings of Bab al-Hawa and Bab al-Salam.
26. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism continued its operations in Jordan
and Turkey. During the reporting period, it monitored 48 United Nations
humanitarian shipments, confirming the humanitarian nature of each and notifying
the Syrian authorities after each shipment. The Monitoring Mechanism continued to
benefit from excellent cooperation with the Governments of Jordan and Turkey.
27. Three inter-agency, cross-line convoys were completed during the past quarter.
In September and October, an inter-agency cross-line convoy to Hula in Homs was
completed in three phases, reaching 60,000 people in hard -to-reach locations. Also
in October, inter-agency convoys brought multisectoral assistance, including
medical and surgical items, to 10,000 people in Fu’ah and Kafraya and to
20,000 people in Zabadani, Madaya and Buqayn. No inter-agency convoys were

6/12

15-21919

S/2015/962

conducted in November. On 5 December, the first leg of a three -part convoy
delivered life-saving supplies to 25,000 beneficiaries in the Al-Wa’r neighbourhood
of Homs city. The convoy delivered all the planned health, food, nutrition and non food items, except for surgical supplies, which the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic did not permit to be included in the convoy. The prohibited surgical
materials would have assisted more than 24,480 beneficiaries.
28. United Nations agencies also undertook cross-line deliveries during the
reporting period. For example, in November, WHO, through local non -governmental
organization (NGO) partners, provided 317,946 medical treatments across conflict
lines, including in Aleppo, Idlib and Hasakah governorates. UNICEF delivered
sodium hypochlorite to Raqqah during October to cover the water treatment needs
of up to 2 million people for five months. In November, UNICEF dispatched
micronutrient sachets to Raqqah for 24,000 children. During the same month, WFP
provided food assistance to 20,000 people in parts of the al -Kiswah subdistrict in
Rif Dimashq controlled by non-State armed opposition groups. UNHCR continued
to reach people in need in hard-to-reach locations during the reporting period,
including 5,000 people in At Tall and 2,500 people in al -Kiswah in Rif Damashq in
November.
29. Both international and Syrian non-governmental organizations continued to
deliver multisectoral assistance, including services, in the Syrian Arab Republic
during the reporting period.
Humanitarian access
30. The delivery of humanitarian assistance to many of the 13.5 million people in
need of assistance in the Syrian Arab Republic remained extremely challenging in
many areas owing to active conflict and insecurity and the imposition of deliberate
restrictions, including burdensome administrative procedures, by parties to the
conflict.
31. Access to the 4.5 million people living in hard -to-reach locations remained of
critical concern. Between 1 September and 30 November, United Nations agencies
and partners reached an average of 47 (32 per cent) of the 147 hard -to-reach
locations per month (in October, the number of locations designated as hard -toreach was revised from 127 to 147). United Nations agencies reached 20 locations
on average per month with food assistance for over 240,000 people, 23 locations
with health support for 373,000 medical treatments, 7 locations with water,
sanitation and hygiene for 144,000 people, and 7 locations with core relief items for
over 30,000 people. Over the past three months, of the 147 hard -to-reach locations,
55 were not reached at all, 60 were reached once, 18 were reached twice and
14 were reached three times. Compared with the two previous quarters, there was no
tangible improvement in the number of hard-to-reach locations accessed between
September and November.
32. Active conflict in several governorates hindered the effective delivery of
humanitarian assistance as well as people’s access to essential services. For
example, in western Aleppo, fighting between government forces, ISIL and the
Nusrah Front hindered the delivery of food assistance to 233,000 people between
23 October and 7 November. Fighting and air strikes also significantly affected
humanitarian access, particularly in Homs and Hama, where roads were frequently
closed or disrupted. This resulted in delays in WFP food deliveries for 63,000 people

15-21919

7/12

S/2015/962

in Idlib and Aleppo governorates, which had been scheduled for shipping in early
December.
33. Deliberate interference and restrictions by the parties to the conflict also
continued to prevent the delivery of aid. WFP continues to be unab le to reach people
in need in ISIL-controlled areas of the country, as all plans to deliver assistance to
those areas have been suspended owing to the inability to work independently and
to monitor activities. This affects some 720,000 people in almost all of Dayr
al-Zawr and Raqqah governorates, parts of northern rural Aleppo and eastern rural
Homs, as well as pockets of southern rural Hasakah and north -western rural Hama.
34. A limited number of humanitarian supplies went through the Nusaybin/
Qamishli crossing during the reporting period. In addition, to the 10 UNICEF trucks
loaded with 4,800 family hygiene kits that were allowed through on 19 October, the
Government of Turkey granted approval to deliver food and non -food items through
the crossing from 30 November to 31 December 2015.
35. As at 30 November, 27 out of the 91 inter-agency requests made in 2015 by
the United Nations had been approved in principle by the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of the Syrian Arab Republic; 48 requests were pending approva l and
3 requests had been put on hold by the United Nations owing to insecurity. The
remaining 13 requests had been submitted previously, but have been subsumed by
newer requests.
36. Of the 27 requests approved in principle by the Syrian Ministry of Forei gn
Affairs, 13 convoys have been completed. Of the remaining 14 requests approved in
principle, 7 have been unable to proceed owing to the lack of approval from Syrian
Government security forces; 2 have been held up owing to a lack of agreement
among the United Nations, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and the Government on
the access route; 2 have been stalled by the lack of approval on the part of non -State
armed opposition groups for safe passage; and 1 remains on hold pending a change
in the security situation. The remaining two requests that have been approved in
principle are under preparation. More than 282,000 beneficiaries in hard -to-reach
and besieged locations could be reached if these convoys were able to proceed.
37. All UNRWA operations in Yarmouk remained suspended during the reporting
period. The most recent UNRWA mission to Yarmouk was conducted on 28 March.
The most recent missions by UNRWA to Yalda, explicitly authorized only for
health-care interventions related to the typhoid outbreak, took p lace from 18 August
to 24 September. Owing to active conflict, insecurity and a lack of authorization,
UNRWA was not able to conduct any missions to Yalda, Babila and Bayt Saham in
October and November. Other humanitarian organizations were reportedly allo wed
to continue their operations and to deliver assistance to Yalda, Babila and Bayt
Saham in September. WFP, for instance, delivered food assistance for 15,000 people
in those areas in September. Mobile clinics run by the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
continue to provide services in those three areas, visiting each location every third
week. In October and November, in response to the increasing prevalence of
typhoid, UNICEF, in collaboration with the health directorate in Rif Dimashq,
distributed aqua tabs in Yalda, Babila, Bayt Saham and Yarmouk. A limited range of
commercial goods continues to enter the Yalda, Babila and Bayt Saham areas on a
daily basis.

8/12

15-21919

S/2015/962

38. The administrative procedures currently in place have continued to delay or
limit the delivery of assistance by United Nations agencies and their partners. On
12 November, food import regulations were revised to require that import
documents for humanitarian food assistance needed to be notarized by the Syrian
embassies in the countries of product origin. The procedure had previously applied
only to commercial goods. The new procedure has put the delivery of food
assistance for over 4 million people at risk of being suspended in December.
Although there has been a reduction in the amount of lead time neede d to obtain
approval from the Syrian Ministry of Foreign Affairs for the importation of health
and nutrition goods, there are still two outstanding exemptions for UNICEF health
and nutrition supplies for 117,000 children that have been pending for more tha n
three months.
39. As at 30 November, 42 United Nations visa requests (for either new visas or
renewals) were pending, of which 22 were within the 15 -working-days limit and
20 exceeded the limit. In November, 59 visas were approved. In 2015, a total of
43 visas have been rejected, excluding those of the four United Nations staff who
were declared personae non gratae in February. This stands in contrast with 28 visa
rejections in all of 2014.
40. A total of 16 international NGOs have been authorized to oper ate in the Syrian
Arab Republic. These NGOs continue to face a series of administrative hurdles and
restrictions that have an impact on their ability to operate. They remain restricted in
their ability to partner with national humanitarian organizations, t o open sub-offices,
to conduct missions, to join inter-agency convoys and to undertake independent
needs assessments. Seven visas for international NGO staff remained pending as at
30 November, and seven applications were approved in November.
41. The number of national NGOs authorized to partner with United Nations
organizations increased from 131 (operating through 214 branches) to 138
(operating through 221 branches) between 1 September and 30 November. Seven
national NGOs were added to the list: two in Rif Dimashq, one in Aleppo, one in
Ladhiqiyah and three in Damascus. Authorized national NGOs continue to operate
under complex procedures in partnering with United Nations agencies.
Besieged areas
42. Of the 4.5 million people living in hard-to-reach areas, some 393,700 remain
besieged in the Syrian Arab Republic. This includes some 200,000 people in Dayr
al-Zawr city who are besieged by ISIL; some 181,200 people who are besieged by
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic in various locations in eas tern Ghutah,
as well as in Darayya and Zabadani in Rif Dimashq; and some 12,500 people who
are besieged by non-State armed opposition groups and the Nusrah Front in Fu’ah
and Kafraya in Idlib governorate.
43. The parties to the conflict continued to entirely or heavily restrict access to
besieged areas during the reporting period. In September, some 7,800 people were
reached with water, sanitation and hygiene assistance in one besieged location. In
October, 10,500 people in besieged locations were provided with food, health and
basic relief assistance and some 16,700 people were provided with water, sanitation
and hygiene assistance. In November, 1,077 children received textbooks and
50 children were provided with winter clothes. No other assistance reached the
besieged areas in November. The flow of commercial supplies through official

15-21919

9/12

S/2015/962

routes remained largely blocked, leading to high prices for commodities reaching
besieged areas through unofficial and irregular supply lines. Freedom of movement
remained heavily restricted, although certain groups, such as students and members
of reconciliation councils, were occasionally allowed to leave and return to some
besieged areas.
44. In eastern Ghutah, Rif Dimashq, some 176,500 people are besieged in the
following locations: Duma, Harasta, Irbin, Zamalka, ‘Ayn Tarma, Hammura,
Jisrayn, Kafr Batna, Siqba and Zabadin. During the reporting period, no United
Nations humanitarian assistance agency reached the besieged areas in eastern
Ghutah with the exception of UNICEF, which provided remedial educational
support to some 1,045 children in Duma in October and winter clothes to
50 children in Irbin and Kafr Batna in November.
45. In Zabadani, in Rif Dimashq, some 500 people remain besieged by
government forces. On 18 October, a joint humanitarian convoy of United Nations
personnel and other partners reached the city with food, basic relief items, water,
sanitation and hygiene support and medicine for 20,000 people. No other assistance
reached that area during the reporting period.
46. In Darayya, in Rif Dimashq, some 4,000 people remain besieged by
government forces. No United Nations assistance reached that area during the
reporting period. People in Darayya have not been assisted by the United Nations
since October 2012.
47. In Fu’ah and Kafraya, in Idlib governorate, some 12,500 people remain
besieged by non-State armed opposition groups and the Nusrah Front. On
18 October, a joint humanitarian convoy of United Nations personnel and other
partners reached Fu’ah and Kafraya with food, basic relief items, water, sanitation
and hygiene support and medicine for 10,000 people.
48. In the government-controlled western neighbourhoods of Dayr al-Zawr city,
some 200,000 people are besieged by ISIL. In September, in partnership with th e
Syrian Arab Red Crescent, UNICEF distributed hygiene supplies and conducted
hygiene promotion activities for some 7,800 people in the besieged part of the city.
In October, in partnership with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, UNICEF provided
water, sanitation and hygiene support to 6,195 people and psychosocial support to
720 children. In November, UNICEF provided textbooks to support children in Dayr
al-Zawr city, 1,077 of which were delivered to the besieged neighbourhood of
al-Qusur. With approvals secured, plans remain for an emergency inter-agency
United Nations airlift to deliver life-saving humanitarian assistance to the area.
Thus far, however, clashes in the vicinity of the military airport have prevented the
operation from proceeding.
Free passage of medical supplies, personnel and equipment
49. Access to medical care continued to be restricted by insecurity and restrictions
imposed by parties to the conflict, resulting in increased prices for medicines, a
shortage of medical supplies in local markets, a reduction in pharmaceutical
production and a shortage of qualified medical workers. The shortage of qualified
medical staff and the degradation of essential services have had an additional impact
on access to medical care. The availability of life-saving health services is of critical
concern in parts of Aleppo, Dar ’a, Dayr al-Zawr, Hasakah, Hama, Idlib and Raqqah

10/12

15-21919

S/2015/962

governorates, as well as in the hard-to-reach and besieged areas of Rif Dimashq
governorate.
50. The risk of waterborne disease outbreaks is declining with the end of the
summer season, but continues to be a major health risk throughout the northern part
of the Syrian Arab Republic owing to gaps in the availability of safe water supplies.
The risk of a cholera outbreak is declining thanks to effective prevention and
preparedness activities, but the public health concern continues for the northern part
of the country, especially for displaced persons living in camps and for populations
in ISIL-controlled areas in Dayr al-Zawr and Raqqah governorates.
51. From 18 to 22 October, in collaboration with the Ministry of Health of the
Syrian Arab Republic, UNICEF and WHO supported the sixteenth nationwide polio
campaign, reaching 2.3 million children. All governorates were covered with the
exception of Raqqah and Dayr al-Zawr, owing to the refusal by ISIL to allow the
campaign to take place in the parts of those governorates under its control, where
only 1.6 per cent and 4.5 per cent, respectively, of children under five years of age
were reached. Between 22 and 26 November, in collaboration with the Ministry of
Health, UNICEF and WHO launched a subnational polio vaccination campaign
targeting 597,000 children under 5 in high-risk areas across the country, with
limited access to areas controlled by ISIL. Results are expected to be known by the
end of December.
52. In November, WHO submitted four new requests and three reminders to the
Syrian authorities for approval to deliver supplies to 33 hard -to-reach parts of
10 governorates (Aleppo, al-Suwayda’, Damascus, Dar’a, Dayr al-Zawr, Homs,
Idlib, Qunaytirah, Raqqah and Rif Dimashq). All of the requests remain pending. In
the meantime, United Nations and health sector partners continue to face extreme
challenges in the delivery of medical supplies and the provision of preventive and
curative services in ISIL-controlled areas.
Safety and security of staff and premises
53. A total of 29 United Nations staff members, including 27 from UNRWA,
1 from the United Nations Development Programme and 1 fro m UNICEF, continue
to be detained or missing. A total of 81 humanitarian workers have been killed in the
conflict since March 2011. This includes 17 staff members of the United Nations,
48 staff members and volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, 8 vol unteers and
staff members of the Palestinian Red Crescent Society and 8 staff members of
international NGOs. Of the 81, 15 have been killed since 1 January 2015.

III. Observations
54. As fighting in the Syrian Arab Republic continues unabated, millions of
ordinary Syrians are bearing the consequences of this abhorrent crisis. Over a
quarter of a million people have lost their lives, and more than half of all Syrians
have had to leave their homes in search of a safe place. In December alone,
hundreds of civilians have been killed and thousands have been displaced, many of
them for the second or the third time. The crisis continues to be characterized by a
complete disregard for international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, in particular with regard to the treatment of civilians, including
women and children, in the conduct of hostilities. I urge all the parties to the

15-21919

11/12

S/2015/962

conflict to halt deliberate or indiscriminate attacks against civilians and the use of
explosive weapons in populated areas. The deliberate targeting of civilians is a war
crime and those responsible must be held accountable. I repeat my call for the
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic to be referred to the International Criminal
Court. I regret that, despite the declaration by the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic, in its statement of 9 November, that it would refrain from using
indiscriminate weapons, such incidents continued to be reported in November.
I expect the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to deliver on its commitments
and translate them into firm action without delay.
55. I am also deeply concerned over the alleged incidents of civilians being killed
or injured in recent airstrikes and again remind all forces of their responsibility to
protect civilians in accordance with key norms and principles, such as
proportionality, distinction and precautions that are enshrined in international
humanitarian law.
56. Notwithstanding efforts to scale up the delivery of life -saving humanitarian
assistance, especially for the 4.5 million people in hard-to-reach areas, access
continues to be deliberately hindered by parties to the conflict. Administrative
obstacles, such as low approval rates for inter-agency convoys and the deliberate
removal of surgical items from convoys, are slowing down and preventing efforts to
deliver essential humanitarian supplies and services. It is unacceptable that tens of
thousands of people subsist on grass and weeds in besieged areas, while warring
parties prevent access to food and essential medicines. I repeat my call to the parties
to the conflict, especially the Syrian Arab Republic, to honour their obligations
under international humanitarian law and to grant immediate and unimpeded access
for humanitarian agencies to provide the much-needed supplies and services.
57. I remain deeply concerned by the continued attacks against health -care
facilities, transport and personnel and the denial of health care to the wounded and
sick. Nearly two thirds of hospitals in the Syrian Arab Republic have been destroyed
or are only partly functional, and hundreds of medical personnel have lost their lives
during the nearly five years of fighting. Many Syrians are unable to access basic
health services and to obtain the treatments they desperately need. The shortage of
ambulances, specialized medical staff and much-needed medical supplies has led to
an increased number of preventable deaths. The protection and provision of medical
assistance and health care to the wounded and sick in all circumstances is at the heart
of humanitarian action and clearly enshrined in international humanitarian law.
58. I stress again that there is no military solution to the crisis in the Syrian Arab
Republic. Only a political solution that will bring together all parties to address the
underlying causes of this brutal conflict can bring hope, sustainable peace and
stability. The people of the Syrian Arab Republic deserve a chance for a better
future. The international community cannot continue to let them down.
59. This conflict has also contributed to a deterioration of the overall security
environment in the region and beyond and has placed immense pressure on
countries that have generously hosted the refugees. I urge the international
community to continue to work together to secure a nationwide ceasefire and launch
a credible political process to fully implement the Action Group for Syria Final
Communiqué of 30 June 2012 and the Vienna Statements of 30 October and
14 November 2015. My Special Envoy continues to work closely with Syrians from
across the political spectrum and members of the international community to launch
intra-Syrian talks in the coming period. We must act now and use this newly created
momentum to bring an end to this senseless conflict.

12/12

15-21919
