246

General Assembly- Thirty-ninth Session

4. Reiterates that it is the responsibility of the administering Power to create such conditions in the United States
Virgin Islands as will enable the people of the Territory to
exercise freely and without interference their inalienable
right to self-determination and independence in conformity with General Assembly resolution I 5 I 4 (XV);
5. Calls upon the administering Power, taking into
account the wish of the people of the United States Virgin
Islands, to take all necessary steps to expedite the process
of decolonization in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration, as well as all other relevant resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly;
6. Notes that the Senate of the United States Virgin
Islands has established a Select Committee to ascertain the
views of the people of the Territory on their future status
and to make recommendations in that regard to the Legislature and further notes that public hearings are being held
throughout the Territory:
7. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering
Power under the Charter for the economic and social
development of the Territory:
8. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation with
the territorial Government, to strengthen the economy of
the Territory by taking additional measures of diversification in all fields and developing an adequate infrastructure
with a view to reducing its economic dependence on the
administering Power;
9. Notes with satisfaction the recent admission of the
United States Virgin Islands as an associate member of the
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean and its subsidiary body, the Caribbean Development
and Co-operation Committee, and calls upon the administering Power to facilitate the participation of the Territory
in other organizations of the United Nations system;
10. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation
with the Government of the United States Virgin Islands,
to safeguard the inalienable right of the people of the Territory to the enjoyment of their natural resources by taking
effective measures to guarantee their right to own and dispose of those resources and to establish and maintain control of their future development;
l l. Also urges the administering Power, in co-operation with the territorial Government, to continue to
improve social conditions and to pay particular attention
to overcoming problems of public housing, health care.
education and crime and, in that connection, notes that
further efforts are necessary to revitalize the health care
programme, to improve crime prevention, to discourage
juvenile delinquency and to expand and upgrade school
facilities;
12. Further urges the administering Power to continue
to take all necessary measures to comply fully with the
purposes and principles of the Charter, the Declaration
and the relevant resolutions and decisions of the General
Assembly relating to military activities and arrangements
by colonial Powers in Territories under their
administration;
13. Considers that the possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to the United States Virgin Islands at an
appropriate time should be kept under review;
14. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
30 Ibid., chaps. IV and XX\' II
31 A/AC.1091799.
J2see A/AC.1091772

the possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to the
United States Virgin Islands at an appropriate time and in
consultation with the administering Power, and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its fortieth session.
87th plenary meeting
5 December 1984

39/39. Question of Anguilla
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Anguilla,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 30
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting oflndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Visiting Mission dispatched to Anguilla in September
1984 31 at the invitation of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, as the administering
Power, 32
Having heard the statement of the Chairman of the
Visiting Mission, 3-'
Having heard the statement of the representative of the
administering Power, 34
Welcoming the co-operation of the administering Power
with regard to the work of the Special Committee relating
to the Territories under United Kingdom administration
and its readiness to permit access by United Nations visiting missions to those Territories,
Aware of the special problems facing the Territory by
virtue of its location, small size, limited resources and lack
of infrastructure,
Reiterating the view that such factors as territorial size,
geographical location, size of population and limited natural resources should in no way delay the implementation
of the Declaration contained in General Assembly resolution 15 14 (XV), which fully applies to Anguilla,
I. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Anguilla; 35
2. Approves also the report of the United Nations
Visiting Mission to Anguilla in 1984; 31
3. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Anguilla to self-determination and independence in
accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
4. Expresses its appreciation to the administering Power and to the Government of Anguilla for the close cooperation and assistance extended to the Mission;
5. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation with
the Government of Anguilla, to expand the programmes of
political education so as to improve the awareness of the
people of the Territory of the options available to them in
the exercise of their right to self-determination and independence, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and the Declaration:
33 Sec Official Remrds of the General Assembly, Thirty-ninth Session,
Fourth Committee, I 4th meeung, paras. I and 2.
34 lb,d., 16th meeting, paras. 45-50.
35 lh1d.. Th,rtv-n,nrh Scsswn, Supplement No. 23 (A/39/23), chap. XXVII.

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

6. Expresses the view that measures to promote the
economic and social development of Anguilla are an
essential element in the process of self-determination and,
in that connection, calls upon the administering Power, in
close co-operation with the territorial Government, to
continue to intensify and diversify its programmes of
development assistance to Anguilla;
1. Requests the administering Power, in the light of the
observations, conclusions and recommendations of the
Visiting Mission, 36 to continue to enlist the assistance of
the specialized agencies and other organizations of the
United Nations system, as well as other regional and international bodies, in the development and strengthening of
the economy of the Territory;
8. Further requests the administering Power to facilitate the participation of the Territory as an associate member of various organizations of the United Nations system,
as well as other regional and international bodies;
9. Considers that the possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to Anguilla at an appropriate time should
be kept under review;
IO. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch ofa visiting mission to Anguilla at an
appropriate time and in consultation with the administering Power, and to report thereon to the General Assembly
at its fortieth session.
87th plenary meeting
5 December 1984

39/40.

Question of Western Sahara

The General Assembly,
Having considered in depth the question of Western
Sahara,
Recalling the inalienable right of all peoples to selfdetermination and independence in accordance with the
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations
and in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14
December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting oflndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling its resolution 38/40 of 7 December 1983 on
the question of Western Sahara,
Having considered the relevant chapter of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 37
Taking note of the report of the Implementation Committee of the Organization of African Unity on Western
Sahara, 38
Recalling resolution AHG/Res. l 04 (XIX) on Western
Sahara, 39 adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity at its
nineteenth ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa from 6
to 12 June 1983,
1. Reaffirms that the question of Western Sahara is a
question of decolonization which remains to be completed
on the basis of the exercise by the people of Western
Sahara of their inalienable right to self-determination and
independence;
2. Reaffirms that the solution of the question of Western Sahara lies in the implementation of resolution AHG/
36 A/AC.109/799, sect. IV.
37 Official Records of the General Asscmhli·. Thmr ninth Sesswn. Supp/emenl No. 23 (A/39/23), chap. X.
38 A/39/680, annex.

247

Res. I 04 (XIX) of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity, which
establishes ways and means for a just and definitive political solution to the Western Sahara conflict;
3. Requests, to that end, the parties to the conflict, the
Kingdom of Morocco and the Frente Popular para la
Liberacion de Saguia el-Hamra y de Rio de Oro, to undertake direct negotiations with a view to bringing about a
cease-fire to create the necessary conditions for a peaceful
and fair referendum for self-determination of the people of
Western Sahara, a referendum without any administrative
or military constraints, under the auspices of the Organization of African Unity and the United Nations;
4. Welcomes the efforts of the Organization of African
Unity and its Implementation Committee with a view to
promoting a just and definitive solution to the question of
Western Sahara in accordance with the resolutions and
decisions of that organization and the United Nations on
the question;
5. Reaffirms the determination of the United Nations
to co-operate fully with the Organization of African Unity
with a view to implementing the relevant decisions of that
organization, in particular resolution AHG/Res. l 04
(XIX);
6. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples to continue to consider the situation in Western
Sahara as a matter of priority and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session;
7. Invites the Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity to keep the Secretary-General of the United
Nations informed of the progress achieved in the implementation of the decisions of the Organization of African
Unity relating to Western Sahara;
8. Invites the Secretary-General to follow the situation
in Western Sahara closely with a view to the implementation of the present resolution and to report to the General
Assembly at its fortieth session.
87th plenary meeting
5 December 1984

39/41.

Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the
Charter of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted
under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations40
and the action taken by the Committee in respect of that
information,
Having also examined the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the question. 41
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December
I 963, in which it requested the Special Committee to
study the information transmitted to the Secretary-General in accordance with Article 73 e of the Charter and to
take such information fully into account in examining the
situation with regard to the implementation of the Decla39 For the text. see resolution 38140. para. I
40 Otfina/ Records of the Genaal AssemNi·. Thtr1i·-n1111h Semon. S11p,,/,•
men/ S,, .'./ (A 0 39!23). chap \'Ill
41 A ,q , I 9
