S/2021/1001

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 December 2021
Original: English

Note by the President of the Security Council
At its 7488th meeting, held on 20 July 2015 in connection with the item entitled
“Non-proliferation”, the Security Council adopted resolution 2231 (2015).
In paragraph 4 of the resolution, the Security Council requested the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency to provide regular updates to the
Council on the implementation by the Islamic Republic of Iran of its commitments
under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and to report at any time any issue of
concern directly affecting the fulfilment of those commitments.
Accordingly, the President herewith circulates the report of the Director General
dated 12 September 2021 (see annex).

21-17987 (E)

131221

*2117987*

S/2021/1001

Annex
Letter dated 13 September 2021 from the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency addressed to the President of
the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a document submitted to the Board of
Governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency (see enclo sure).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and the document to
the attention of all members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Rafael Mariano Grossi

2/4

21-17987

S/2021/1001

Enclosure
[Original: Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish]

Verification and monitoring in the Islamic Republic of Iran in
light of United Nations Security Council resolution 2231 (2015) *
Report by the Director General
1.
This report of the Director General to the Board of Governors and, in parallel,
to the United Nations Security Council (Security Council), is on the Islamic Republic
of Iran’s (Iran’s) implementation of its nuclear-related commitments under the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). It provides an update on developments
related to Agency monitoring and surveillance equipment in Iran and other matters
since the Director General’s previous reports. 1
2.
In his report to the Board of Governors of 7 September 2021 (GOV/2021/39 ),
the Director General indicated that the Agency’s lack of access to its monitoring and
surveillance equipment at facilities and locations in Iran was seriously compromising
its technical capability to maintain continuity of knowledge, which is necessary for
the Agency to resume its verification and monitoring of Iran’s nuclear-related
commitments in the future, and that the situation needed to be rectified by Iran
without delay.
3.
Furthermore, in his report to the Board of Governors of 7 September 2021
(GOV/2021/42), the Director General stated that he is increasingly concerned that
even after some two years the safeguards issues referred to in that report remain
unresolved.
4.
In his reports, the Director General indicated that he was available to travel to
Iran to meet members of the new administration to discuss all these matters with a
view to resolving them without delay. The Director General hoped that through a
direct, cooperative and productive dialogue with the new Government of the Islamic
Republic of Iran these urgent matters could be addressed.
5.
On 12 September 2021, the Vice-President of Iran and Head of the Atomic
Energy Organization of Iran, H.E. Mohammad Eslami, and the Director General met
in Tehran, following which they issued a Joint Statement (see annex). The Joint
Statement provided, inter alia, that Agency inspectors will service Agency monitoring
and surveillance equipment and replace the storage media, which will be kept in Iran
under “joint” 2 seals of the Agency and the Atomic Energy Organization of Iran
(AEOI). The way this is to be carried out and the timing have been agreed by the two
sides.
6.
The Joint Statement also referred to a meeting between the Director General and
Vice-President Eslami on the sidelines of the forthcoming IAEA General Conference
and a visit to Tehran by the Director General in the near future to hold high -level
consultations with senior Iranian officials with the aim of enhancing cooperation
between Iran and the Agency in different fields, and to discuss current issues of
mutual interest.
7.

The Director General will continue to report as appropriate.

__________________

* Circulated to the Board of Governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency under the
symbol GOV/INF/2021/42.
1
GOV/2021/39 and GOV/2021/42.
2
The storage media will be kept under Agency seal and AEOI seal.
21-17987

3/4

S/2021/1001

Annex
Joint Statement by the Vice-President and the Head of Atomic
Energy Organization of the Islamic Republic of Iran and the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
A meeting between His Excellency Mr. Mohammad Eslami, Vice-President and
the Head of Atomic Energy Organization of the Islamic Republic of Iran (AEOI) and
His Excellency Mr. Rafael Grossi, Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) took place on September 12, during his visit to Tehran.
1.
In this meeting the parties recalled and reaffirmed the spirit of cooperation and
mutual trust and its continuation and emphasized on the necessity of addressing the
relevant issues in a constructive atmosphere and exclusively in a technical manner.
2.
In the framework of the existing cooperation, the two sides decided to maintain
their mutual interactions and meetings at relevant levels. To this end, the Vice President and the Head of AEOI will meet the IAEA Director General at the sidelines
of the upcoming General Conference, and the IAEA Director General will also visit
Tehran in the near future to hold high level consultations with the Government of the
Islamic Republic of Iran with the aim of enhancing cooperation between Iran and the
IAEA in different fields and discussing current issues of mutual interest.
3.
IAEA’s inspectors are permitted to service the identified equipment and replace
their storage media which will be kept under the joint IAEA and AEOI seals in the
Islamic Republic of Iran. The way and the timing are agreed by the two sides.

4/4

21-17987
