V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

pansion of the Israeli settlements, and other plans and actions creating conditions leading to the displacement and
exodus of Palestinians from the occupied Palestinian territories;
4. Expresses its alarm at the deterioration, as a result
of the Israelí occupation, in the living conditions of the
Palestinian people in the Palestinian territories occupied
since 1967;
5. Affirms that the Israeli occupation is contradictory
to the basic requirements for the social and economic development of the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territories;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare an indepth study on future needs in the field of infrastructure
for the Palestinian people in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-fourth session, through the
Economic and Social Council, on the progress made in the
implementation of the present resolution.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

42/191.

Global Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the Vancouver Declaration on Human
Settlements, 197670 and the recommendations for national
action 71 adopted at Habitat: United Nations Conference
on Human Settlements,
Recalling its resolution 35/56 of 5 December 1980, the
annex to which contains the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade, in which, ínter alía, the importance of the provision of basic shelter and infrastructure was stressed,
Recalling also its resolution 41/190 of 8 December 1986
on the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless,
Taking note of the reports of the Executive Director of
the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) entitled "Shelter and services for the poor -a call to
action" 74 and "A new agenda for human settlements", 75
as well as the comments made by Governments at the
tenth (commemorative) session ofthe Commission on Human Settlements,
Recognizing that adequate and secure shelter is a basic
human right and is vital for the fulfilment of human aspirations,
Recognizing further that a squalid residential environment is a constant threat to health and to life itself and
thereby constitutes a drain on human resources, a nation's
most valuable asset,
Noting that this lamentable situation can adversely affect the social and political stability of countries,
Deeply concerned about the present alarming situation,
in which, despite the efforts of Governments at the national and local levels and of international organizations,
more than one billion people find themselves either completely without shelter or living in homes unfit for human
habitation, and that, owing to prevailing demographic
trends, these already formidable problems will escalate in
the coming years unless concerted, determined measures
are taken immediately,
74 HS/C/10/3.
75 HS/C/10/2 and Corr.1 and 4.

159

Fully aware of the multidimensional nature of the shelter problem, which has its main roots in poverty and, in
many countries, is aggravated by the scarcity of resources,
inadequate institutional capacities and the lack of a legal
and financia! framework for alleviating the problem,
Realizing that the problem manifests itself in slums and
shanty towns, with inadequate social and technical services, and in a general deterioration of the living environment in rural settlements,
Conscious of the vital role of the self-help efforts of the
poor to house themselves and the multiplier effects of shelter development, based on the full mobilization of local resources, and their importance to the economic development of a country, and the lost opportunities for
development represented by the neglected shelter sector,
Convinced that the continuous, co-ordinated and widely
based efforts of all relevant agencies, bodies, organizations
and individuals, when guided by an appropriate strategy,
will reverse the alarming trends and produce clear and visible improvements in the shelter and neighbourhoods of
the poor and disadvantaged by the year 2000,
Encouraged by action already taken in many countries
to prepare national shelter strategies and launch other
measures that will promote achievement of the goal of
shelter for ali,
1. Decides that there shall be a Global Strategy for
Shelter to the Year 2000, including a plan of action for its
implementation, monitoring and evaluation;
2. Further decides that the objective of the Strategy
should be to stimulate measures that will facilitate adequate shelter for ali by the year 2000;
3. Requests the Executive Director of the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) to prepare
a proposal for a Global Strategy for Shelter to the Year
2000 and its implementation, including its financia) implications, for consideration by the Commission on Human Settlements at its eleventh session;
4. Requests the Commission on Human Settlements to
formulate a Global Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000,
to be drawn up within existing resources, for submission,
through the Economic and Social Council, to the General
Assembly at its forty-third session;
5. Urges ali Governments to commit themselves to the
objectives of the Global Strategy for Shelter to the Year
2000 by adopting and implementing shelter strategies in
accordance with the guidelines contained in section I of
the annex to the present resolution, which will permit the
mobilization of all forces and resources in the country for
the attainment of the objectives of the Strategy, and to
renew this commitment annually by, ínter alía, announcing on World Habitat Day the concrete actions to be taken
and targets to be achieved during each successive year;
6. Requests ali United Nations bodies and agencies and
the international community at large to support the formulation and implementation of the Global Strategy
along the lines defined in section II of the annex to the
present resolution.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

160

General Assembly-Forty-sec:ond Session
ANNEX

l. GUIDELINES FOR NA TIONAL ACTION
1. Ali Governments that have not airead y done so should endeavour
to prepare national shelter strategies at appropriate levels as an integral
part of their development strategies.
2. The national shelter strategies should take into account the multidimensional nature of the problem and fulfil and reflect the wide socioeconomic benefits of shelter development.
3. The national shelter strategies should also reflect the criteria of affordability and replicability, particularly for shelter for low-income
population groups; special attention should be paid to improving the access of the poor to land with secure tenure and appropriate building
materials, as well as to developing housing finance institutions that will
mobilize household savings and are responsive to the needs of lowincome groups.
4. Ali efforts should be made to involve, in full partnership, ali concerned governmental, non-governmental, public-sector and privatesector bodies, agencies and institutions at all levels and, in particular, the
communities and people concerned, in the planning and implementation
of national shelter strategies.
5. In the national shelter strategies, special attention should be paid
to the problems faced and capacities represented by marginalized groups
such as women and youth and disadvantaged groups such as the aged
and the disabled.
6. Governments should report biennially at the session of the Commission on Human Settlements on the progress made in implementing
the measures mentioned above.

11.

GUIDELINES FOR INTERNATIONAL ACTION

Ali United Nations bodies, specialized agencies and institutions
should support, as necessary, the Commission on Human Settlements
and the Executive Director ofthe United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habita!) in the formulation and implementation of the Global
Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000 and ensure that their relevan! country-specific activities are supportive of and co-ordinated with national
shelter strategies.
l.

2. The regional commissions of the United Nations should encourage and assist in the formulation of shelter strategies in their respective
regions and the exchange of information thereon, and the Executive Director is invited to make ful] use of contacts with Governments through
the regional commissions and their subsidiary bodies.
3. Ali countries in a position to do so and international funding agencies should give ali possible support to Governments in their efforts to
plan and implement national shelter strategies for the attainment of the
goals of the Global Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000 and, within the
framework of an enabling shelter strategy, their endeavours to achieve
improvement in the shelter situation of their inhabitants, in particular
the poor and disadvantaged, and they should report to the Executive Director ofthe United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habita!) on
their actions in this respect.

42/192.

Tenth anniversary ofthe adoption ofthe Vienna
Programme of Action on Science and Technology for Development

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the continuing importance of the Vienna
Programme of Action on Science and Technology for Development 76 in providing comprehensive guidance for the
work of the United Nations system in the field of science
and technology for development,
Having considered the report of the Intergovernmental
Committee on Science and Technology for Development
on its ninth session,77

76
Report of the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology
for Development, Vienna, 20--31 August 1979 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.79.1.21 and corrigenda), chap. VII.
77
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-second Session.
Supplement No. 37 (A/42/37 and Corr. l).

Noting that 1989 will mark the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of the Vienna Programme of Action on Science
and Technology for Development, and taking note of the
recommendation of the Intergovernmental Committee
that the General Assembly observe the anniversary at its
forty-fourth session, at a commemorative plenary meeting,'1 8
Recalling that the Intergovernmental Committee, at its
tenth session, will carry out an end-of-decade review ofthe
implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action,
Conscious of the need to enhance the endogenous scientific and technological capabilities of the developing countries, and aware of the impact of new and emerging areas
of science and technology on the development of the developing countries,
Bearing in mind that the multi-faceted preparation of
the end-of-decade review of the implementation of the
Vienna Programme of Action constitutes a challenge and
an opportunity to contribute to a forward-looking strategy
for incorporating science and technology in the development process,
1. Endorses the resolutions and decisions adopted by
the lntergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology for Development at its ninth session; 79
2. Also endorses Economic and Social Council resolution 1987/79 of 8 July 1987;
3. Emphasizes the need for careful and comprehensive
preparation of the end-of-decade review of the implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action on Science and
Technology for Development, in 1989, taking into account the important role that science and technology play
in the development process, in particular in developing
countries;
4. Reaffirms the crucial role of the United Nations in
promoting and catalyzing international co-operation in
the field of science and technology for development, in
particular in developing countries, and in helping solve
global scientific and technological problems;
5. Decides to observe at its forty-fourth session, at a
commemorative plenary meeting, the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of the Vienna Programme of Action on
Science and Technology for Development, and encourages the participation of distinguished professionals in the
field of science and technology;
6. Also decides that, in the light ofthe importance and
priority accorded to science and technology for development, the general debate on the question will be conducted
at its forty-fourth session in plenary meeting.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

42/193.

Preparation of the new international development strategy for the fourth United Nations development decade

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter ofEconomic Rights and Du-

78 /bid., sect. II.A, resolution 1 (IX), sect. II.
79 /bid., sect. II.
