A /68/PV.82

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

82nd plenary meeting

Thursday, 10 April 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Khiari
(Tunisia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 12
Global road safety crisis
Note by the Secretary-General (A/68/368)
Draft resolution (A/68/L.40)
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I now give
the floor to the representative of the Russian Federation
to introduce draft resolution A/68/L.40.
Mr. Kiryanov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Road safety has been and remains one of
the today’s most pressing issues. Deaths and injuries
in road traffic accidents pose a serious threat to global
health and have a very negative impact on social and
economic progress and sustainable development.
The inclusion of road safety in the agenda of
the General Assembly has contributed to a better
understanding by the international community of the
magnitude of the problem and, as a result, has led to an
acceleration of Government action and greater support
from the United Nations and other international
organizations at the national, regional and global
levels. In that regard, it is necessary to emphasize the
crucial role of the first Global Ministerial Conference
on Road Safety, held in Moscow in 2009, which was
of paramount importance. The Moscow declaration
adopted as an outcome of the Conference called upon

Member States to declare 2011-2020 the Decade of
Action for Road Safety.
Resolutions 64/255 and 66/260, adopted in 2010
and 2012, respectively, upon the initiative of the
Russian Federation, triggered the launch within the
framework of the Decade of a large-scale campaign to
stabilize and reduce the global fatality rate due to road
traffic accidents. Targeted steps by the international
community to reduce road traffic injuries have already
brought about positive results. Accordingly, over the
past few years, we have seen a downward trend in the
field in a number of countries. Continued cooperation
in this area will not only prevent hundreds of thousand
fatalities on the roads but also contribute to global and
sustainable social and economic progress.
Ensuring road safety is an important aspect in the
effective implementation of international development
goals, including those in the field of sustainable
transport. We hope that universal access to safe,
affordable and environmentally sound transport will
be recognized as one of the priorities of the post-2015
global development agenda. Such a goal may imply the
development of sustainable transport systems, leading,
in particular, to better access to transport services,
the stabilization and further reduction of the projected
fatality rate due to road traffic accidents worldwide,
as well as a massive reduction in greenhouse gas
emissions.
We also support the Secretary General’s endeavours
to strengthen United Nations system coordination on
sustainable transport. We assume that those efforts will
take into account and prioritize road safety.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

14-29539 (E)

*1429539*

A/68/PV.82

For its part, the Russian Federation reaffirms
its commitment to joint international efforts to
fight mortality and injuries on the roads. Today, my
country is undertaking a series of activities within
its federal target programme for road safety until
2020, including measures on preventing road users’
dangerous behaviour, ensuring road safety for children,
raising the level of the technical condition of vehicles,
developing traffic management systems for vehicles and
pedestrians, and providing assistance for road victims.
As a result, the decrease in transport risk has doubled.
The fifth international congress on the theme
“Safety on the roads for the safety of life”, organized
by the Council of Federation of the Federal Assembly of
the Russian Federation, will be held in Saint Petersburg
this fall. We invite delegations from all countries to
participate.
It is a great honour for us to present for the General
Assembly’s consideration the draft resolution entitled
“Improving global road safety” (A/68/L.40). The draft
resolution is based on relevant General Assembly
resolutions adopted in previous years. It reflects the
progress achieved by the international community
on road safety and aims at strengthening multilateral
cooperation in all major aspects to reduce the level
of injury caused by traffic accidents, which are now
considered to be a serious challenge to public health
and socioeconomic development in general. It is very
important that the draft resolution emphasizes that a
robust response to global challenges in road safety is
possible through multilateral cooperation that includes
private sector and non-governmental organizations.
The draft resolution highly appreciates the efforts
undertaken by United Nations entities, first and
foremost the World Health Organization (WHO), but
also regional commissions, multilateral development
banks and other international organizations. The draft
resolution welcomes measures taken by Member States
to join the relevant international legal instruments and
introduce comprehensive national legislation on road
safety, taking into account the main risk factors.
It is of paramount importance that the draft
resolution calls upon Member States to tackle the
problems of road safety through comprehensive
approaches, which implies the introduction of efficient
road safety management systems, strengthening
interagency cooperation and developing public
strategies on road safety in line with the Global Plan of
the Decade of Action for Road Safety (2011-2020).
2/16

10/04/2014

The draft resolution mandates WHO and the
United Nations regional commissions to further
support efforts in achieving the goals of the Decade,
including facilitating the arrangements for the third
United Nations Global Road Safety Week with a focus
on improving the safety of children in traffic.
WHO is encouraged to continue monitoring
progress on the implementation of the Decade for
stabilization and reduction of road transport accidents.
In that context, the draft resolution notes the importance
of parameters and indices for a systematic assessment
of progress achieved.
The Secretary-General is invited to continue
efforts to promote effective international cooperation
on road safety issues, including in the broader context
of sustainable transport. In that regard, it encourages
further efforts to strengthen coordination of the work
of the United Nations system on sustainable transport.
States Members of the United Nations and the
international community as a whole are encouraged to
take road safety into due consideration in the elaboration
of the global post-2015 development agenda.
The draft resolution welcomes the Government
of Brazil’s offer to host the second high-level global
conference in 2015 in order to monitor progress on the
Decade of Action for Road Safety. We wish our Brazilian
colleagues success in organizing that important forum.
The draft resolution was discussed in detail
during intergovernmental consultations, with the full
participation of all parties concerned. We note with
deep satisfaction that the negotiations were held in a
constructive atmosphere of openness and transparency,
which allowed us to reach consensus.
We express our sincere gratitude to all delegations
that participated in the negotiation of the draft
resolution. In particular, we would like to thank
our colleagues from WHO and the United Nations
Economic Commission for Europe for their significant
contribution to our work.
We call upon all delegations to support the draft
resolution and invite Member States to become sponsors
of it.
Ms. Yeoh (Malaysia): I am honoured to stand
before the Assembly representing Malaysia. I would
like to take this opportunity to congratulate the
Russian Federation for leading the discussions that led
to a concrete draft resolution on improving global road
safety (A/68/L.40).
14-29539

10/04/2014

We are fast approaching the midway point of the
Decade of Action for Road Safety. This is the right
time to make a calculated assessment. Undoubtedly,
there have been many successes and advances. Many
nations shared their practices on efforts to reduce road
casualties. The Decade of Action has raised the profile
of road safety, motivated more countries to establish
strategic plans or lead agencies and encouraged
important new initiatives.
Malaysia wishes to reaffirm its continuous
commitment to the Decade of Action for Road Safety
and efforts to reduce road traffic injuries. We are
continuously increasing and intensifying our road
safety initiatives and programmes towards that end,
resulting in the reduction of the fatality index per 10,000
registered vehicles from 3.55 to 2.9 for the period from
2009 to 2013.
In May 2013, Malaysia celebrated United Nations
Global Road Safety Week, during which various
pedestrian-themed road safety programmes were
organized nationwide. That included the adoption of
pedestrian facilities by the road safety department,
mural-drawing competitions in schools, the repainting
of faded zebra crossings and advocacy programmes.
Malaysia successfully introduced road safety
education in all primary schools beginning in 2007
and has included a road safety awareness campaign
in its national service training programme in an effort
to educate and create awareness among the younger
generation on the importance of road safety. Malaysia
has also embarked on weekly advocacy programmes that
target high-risk road users, particularly motorcyclists,
and pedestrians in order to increase the knowledge
and awareness of current road users. That effort is
complemented by advocacy through various media,
namely, television, radio, print and social media.
Realizing the value of community involvement,
Malaysia has also launched road safety communitybased programmes. With the theme “By the community,
for the community”, every state in Malaysia will be
working with a specific district to provide guidance
and support to that community’s road safety initiatives.
Through cooperation between the Malaysian
Institute of Road Safety Research and the global new car
assessment programme, the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations new car assessment programme
completed two phases of testing involving 25 popular
models in the region’s market in 2013.

A/68/PV.82

As road safety is everyone’s responsibility, the
Government actively cooperates with the private sector,
non-governmental organizations and the public at large
to participate in and contribute to road safety initiatives.
Recognizing the significance of public engagement,
Malaysia continuously listens to and requests feedback
from those groups before formulating new road safety
policies.
We must — and can — do much more. Safe mobility
should be something we should all expect, irrespective
of whether we are rich or poor or from the North or
South. We should all have safe access to our streets, just
as to clean water or education. That should be true for
all, but especially so for our children.
The United Nations Convention on the Rights of
the Child clearly and specifically states that children
should have the right to a clean and safe environment.
The Convention has been in force for more than
21 years, which is time enough for a child to be born
and reach maturity under its protection.
But in many countries children’s rights still do not
extend to the journey to and from school or the street
outside their homes, where kids play. Through this draft
resolution, the Assembly will approve a United Nations
Global Road Safety Week for 2015, to focus on the
needs and rights of children on our streets and roads.
Next year, hundreds of organizations and hundreds of
thousands of people will campaign to make roads safer
for our children.
We need to prioritize safe speeds on our streets to
protect all road users, especially children, to encourage
a healthy lifestyle and allow people to walk and cycle
in safety and in comfort. We need to do more to
support the concept of the safe school and make school
communities an empowering hub for local action on
safe and sustainable transport. We need to accord this
agenda the priority it deserves and embed it in national
programmes. In that respect, a road safety target must be
included in the new post-2015 sustainable development
goals.
In my role as Global Ambassador for the Make
Roads Safe campaign, I have met many families who
have suffered the loss of a child or a parent in a road
crash. When one visits homes and hospitals and see
first-hand the impact of those tragedies and the way
they engulf people in grief and despair, one cannot step
away and not do anything. There has not been a voice
for road traffic victims.

14-295393/16

A/68/PV.82

That is changing. In support of the Decade of
Action, the global Make Roads Safe campaign, under
the leadership of Mr. Robertson and coordinated by the
United Nations Global Road Safety Collaboration; the
excellent work being done across the world by the auto
clubs of the Fédération internationale de l’automobile,
which is led by its President, Jean Todt; and the relevant
United Nations resolutions are giving voices to the
demand for action.
In my visits to many countries, along with sadness
and loss, I have also seen the many ways in which
solutions are being implemented and lives protected:
helmet enforcement in Viet Nam; new bicycle lanes in
Costa Rica; a new road safety strategy in Cambodia;
pilot projects for safer school routes in South Africa;
the big reductions in deaths and injuries that are being
achieved in Russia; and, in my own country, road
design solutions and car crash test programmes, which
demonstrate Malaysia’s commitment to road safety.
It is wonderful that Brazil is offering to host the next
Global Ministerial Conference on Road Safety, which
will allow Brazil to look into ways to ensure safer roads.
In the months leading up to the Ministerial Conference,
we must be ambitious with our expectations.
Road safety needs a stronger voice at the United
Nations. We need new sources of funding to support
road safety campaign, and we need new momentum in
support of our shared objective for the Decade of Action,
beginning with the inclusion of road safety in the post2015 goals. Let us all recommit to that challenge and
work together to make our roads safe.
Lord Robertson (United Kingdom): It is a great
honour to represent the United Kingdom in today’s
meeting, and I would like to thank the United Kingdom
Government for giving me this opportunity.
I am the Chairman of the Commission for Global
Road Safety. As a former United Kingdom Defence
Secretary and Secretary General of NATO, I feel I
speak with some authority when I describe the carnage
on the world’s roads as resembling nothing less than a
war.
Since I last spoke in the General Assembly six
years ago (see A/62/PV.87), a great deal of progress has
been made in uniting the world to combat road safety
deaths and injuries. Building on the early leadership of
the Sultanate of Oman, the Russian Federation hosted
the first Global Ministerial Conference on Road Safety
in Moscow. The Decade of Action for Road Safety
4/16

10/04/2014

was proclaimed and a Global Plan for the Decade
was agreed. I would like to pay tribute to all of those
involved in driving that process forward.
Since the launch of the Decade of Action for
Road Safety, in May 2011, many countries have been
inspired to redouble their efforts to prevent road
traffic injuries. New national strategies have been
launched in a number of countries, and Bloomberg
Philanthropies estimates that more than 1.5 billion
people are now being protected by new traffic safety
laws in the countries where it works. With the support
of the FIA Foundation for the Automobile and Society,
independent vehicle crash test programmes have been
established in Latin America and in south-east Asia to
encourage consumers to demand safe cars. And safety
assessment is now being used to influence road design
in some World Bank supported projects.
Yet I have to say that we have not come as far as
some of us had hoped, or indeed expected. In 2010,
when the General Assembly established the Decade of
Action, more than 100 countries endorsed the objective
of stabilizing and then reducing road deaths by 2020.
But we have not yet seen the levels of international
cooperation or political leadership or resourcing
that are necessary if we are going to achieve that. I
therefore congratulate Brazil for offering to host the
mid-decade review Ministerial Conference. That will
be an important opportunity to renew commitment
to the Decade of Action; to forge new partnerships
between countries, within regions and with corporate
and philanthropic donors; and to generate momentum
for real advances in the second half of the Decade of
Action.
The latest global status report from the World
Health Organization shows a stark divide between
high-income countries, where road casualty numbers
are falling, and the rest of the world. Cooperation
between nations that have developed expertise and road
safety and those that need assistance should therefore
be a priority. The need to find ways to cooperate was
a subject raised by President Rousseff of Brazil when
the United Kingdom’s Prime Minister David Cameron
visited the country the year before last, and it is clearly
important to many Group of Twenty nations that are
experiencing rapid motorization.
Improving road safety can seem an immense task,
but by focusing on the main building blocks — which
are data management, the way roads are designed and
used, vehicle standards and new technologies, seat
14-29539

10/04/2014

belt and helmet enforcement and, above all, speed
management — countries can drive down the number
of deaths and injuries. That has been the experience of
the United Kingdom over many decades. The United
Kingdom has been fortunate in being able to develop
policies through a sustained focus on road safety, and
that has led to us being among the world leaders in road
safety with one of the lowest casualty rates.
This year in the United Kingdom we are celebrating
30 years of drink-drive campaign activity, which is
estimated to have saved around 2,000 lives. That
has shown the positive impact that communications
can have when done effectively — for instance, by
tackling attitudes towards drinking and driving, social
acceptability and denial.
Alongside that, we have taken a pioneering role
in developing the European New Car Assessment
Programme and have also developed our safety helmet
rating system, which helps to inform motorcyclists about
how well a helmet will protect them from a head injury.
That system is unique to the United Kingdom and was
recently awarded a Prince Michael International Road
Safety Award.
The United Kingdom continues to take a tough
approach to enforcing road safety law. However, for
some minor offences we have recently made remedial
training courses available, which are aimed at changing
driver behaviour.
Internationally, too, the United Kingdom is
supporting road safety. The Department for International
Development provides £1.5 million to the Global Road
Safety Facility, which is housed at the World Bank. As
a Board member of the Global Road Safety Facility, the
United Kingdom has pushed for the mainstreaming of
road safety across the World Bank and for increased
engagement with other multilateral development banks.
The World Bank’s Transport Sector Board recently
agreed that no road project shall be approved by the
Board without a comprehensive consideration of the
road safety context in the borrowing country.
In addition, the Department for International
Development works directly to improve road safety
in partner countries. For example, in Nepal, where
almost half a million people suffered road injuries in
2010, the Department is improving safety conditions
on highly vulnerable mountain roads and ensuring
their sustainability by working with the Government
to strengthen the capacity for implementing road

A/68/PV.82

safety measures. Through the African Community
Access Programme, the Department for International
Development undertakes applied research to improve
road safety. In Tanzania, for example, its programmes
have assessed the effectiveness of different road safety
measures to increase safety for children and adults.
Last week, the World Bank and the Institute for
Health Metrics and Evaluation published an important
new analysis of the global burden of disease caused
by motorized transport. That report calculates — and
it is really quite remarkable — that the combined
deaths from road injury and motor-vehicle related air
polution amount to 1.5 million people per year, which
is a greater casualty rate than AIDS or malaria. But
unlike those terrible diseases, the global trajectory of
vehicle-related deaths is upwards. That data reinforces
the Commission for Global Road Safety’s view that
a focus on road safety can also play a vital role in
improving the urban environment and tackling some
of the conditions, such as poor air quality and lack of
exercise, that are responsible for the rapid increase in
noncommunicable diseases.
I am grateful to the General Assembly for taking
note in this draft resolution (A/68/L.40) of the
Commission for Global Road Safety’s latest report,
Safe Roads for All: A Post-2015 Agenda for Health and
Development. It is a report with a simple but compelling
argument at its core: road traffic deaths and injuries
are a plague on the young people of this planet, human
suffering is preventable, and we have a powerful model
and economic case for taking action.
By the end of this year, the mid-way point of the
Decade of Action, we need to see a renewed political
and financial commitment to road safety. As part of
the open working group meetings last week, the United
Kingdom, represented in a troika made up of Australia
and the Netherlands, noted the importance of increasing
access to safe, sustainable transport, within the cluster
discussion on economic growth, industrialization
infrastructure and energy.
As Prime Minister Cameron has said, every six
seconds somebody is killed or seriously injured on
the world’s roads. Addressing that must be an urgent
priority for the international community. I pay tribute to
Michelle Yeoh as the Global Road Safety Ambassador,
who spoke before me in this debate. She has brought her
talents and her communication skills to bringing this
message to a wider audience. But we must all redouble
our efforts to secure urgent action for road safety.

14-295395/16

A/68/PV.82

The challenge we face, which we have not yet
met, is how to transfer the words and good intentions
contained in this draft resolution and previous United
Nations resolutions into real and practical cooperation
and action on our streets and highways. We must do
so to fulfil the promise of the Decade of Action and,
in doing so, lay the foundations for safer and more
sustainable mobility for all.
Mr. Al-Hajri (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf
of the Government of the Sultanate of Oman, I would
like to extend my sincere thanks and appreciation to
His Excellency the Secretary-General for his report
(A/68/368) on efforts to improve road safety around the
world. In it, he reviews the most recent developments in
the implementation of recommendations contained in
General Assembly resolutions on improving road safety
around the world. Moreover, I would like to commend
the constructive efforts by the international community
in the field of traffic and road safety.
We are proud that our country pioneered launching
the global Make Roads Safe Campaign, which we
introduced in the General Assembly by promoting
the inclusion of an item on road safety in the agenda,
in the service of generations to come. The Assembly
included such an item in its agenda for the first time at
its fifty-seventh session. At the plenary meeting held on
22 May 2003 (see A/57/PV.86), the Assembly adopted
a resolution (resolution 57/309) that the Sultanate
of Oman introduced based on our firm belief in the
importance of achieving road safety at the international
level.
The international community is shedding light on
such tragic incidents in order to raise awareness of the
need to improve road safety. The General Assembly
has adopted a number of resolutions on global road
safety, and a number of meetings have been held at the
ministerial level to raise awareness on the tragedy of
traffic casualties and on the need to build safer roads
and provide technical safety assistance at the regional
and global levels.
As evidenced by the fact that road safety has
become an important item on the agenda of the United
Nations and those of other international organizations,
the international community attaches great importance
to cooperation with all the relevant parties to put an
end to this harmful phenomenon. According to United
Nations statistics, approximately 1.2 million people die
each year as a result of traffic accidents, in addition

6/16

10/04/2014

to the millions injured or disabled. That takes a heavy
social, economic, financial and human toll on the
international community.
The Sultanate of Oman is making great efforts to
improve road safety. For example, the Sultanate has
issued a decree establishing a national committee on
road safety to set out a single, comprehensive strategy
to reduce traffic and road accidents and to develop
standards that meet international criteria. With regard
to awareness-raising efforts, we periodically review
traffic statistics and, each year, publish approximately
1 million leaflets that are distributed throughout
every governorate in the Sultanate and that target road
users, schoolchildren and every sector of society. We
have also produced internationally award-winning
awareness-raising films. In order to raise awareness
about road safety among future generations, we have
established a traffic school for children that includes a
model of an ideal integrated city. Moreover, the police
force of the Sultanate of Oman, in cooperation with the
relevant Government authorities, has been planning
and following up on the implementation of road safety
measures. It periodically updates the road design
manual to bring it in line with the specifications of local
and international safety standards. In addition, we have
established a website for the public traffic authority to
provide comprehensive information on road safety and
answers to people’s questions.
In conclusion, we would like to express our
appreciation and gratitude to the Russian Federation
for introducing the draft resolution entitled “Improving
road safety around the world”. In order to improve
international efforts in this respect, and based on our
desire to work together to achieve the common goal of
safeguarding human rights and increasing international
cooperation on road safety, we call on the General
Assembly to adopt the draft resolution by consensus.
Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): My delegation
welcomes this important debate to consider the draft
resolution entitled “Improving global road safety”
(A/68/L.40). We support its adoption and we trust
that the world, in particular developing countries, will
continue to witness safety improvements to our roads.
Indeed, the issue of road safety is an imperative
improvement in our countries, as millions of our people
suffer grave injuries — and many lose their lives — due
to road accident injuries in our communities. We concur
with the view that road accident injuries are a major

14-29539

10/04/2014

public health and development problem with a broad
range of social and economic consequences that put
considerable strain on our national systems.
For that reason, it is critically important
that, in pursuit of sustainable development, our
Governments continue to invest in climate-resilient
road infrastructure that is capable of withstanding the
unusual weather patterns of our times and of meeting
the needs of our growing national populations. It is also
critically important that we give expression to the draft
resolution by strengthening our policy framework at
the national level.
In 1996, South Africa adopted the National
Road Traffic Act, which regulates road usage and
promotes road safety. The act also empowers traffic
officers to stop motorists on the roads, examine their
cars, verify the validity of their driving licences and
issue fines where necessary. In line with our policies
of non-discrimination, I should mention that road
traffic laws in South Africa are enforced without
discrimination and apply to all road users, based on the
principles of equality and non-discrimination.
In addition, in 1997, our national Department
of Transport launched the Arrive Alive road-safety
campaign as a short-term initiative aimed at reducing
carnage on the roads. The campaign has played a
significant role in bringing about positive change in
road users’ attitudes. Through it, the Government of
South Africa has managed to drastically reduce the
number of deaths from accidents and has sharpened the
readiness and rapid response of our law enforcement
agencies and health service, particularly during peak
traffic periods on the national calendar. Thanks to its
success, Arrive Alive has now become a continuing,
year-round campaign that is ramped up during peak
holiday periods.
In 2006, in another demonstration of its
commitment to road safety, South Africa’s Government
designated October as Transport Month. Now an
annual project, Transport Month is used to assess the
country’s progress in providing reliable and safe roads
and modes of transport to all road users in the country.
During the month, the Government assesses transport
infrastructure and establishes ways by which the public
transport system and roads can be improved. The
Department of Transport will soon finalize a long-term
national master plan designed to improve the role of
transport in fostering social and economic development

A/68/PV.82

by rolling out infrastructure and services that respond
to the needs of South African road users.
In August 2013, the Department of Transport
also launched the Zenani Mandela Road Safety
Scholarship Certificate Award and Road Safety
Initiative. The scholarship is an initiative of the
Fédération Internationale de l’Automobile Foundation,
based in the United Kingdom and working with the
United Nations in collaboration with South Africa’s
Department of Transport and the Nelson Mandela
Centre of Memory. Its purpose is to offer young South
Africans an opportunity to learn with and from talented
professionals from around the world, with a shared aim
of improving road safety for communities in their home
countries.
The Zenani Mandela Scholarship is also designed
to inspire young leaders in South Africa to join the
global movement advocated by the United Nations
Decade of Action for Road Safety (2011-2020), which
was introduced with the aim of reducing and stabilizing
road deaths by 50 per cent by the year 2020 and beyond.
We call for global support for that initiative.
At the global level, South Africa is a State party
to a number of international conventions related to
transport and road safety. I must add that South Africa
is party to the United Nations Decade of Action, which
aims at raising awareness and supporting international
measures to reduce the effects of poor road safety
by focusing on the Decade’s five road-safety pillars,
alongside with the revitalization of the Arrive Alive
safety campaign.
In that connection, South Africa has developed
its own strategy for the Decade of Action that aims at
improving education and enforcement to address poor
road-use behaviour, in line with international best
practices.
Let us continue to work together to support the
implementation of the objectives of the Decade of
Action for Road Safety.
Mr. Rodríguez Laguens (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): I would first like to thank the President for
convening this important debate on road safety around
the world.
Argentina is an adherent of the Decade of Action
for Road Safety (2011-2020), declared by the United
Nations in 2010 and aimed at stabilizing and, ultimately,
reducing the figures on road-accident casualties

14-295397/16

A/68/PV.82

10/04/2014

worldwide by increasing activities at the national,
regional and global levels.

the World Bank and other organizations, such as the
World Health Organization.

In 2008, Argentina’s President, Cristina Fernández
de Kirchner, sent a bill to the national Congress that
enjoyed political and multisectoral consensus, based
on which a law creating a national road safety agency,
and making road safety a State policy, was enacted
under the aegis of the Ministry of the Interior and
Transportation. The law provides for the agency’s
establishment and for a budget allowing it to function
interjurisdictionally within our federal system. Since
its inception we have implemented a national roadsafety education plan that reaches public and private
schools at every level throughout the country; the
institution of uniform standards for granting national
driving licences; a national speed control plan using
technology on all national highways; a plan regulating
drinking and driving; a seat-belt and motorcycle
helmet plan and a national road safety observatory
for providing statistics certified by the International
Transport Forum. In the past five years we have
achieved concrete results that are reflected in the report
of the World Health Organization. We have reduced the
rate of traffic casualties per 100,000 inhabitants by
14 per cent, and the rate of traffic casualties per 10,000
vehicles by 50 per cent in the same period, representing
5,900 lives saved, which almost equals the number of
traffic victims we have in any given year.

The Argentine Republic supports the draft
resolution now under consideration by the General
Assembly and has co-sponsored it (A/68/L.40). Some
of the key elements of the draft resolution deserve
greater emphasis — for example, the need for national
Governments to promote concrete action on road
safety in the short term and the suggestion that leading
organizations be established in each country. Endowing
them with appropriate budgets and institutional
operations and involving all sectors of society is a vital
necessity today.

We speak of victims, and we should note that all
the policies applied at the national level were developed
together with civil society organizations, which are an
integral part of our national road safety agency, a fact
that is particularly true for the families and friends
of victims of road accidents, whom I would like to
acknowledge here. They are our guiding light on this
path, and they are always with us.
The policies I have mentioned and their results have
been recognized at international level, in particular
during the recent meeting of the United Nations Road
Safety Collaboration in support of the Global Plan for
the Decade of Action of Road Safety. Argentine Minister
of the Interior and Transport Florencio Randazzo
received an award in recognition of the relationships
he has created and the work he has accomplished with
civil society as part of the Global Road Safety Facility,
among other honours. Furthermore, we should mention
that the work done by Minister Randazzo have been
recognized by the International Automobile Federation,

8/16

We cannot wait any longer to show concrete
determination in the field. We must begin the work
to establish specific goals and effective, comparable
indicators, such as number of victims per 100,000
inhabitants, the number of victims per 10,000 vehicles.
We must also observe certain indicators, such as
helmet use, seat belt use, average speed studies and the
prevalence of alcohol and drug use, and create baselines
for each country. For that, we count on the support of
World Health Organization.
Furthermore, it is very important to promote
regional initiatives such as the Ibero-American Road
Safety Observatory (OISEVI), which brings together
road safety authorities of the countries of Ibero-America,
especially Latin America. In addition, we know that,
with the support of the United Nations, the measures
adopted under that initiative can be implemented in
other regions. OISEVI’s technical cooperation function
was mentioned by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon in
his latest report entitled “Improving global road safety“
(A/68/368).
The Observatory has as its central objective the
coordination of strategic actions in the framework of
the Decade of Action for Road Safety (2011-2020).
In that regard, we believe that driver education, the
collecction of statistics, the establishment control
plans and dealing with the greatest problem of our
region — motorcycles — are priorities that we should
focus on in our efforts in the short term.
In Argentina, we have made real progress, but
we are aware that there is still a long way to go. As
noted by the Global Ambassador for the Make Roads
Safe campaign, Michelle Yeoh — and this is the slogan
of the Decade, one which our Minister of the Interior

14-29539

10/04/2014

and Transport has adopted — “Together we can save
millions of lives.”
Mr. Jawhara (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): On behalf of my delegation, at the outset, I
would like to extend our thanks to the delegation of
the Russian Federation for its successful efforts and
leadership during the informal negotiations on the draft
resolution on improving global road safety (A/68/L.40).
The draft resolution deals with one of the most important
issues on the agenda of the United Nations and of the
world at large, namely, the safety of people.
My delegation took part in the informal
consultations on the draft resolution and, as in past
years, became one of its sponsors. We believe that it is
an important draft resolution with regard to the launch
of to the Decade of Action for Road Safety (2011-2020),
which we welcomed. The draft resolution encourages
cooperation among Member States and United Nations
agencies, the private sector and non-governmental
organizations in efforts aimed at achieving the highest
possible degree of road safety. In that regard, we
would like to emphasized the importance of taking
this important issue into account in all upcoming
development programmes of the United Nations. We
would also like to stress that a sustainable transport
sector and improved road safety require a commitment
by developed countries to help developing countries,
especially those facing exceptional circumstances,
through capacity-building, funding and technology
transfer, and without delay.
My Government strongly supports all efforts
to ensure road safety around the world. We have
acceded to the relevant United Nations conventions
on oad transport and road signs. It Government also
pays great attention to the issue of safety on highways
and its impact on human lives and development. The
Government has also established a high-level committee
under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister and with
the participation of a number of Government entities as
well as civil society organizations, in order to develop
a national strategy for road safety. The council of the
public authority for road safety in Syria leads the efforts
aimed at maintaining the technical conditions of all
roads according to global specifications, and securing
traffic safety. It also promotes efforts at data collection
on traffic safety and administrative systems and raises
awareness about traffic satefy rules in cooperation with
the relevant actors and civil society organizations.

A/68/PV.82

Despite all the ongoing efforts by the Syrian
Government to improve traffic safety, we have
experienced a number of difficulties that impede those
efforts, including the ongoing imposition by some
countries and regional entities of illegal unilateral
coercive economic measures against the people and
Government of my country. Unfortunately, those
measures target vital sectors, including transport,
energy, power, finance and trade, with negative impacts
on the efforts of both the public and private sectors in all
development spheres, especially the plans for building
strong infrastructure, including roads, as well as the
improvement of the specifications for roads, taking into
account safety standards.
Armed terrorist groups that are being trained,
financed and equipped by foreign States are
indiscriminately targeting civilian passengers and trade
and transit convoys. They also plant mines and roadside
bombs that claim the lives of thousands of passengers,
including children, and causeda great number of
physical disabilities. They have also led to fear and
horror among Syrians when they travel on roads, after
they had enjoyed safety and security on highways for
decades. On top of that, this catastrophic terror has had
a significant impact on the Syrian economy hampers
the significant role of the road networks, economically
and commercially, as the primary means for trade
movement inside Syria and across the borders.
Finally, we would like to affirm the importance of
genuine political will by all Member States to provide
assistance to the Syrian Government to deal with those
two major problems, and ensure the success of the
government development plans, including those that
aim at improving road safety.
Mr. Botto (Monaco) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks the Secretary-General for his report
on improving global road safety (A/68/368). The report
reminds us of the bleak picture for 2010, when road
accidents caused more than 1 million deaths. Resolution
66/260, co-sponsored by Monaco and adopted on
19 April 2012, called on Member States to carry out
activities to promote road safety in the five areas of the
Global Plan for the Decade of Action for Road Safety
(2011-2020). In most accidents, it is the behaviour of
the driver that is to blame — excessive speed, failure
to control the vehicle, blood alcohol level and failure to
comply with the basic rules of the road.

14-295399/16

A/68/PV.82

That global finding is well known. It is especially
urgent to strengthen the prevention of accidents and
the protection of road users, in particular the most
vulnerable, such as motorcyclists and pedestrians.
In 2011, there were 232 injuries and 2 deaths in the
Principality of Monaco alone. Declared a national
priority two years ago by Prince Albert II, road safety is
clearly being improved. In 2012 and 2013, there were no
deaths, and the number of accidents is on a downward
trend. However, two thirds of the accidents in 2013
still involved two-wheeled vehicles. The Principality’s
Government has therefore launched several awarenessraising campaigns for drivers, namely, in the media,
on the one hand, and by putting up new road signs,
on the other hand. In addition, city planning efforts
include such things as speed warning cameras to
remind drivers of speed limits on the most dangerous
road strips. Furthermore, on the legal front, Monaco’s
criminal code imposes a fine or a prison sentence on
anyone driving a vehicle who is clearly drunk or under
the influence of alcohol.
Finally, educating children and young people is a
key aspect of Monaco’s road safety policy. There are
theory and practical awareness-raising classes from
primary-school age to raise awareness so that children
follow the basic highway and road signalling code.
Mandatory lessons for school children aged 12 and
optional training for those aged 14 lead to a school
certificate in road safety. Furthermore, riding a moped
requires a special driver’s licence, obtainable from the
age of 14 years, which is also valid abroad. Monaco was
one of the first countries to require the completion of a
test for provisional drivers in that category.
Ms. Power (United States of America): The United
States is pleased to co-sponsor and urge the adoption
of this comprehensive draft resolution on road safety
(A/68/L.40). We sponsored the draft resolution because
motor vehicle accidents kill more than 1.2 million
people every year and because many of those deaths
could be prevented through improvements in road
design, traffic management, safety equipment and
emergency response.
Most important, however, is driver behaviour.
Excessive speed and a failure to obey traffic rules are
both killers. The role of alcohol in traffic fatalities is
also well documented and should never be understated.
In recent years, however, we have faced a new and
deadly threat in the form of driving while texting or
talking on the phone. Research shows that cell phone

10/16

10/04/2014

users are more than five times more likely than
undistracted drivers to be involved in an accident and
that texting while driving can delay a driver’s reactions
as much as a 0.08 blood-alcohol level, which is the same
level as for a drunk driver. In the United States, more
teenagers are already killed while texting than because
they have been drinking. However, the problem is not
confined either to teenagers or to highly industrialized
countries. It is spreading as fast as technology.
Worldwide, six out of seven people have access
to cell phones and more than 1 billion cars are on
the road. In crowded conditions, with narrow roads
and poor infrastructure, bicyclists and pedestrians
are particularly at risk. Too many drivers simply do
not understand the danger of taking their eyes, even
briefly, off the road. While drinking is episodic, the
use of hand-held devices is chronic. No one should die
or kill because of a text message.
That is a lesson that we are starting to learn.
Earlier this week, the state of Maryland, here in the
United States, enacted stricter penalties for drivers
who cause an accident while texting or talking on
a cell phone. The new law was named after Jake
Owen, a five-year-old who never turned six because,
three years ago, a distracted driver ploughed into his
family’s car. In 2010, the Secretary-General prohibited
United Nations employees from texting while behind
the wheel. President Obama adopted a comparable
standard for United States employees. Globally, more
than 70 countries have approved laws that restrict
drivers using hand-held devices. We must build on that
momentum and ensure that such laws are enforced.
A motor vehicle is a source of transportation but
is also a potential weapon. Compared to other drivers,
a distracted driver is at least four times as likely to
be involved in a crash. When a driver is texting, the
likelihood of an accident rises by a factor of 20. That is
pure recklessness and must be stopped.
Two years ago, 18-year-old Taylor Sauer was heading
home after dropping a friend off at college. Texting
constantly, she was travelling at 88 miles an hour when
she ran her car into a semi-trailer. Immediately prior to
her death, she sent the following message to a friend: “I
can’t discuss this matter now. Driving and Facebooking
is not safe. Ha ha.”
Traffic safety in all its dimensions is a deadly
serious business. There are many lessons to be learned
about how to minimize the danger. The challenge for us

14-29539

10/04/2014

all and the imperative embodied in the draft resolution
that we consider today are to be sure that those lessons
are learned before, and not after, it is too late.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I thank the Acting
President for presiding over these discussions on the
very important issue of road safety. We need to raise
awareness in the United Nations of the fact that road
and transit accidents are a leading cause of death in
many very populous countries, including my own. Day
after day, thousands of people are killed and maimed in
streets and roads around the globe.
We congratulate the Russian Federation on its
leadership and successful facilitation of the negotiations
on draft resolution A/68/L.40, entitled “Improving
global road safety”, which is before the General
Assembly today. Brazil joins as a sponsor of the draft
resolution and is glad to offer its full support for this
important agenda item as host country to the next highlevel conference on global road safety in 2015. We take
up that commitment with honour and responsibility.
We know that addressing the issue at the international,
national and local levels will help to save lives, improve
health and promote development, as mentioned by
President Dilma Rousseff during her address at the
opening of the general debate of the current session of
the General Assembly (see A/68/PV.5).
I take this opportunity also to acknowledge the
presence of Brazilian congressman Hugo Leal, who
presides over the parliamentarian front in defence of
road safety and who drafted the national law to impose
limits on the consumption of alcohol by vehicle drivers
through more rigorous enforcement of, and an increase
in, criminal penalties.
The current level of traffic accidents in today’s
world is unacceptably high and points to alarming
scenarios in the near future. Mortality and serious
injuries caused by road accidents have become one of
the most pressing public health problems facing the
international community today, since the fatality rate
associated with the road system is considerably higher
than the fatality rate associated with other systems
of transportation. According to reports by the World
Health Organization (WHO), road traffic accidents
claim the lives of 1.3 million victims and injure
20 to 50 million people every year. If we do not change
the course of events, road traffic fatalities will reach
2.3 million and become the sixth leading cause of death
by 2020. Decreasing the mortality rate of road traffic
accidents is a global challenge that affects developed

A/68/PV.82

and developing countries alike. If there is one goal that
could be easily typified as universal, this is it, and it is no
coincidence that it was recognized as an area of priority
in the document compiled by the co-facilitators of the
Open Working Group on Sustainable Development
Goals.
In March 2010, the United Nations proclaimed the
period 2011-2020 as the Decade of Action for Road
Safety and called upon Member States to stabilize, and
then reduce, the forecast level of road traffic fatalities by
increasing activities at the national, regional and global
levels. The initiative has generated greater awareness on
the importance of enhancing transport infrastructure,
adopting preventive measures, penalties and other road
safety norms and providing adequate emergency care
for people injured in road traffic accidents — and not
only adults, but more significantly, children, who tend
to be disproportionately affected, whether directly or
indirectly, due to the loss of parents or caregivers.
Despite noticeable signs of progress, day-to-day
reality still draws to our attention the fact that more
needs to be done. Currently, around 27 per cent of deaths
and injuries in traffic accidents involve pedestrians
and cyclists. But that number rises to over 75 per cent
in developing countries. Pedestrians, cyclists and
motorcyclists constitute a major vulnerable group,
and they deserve adequate attention in public policies
aimed at preventing traffic accidents.
Human life is invaluable and its loss irreparable.
The pain it inflicts on families is unbearable and should
lead us to take firm action at all levels. Road traffic
injuries place a heavy burden on society. According
to the Institute for Applied Economic Research, a
Brazilian economic institute, costs arising from traffic
accidents on federal, state and municipal roads were
estimated at approximately $8 billion in 2005. Previous
estimates in 2003 revealed costs of approximately
$2 billion. In 2012, traffic-related accidents in Brazil
resulted in more 150 million hospital admissions in
public institutions, at a cost of $90 million. Admissions
involving motorcyclists represented 80,000 cases,
amounting to $45 million in health-care costs. A
renewed national plan was adopted in 2011, under
which emergency relief can now be sent more promptly
to disaster-affected sites through a network of mobile
units at maximal alert levels.
We believe that improving road safety requires
multidisciplinary action and efforts to address major
risk factors such as the non-use of safety belts and

14-2953911/16

A/68/PV.82

child restraints, the non-use of helmets, driving under
the influence of alcohol and drugs, inappropriate and
excessive speed and texting and inappropriate use
of cell phones while driving, as highlighted in the
draft resolution we are considering today. Adopting
and enforcing legislation that addresses those most
common risk factors has been a priority for Brazilian
authorities. The best examples to that effect have been
the establishment, since June 2008, of a zero-tolerance
policy on blood alcohol concentration levels for vehicle
drivers and the mandatory use of anti-lock braking
systems and airbags in new vehicles as of January 2014.
Yet another example is the mobilization through the
National Pact for the Reduction of Accidents, which
was established in 2011 by the Ministry of Cities and
the Ministry of Health and further strengthened by
President Dilma Rousseff in September 2012 through
partnerships with civil society.
Brazil is deeply engaged in a number of
international initiatives to enhance cooperation on
road safety in line with the United Nations Global
Road Safety Collaboration, set up by WHO. We are
also convinced that the Decade of Action for Road
Safety (2011-2020) provides the ideal framework for
international cooperation and much-needed support
to the development of national plans, possibly and
hopefully within the broader framework of a post-2015
development agenda.
Finally, we thank all members for welcoming the
offer made by the Brazilian Government to host the next
Global Ministerial Conference on Road Safety in 2015,
most probably at the end of November or beginning of
December. The proceedings for the establishment of a
preparatory committee will be announced in a timely
manner, and we expect to count on the active support
of partners and organizations in this endeavour so that
next year’s Conference can contribute to the overall goal
of improving road safety through greater international
cooperation.
Mr. Rattray (Jamaica): Jamaica thanks the
Secretary-General for transmitting the report by the
World Health Organization (A/68/368) on improving
global road safety. We note the very comprehensive
account of the range of activities and programmes
undertaken around the world in furtherance of the goals
and objectives of the Decade of Action for Road Safety.
Jamaica is indeed pleased that its own activities
and programmes reflect the global trends and is
happy to sponsor the draft resolution (A/68/L.40). It is
12/16

10/04/2014

noteworthy that there is broad recognition of the need
to pay greater attention to global road safety as a means
of promoting national development and indeed global
development.
Jamaica concurs that more needs to be done to
address road safety holistically, including through
better implementation and enforcement of laws and
regulations on safe road use, improving vehicle safety
standards, increasing road user awareness, addressing
the five risk factors and investing in post-crash
treatment and services.
Our experience has taught us the critical importance
of employing multisectoral collaboration in addressing
the epidemic of road traffic injuries and deaths. That
has resulted in greater efforts and awareness of the need
to strengthen capacity and put in place coordinated
policies and programmes that involve all stakeholders,
with the aim of improving road safety in the country.
In 2013, Jamaica was honoured to be the recipient of
the prestigious Prince Michael International Road
Safety Award in recognition of its success in reducing
the number of fatalities on the country’s roads. The
National Road Safety Council was recognized as a best
practice example of a highly effective lead agency on
road safety.
Road traffic injuries are already the number one
killer of young people aged 15 to 29 worldwide. Despite
recent improvements, we run the risk of reversing gains
in reducing fatalities. Having reduced annual fatalities
from 434 in 1993 to 260 in 2012, Jamaica achieved its
target of below 300 fatalities, which was established in
2008. The target was then revised downwards to below
240, to be achieved over a three-year period ending in
2015. However, in 2013 those figures rose to 308. In
addition, for the first quarter of 2014, we have seen a
25 per cent increase in fatalities compared with the first
quarter of 2013.
We cannot afford to let this epidemic get any
worse. Sustained action and attention are required at
the national, regional and global levels to accelerate
progress towards achieving the target of reducing
the projected level of road fatalities by 50 per cent
by 2020 and to prevent fatalities from road crashes
from becoming the number one cause of preventable
death. Road safety still needs to become more of an
international priority. Global funding and support are
still inadequate to achieve the objectives of the Decade
of Action to save 5 million lives and to prevent 50 million
serious injuries by 2020. In that regard, we welcome the
14-29539

10/04/2014

offer of the Government of Brazil to host to the second
global high-level conference on road safety in 2015 in
order to review progress in implementing the Global
Plan for the Decade of Action for Road Safety.
The rising toll of road deaths places a heavy burden
on developing countries such as Jamaica. Health-care
costs and the impact on lost productivity are only the
most glaring examples. We should also bear in mind
the untold cost and suffering borne by victims and their
families, the resulting disabilities and the negative
impact on the enjoyment of development rights. Those
serve only to reiterate why attention to improving
global road safety requires that such a goal be properly
reflected in the post-2015 development agenda.
As we look towards the new global development
agenda, we must ensure that transportation is both
safe and sustainable. As such, Jamaica is supportive of
efforts to address that objective with a simple target in
the context of the new development goals. We reaffirm
the call made by our Prime Minister in endorsing “The
Long Short Walk” campaign in September 2013 for
combating road traffic injury to be included among the
post-2015 sustainable development goals in the context
of safe and sustainable transport.
Ms. Gunnarsdóttir (Iceland): Road safety is
important for all States alike. Iceland is pleased to
have co-sponsored again this year draft resolution
A/68/L.40, which is before us. We are now in the fourth
year of the Decade of Action for Road Safety. We have
set ambitious goals to improve road safety, thereby
preventing serious life-altering injuries and the loss
of lives, aside from the economic costs involved with
regard to traffic accidents.
I am pleased to note that prevention and safety
efforts in Iceland have resulted in a significant decrease
in road traffic fatalities and injuries. A national road
safety plan has been in place since 2005 and the progress
is evident. The most effective measures to date include
legislative action targeted at young drivers, a special
emphasis on enforcing speed limits, road risk mapping
and targeted prevention campaigns, including against
the use of mobile phones while driving. On the basis
of the Decade of Action, further areas for improvement
have been identified for possible inclusion in the
national plan.
While Iceland has managed to decrease the actual
number of fatalities, progress at the international level
has been in proportional terms. Fatalities have remained

A/68/PV.82

the same even as the number of vehicles has increased
by 15 per cent from 2007 to 2010. However, more needs
to be done if we are to achieve our target.
We also need to focus on survivors of traffic
accidents, who are often left with serious and longlasting injuries. In particular, my Government is
committed to raising awareness of spinal cord injuries,
which are given a special mention in the draft resolution
before us. Traffic accidents cause almost half of all
spinal cord injuries. It is estimated that between 4 and
5 million people around the world now live with spinal
cord injuries, most of whom are between the ages of 20
and 40.
The Government of Iceland has supported the
Institute of Spinal Cord Injury in Iceland in its work
towards alleviating the suffering of those living with a
spinal cord injury. The Institute aims to raise awareness
and to collect information on innovative treatments for
such injuries. That initiative has received support from
the Nordic Council, which has agreed to organize a
joint project to search for an effective remedy for spinal
cord injuries.
We encourage Member States, as a part of their
national efforts, to take similar steps to increase
knowledge of the serious injuries caused by traffic
accidents and to try to find ways to more effectively
treat or even cure them. In addition, we stand ready to
share our knowledge with all those who are interested
through our national Road Safety Directorate and the
Institute of Spinal Cord Injury in Iceland.
Finally, we would like to thank Oman for originally
placing the issue of road safety on the agenda of the
United Nations, and the Russian Federation for
continuing to promote our collective efforts to ensure
the safety and needs of all road users. We know firsthand that real results can be achieved in saving lives
and in alleviating the suffering of those left with serious
injuries.
Mr. Roet (Israel): The sacred Talmud tells us that
whoever saves a life is considered to have saved an
entire world. In the light of that, the Global Plan for the
Decade of Action for Road Safety can save the universe.
I would like to thank the President for having
convened this meeting on an important topic that calls
for more focused attention on saving lives. I would also
like to thank the World Health Organization (WHO) for
its ongoing activities and support in the area of global
road safety. Israel is proud to support the current draft

14-2953913/16

A/68/PV.82

resolution (A/68/L.40), as it has all previous resolutions
on road safety.
Fatalities as a result of road accidents remain
shockingly high worldwide. People are twice as likely
to be killed in a road accident as to die of malaria.
Worldwide, road accidents are the leading cause of
death among people of 15 to 29 years old. Vulnerable
road users, namely, pedestrians, bicyclists and
motorcyclists, account for more than half of all traffic
fatalities. That is to say nothing of the tens of millions
who suffer serious injuries each year, many resulting
in long-term or permanent disabilities. That is nothing
short of an epidemic.
It is therefore surprising that such an epidemic
has not evoked a public outcry. Most of such deaths
and injuries are predictable and preventable. Yet only
28 countries, accounting for just 7 per cent of the
world’s population, are protected by comprehensive
traffic safety laws.
Fortunately, the international community is
beginning to take action. The five pillars of the Global
Plan for the Decade of Action for Road Safety provide
clarity and areas of focus for national authorities
acting to improve domestic road safety. It is clear
that progress is being made. The recent WHO report
entitled Improving Global Road Safety highlights the
growing activities of regional organizations that aim
to strengthen road safety among their members. The
number and variety of regional programmes, including
training workshops, indicate that regional organizations
can contribute substantially to the implementation of
the five pillars of the Global Plan for the Decade of
Action for Road Safety.
I would like to take this opportunity to briefly
mention the secondary benefits of increased road safety.
It is clear that, in addition to saving lives, implementing
the pillars of the Global Plan would reduce road
congestion, increase productivity and lessen transport
time for goods and people and reduce pollution, to name
but a few positive outcomes. While of course those
effects pale in comparison to the importance of saving
lives and avoiding catastrophic injuries, they serve to
counter the argument that Governments simply cannot
afford to implement the necessary measures.
I would like to share a few of the many actions the
State of Israel has undertaken to improve road safety
within the country. In 2006, four years before the
General Assembly proclaimed the current Decade of

14/16

10/04/2014

Action for Road Safety (2011-2020), Israel established
a national road safety authority with the goal of
developing and, most importantly, implementing a
national plan. The authority promotes regulations
and policies, prepares driver-education programmes
and communicates safety-related messages to the
public. It has a close working relationship with other
branches of Government, including the police, as
well as non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
concerned with road safety. Chief among those is Or
Yarok — Hebrew for “green light” — which sponsors
research on the wide range of factors that influence
road safety and puts the knowledge into practice to save
lives, for example, taking its outreach directly into the
homes of new drivers to promote safe driving practices.
Or Yarok is a prime example of effective cooperation
between the Government and NGOs.
Together, Israel’s national road safety authority and
its partners are working to increase road safety though a
holistic approach that includes adopting high technical
standards for maintaining sound infrastructure,
promoting strong education programmes, maintaining
a policy of robust enforcement, and other responses that
track the five pillars of the Global Plan for the Decade.
The ultimate goal of Israel’s efforts is, of course, to save
lives. Our success is evident in the numbers. Thanks
to Government efforts, the number of accident atalities
among young drivers fell by 60 per cent between 2006
and 2012. As a result, Israel’s traffic safety record now
surpasses that of other high-income countries with
robust traffic laws and enforcement, and its rate of road
traffic deaths is among the lowest in the world. That is,
of course, not enough, and we should and will do more.
Member States can and should urgently address this
global problem through education, and by establishing
and enforcing effective road safety laws. It is important
to remember that road traffic injuries and deaths can
be reduced and prevented if Governments implement
appropriate interventions. Nearly seven years of the
Decade of Action remain. We have the ability to make
our achievements in this area a model for collective
resolve and national action. We have the ability to make
a difference. We have the ability and the obligation to
save the world, one person at a time.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): In
accordance with resolution 49/2, of 19 October 1994, I
now give the floor to the observer of the International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.

14-29539

10/04/2014

Mr. Boulanger (International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies): Put in economic
and sustainable development terms, road crashes
kill 3,300 people — roughly the number carried by
10 aircraft — every day, or 1.3 million people every
year. Nearly half of those who die on the world’s
roads are pedestrians, cyclists and motorcyclists.
Road crashes also severely injure, often permanently,
between 20 million and 50 million people every year.
The global financial cost of road traffic injuries is
$518 billion every year, equivalent to the loss of an
economy the size of Switzerland’s every year. It is
estimated that approximately 85 per cent of annual road
crash deaths occur each year in low- and middle-income
countries, costing those countries between 2 and
3 per cent of their gross national product per year, or
$65 billion — more than all the development aid they
receive. By 2020, unless action is taken, road traffic
injuries are predicted to rise overall by about 65 per
cent. These economic, social and, more fundamentally,
human costs to parents, young people, breadwinners,
families and communities in general, are unacceptable,
particularly since such tragedies are preventable.
Since 1998, when for the first time the World
Disasters Report of the International Federation of
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) termed
road crashes a global humanitarian emergency, the
International Red Cross and Red Crescent movement
has demonstrated its commitment to road safety,
including through the countless efforts of the Global
Road Safety Partnership, working with Governments,
the private sector and civil society to implement road
safety programmes in the Decade of Action for Road
Safety (2011-2020), now in its third year.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s report
(A/68/368), which outlines several high-profile events
that attest to the recognition of the problem around the
world and the solutions that Governments and other
stakeholders must implement in order to reduce road
traffic crashes and their consequences for public health
and development. We also wish to echo the Global
Status Report on Road Safety 2013 of the World Health
Organization (WHO), which reports that real progress
has been made in improving road safety and saving
lives. For instance, the annual number of road traffic
deaths has not increased for the past three years. New
road safety laws have been passed in 35 countries.
Eighty-nine countries, representing 66 per cent of the
world’s population, now have comprehensive drink-

A/68/PV.82

driving laws. Ninety countries, representing 77 per
cent of the world’s population, have a comprehensive
helmet law covering all riders, roads and engine types,
and apply a helmet standard. Progress has also been
made in extending seat-belt laws to include rear-seat
passengers.
But considerable work must still be done for the
goals and objectives of the Decade of Action to be
realized. For instance, the Global Status Report stresses
that only 59 countries, representing just 39 per cent
of the world’s population, have implemented an urban
speed limit of 50 kilometres per hour or lower and allow
local authorities to reduce those limits. It also states
that transport policies neglect pedestrians and cyclists.
Furthermore, while it is true that the annual number of
road traffic deaths has not increased overall in the past
three years, in 87 countries the number of deaths in the
same period did increase, and while new road safety
laws have been passed in 35 countries, only 7 per cent
of the world’s population is covered by comprehensive
legislation. At more than 1.2 million lives lost every
year, the global death toll remains too high.
The IFRC supports the urgent recommendation
of the Secretary-General and WHO that Governments
pass comprehensive legislation that meets best practices
standards for all key risk factors in order to address
this preventable cause of death, injury and disability.
We also wish to encourage Member States to develop
enforceable policies and laws that protect bystanders
and first responders who provide assistance to the
injured. Good Samaritan laws are very important in
saving lives, as is support to crash victims by properly
trained responders. To that end, the Red Cross and
Red Crescent Movement is building partnerships with
the automobile and touring clubs of the Fédération
Internationale de l’Automobile. The IFRC Global First
Aid Reference Centre aims to play an important role in
strengthening that essential and indeed very direct link
between first aid and road safety.
To underscore the vital importance of first aid in
road safety, the theme of this year’s World First Aid
Day, an event that was introduced by the International
Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement in 2000, was
“First aid and road safety”. To date, more than 17 million
people have learned first aid through courses, and
46 million people have received first aid and preventive
messages. Within the Red Cross and Red Crescent
National Societies, there are today more than 36,000
active first aid trainers and 770,000 active volunteers.

14-2953915/16

A/68/PV.82

The total number of voluntary hours in first aid given
globally is at least 40 million per year.
The IFRC strongly believes that the International
Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, with its 189
National Societies and approximately 15 million
active volunteers, has an important role to play in
reaching the goals of the Decade of Action for Road
Safety (2011-2020). Only a few months ago, at our
General Conference in Sydney, the Global Road Safety
Partnership conducted two workshops highlighting
the role National Societies can and do play in the
Decade of Action. National Societies such as the Viet
Nam Red Cross and the Tunisian Red Crescent work
as auxiliaries to their Governments and advocate
successfully for improved road safety legislation. They
take a hands-on role and work with communities in
educating children on road safety and with adults and
teenagers on improved post-crash care. The workshops
also focused attention on the IFRC pledge to work to
improve road safety outcomes in the five pillars of the
Decade of Action. Delegates from approximately 100
National Societies attended the workshops, and the
takeaway was overwhelmingly positive.
It is certain that the road safety situation holds a
high level of recognition within the Movement. There
are countless examples of good practice initiatives being
implemented and shared all over the globe and there
is high level leadership commitment to building the
capacity of National Societies to expand and enhance
their work in the field through partnerships with the
Global Road Safety Partnership.
But beyond the Red Cross and Red Crescent
Movement approach at the national level, we also
recognize the need for global initiatives with global
impacts. That is why the International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies and the Fédération
Internationale de l’Automobile (FIA) are looking at
ways to collaborate and are identifying opportunities in
which the dozens of National Societies and millions of
volunteers can work together with the 235 automobile
clubs with their 60 million members affiliated with the
FIA. That kind of partnership could lead to initiatives
with global impact.
Much more needs to be done to meet the goal of
the Decade of Action for Road Safety (2011-2020), as
evidenced in the Global Status Report on Road Safety
2013: Supporting a Decade of Action, particularly with
regard to protecting vulnerable road users, adopting

16/16

10/04/2014

and enforcing good road safety laws and reducing the
number of road traffic injuries and fatalities. As the
Secretary-General has said,
“A more systematic approach needs to be taken to
address road safety issues across the five pillars
outlined in the Global Plan for the Decade.”
(A/68/368, para. 66).
But the IFRC believes that the humanitarian crisis,
with its enormous magnitude and very serious impacts
on our economic, community, and family lives, requires
international cooperation beyond just the sharing of
good practices. The IFRC believes that such global
partnerships and collaborations could create the impact
needed to make a difference in the second half of the
Decade of Action for Road Safety.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): We
have heard the last speaker on this item. The General
Assembly will now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/68/L.40, entitled “Improving global road safety”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in the
document, the following countries have become sponsors
of draft resolution A/68/L.40: Algeria, Andorra,
Australia, Azerbaijan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
Czech Republic, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Iraq, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique,
Norway, Qatar, the Republic of Moldova, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Tunisia, the United States of America,
Uzbekistan and Yemen.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): May I
take it that the General Assembly wishes to adopt draft
resolution A/68/L.40?
Draft resolution A/68/L.40 was adopted (resolution
68/269).
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 12?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

14-29539
