TWENTY-SIXTH

YEAR
nd
MEETING: 12 OCTOBER 197 1

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 592) . . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . , .

Page
1

... ..... . . . .. .. .,. ,. ,.. . .,.. .., .. .. ,,,

1

Complaint by Zambia:
Letter dated 6 October 1971 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/10352) . . . . . . . . , . . . . . , . . . , . . . . , . . . . . , . 1.. . . . . . I.. . . .

1

Adoption

of the agenda

spv.1592

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FIFTEENHUNDREDANDNINETY-SECONDMEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday,
fiesident: Mr. Guillermo SEVILLA SACASA (Nicaragua).
Present: The representatives of the foliowing States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Unioll of Soviet Social% Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northsrn Ireland and United
States of America.
Provisional agenda (SIAgendall592)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Complaint by Zambia:
Letter dated 6 October 1971 from the Permanent
Representative of Zambia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/10352).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Complaint by Zambia
Letter dated 6 October 1971 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/10352)
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): In
accordance with the decision previously taken by the
Council, and with the Council’s consent, I invite the
representative of Zambia to be seated at the Council table
and I invite the representatives of the United Republic of
Tanzania, South Africa, Kenya, Nigeria, Guinea, Yugoslavia, India and Pakistan to take the places reserved for
them in the Council Chamber, on the understanding that
they will be seated at the Council table when they wish to
speak.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. V: J. Mwaanga
[Zambia) took a place at the Council table; and Mr. S. A.
Salim (United Republic of Tanzania); Mr. C l? G. van
Hirschberg (South Apica); Mr. J. Odero-Jowi (Kenya);
Mr. E. 0. Ogbu (Nigeria); Mr. 1). Camara (Guinea); Mr. L.
Mojsov (Yugoslavia); Mr. S. Sen (India) and Mr. A. Shahi
(Pakistan) took the places reserved for them.
2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation ffom Spanish): The
Council will now continue consideration of the item on its
agenda. I would draw the attention of members of the

12 October

1971, at 3.30 pm.

fhmil
to the revised text of the draft resolution
[sflo365fRfl.1],
co-sponsored by Burundi, Sierra Leone
and Somalia, which was distributed a few minutes ago.
3. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): During our meeting yesterday
evening 1 informed you, Sir, and through you the members
of this Council that the African members of the Council
had proceeded to rewrite the draft resolution which had
been presented to the Council on 8 October(S/I&K5]
and
that the reformulation of the draft resolution had taken
into account extensive consultations that had taken place
belween African members and delegations on the Council.
4. When my delegation spoke on this matter in the debate
on 8 October, I posed the following question:
‘L. . . in what manner can this Organization assist a
Member State such as Zambia, which falls victim to the
aggressive policies of the South African kgime? ”
[1.59&h meeting, para. 161.1
5. At that time I suggested that the least that this Council
could do in the present case was
“ . . . in a clear and concise manner, draw attention to
the principle that violations of sovereignty and territorial
integrity of a State are contrary to the Charter of the
United Nations, that the vidations committed by South
Africa against the sovereign’y and territory of Zambia are
to be condemned, and that South Africa must desist from
committing any further violations,” [Ibid., para. 162.1
6. When the draft resolution contained in document
Sf 10365 was presented to this Council by the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic on behalf of his
country and of Burundi, Sierra Leone and Somalia, its text
to us represented the minimum action which this Council
should take under the set of circumstances with which
Zambia has been faced over the past two years, and
particularly those arising from the incident of 5 October.
However, we have found that it is not always possible to
obtain a line of action which would be commensurate with
the gravity of a situation because of certain positions
adopted by members of this Council. For those reasons, but
without compromising on any principle, the three African
countries decided to rewrite the draft resolution to take
into account the various positions of members and to bring
forward a resolution which in our opinion would receive a
unanimous vote.
7. The text of the revised draft resolution is contained in
document S/l0365/Rev.l
of 12 October 1971. Before

proceeding to introduce its different provisions, I should
like to draw attention to an amendment to operative
paragraph 3. That paragraph has been *amendedto read as

16. What makes the position of South Africa perhaps even
more deplorable is the fact that South Africa has been able
to launch violations against the integrity of Zambia from an
international Territory over which the United Nations for
all purposes exercises complete authority. If any further
violations occur and if any loss of life is involved and
property destroyed, I cannot see how the United Nations
can escape responsibility in this respect.

fOllOWS:

‘%‘urther declares that in the event of South Africa
violating the sovereignty or the territorial integrity of
Zambia, the Security Council will meet again to examine
the situation further in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter.”

17. The last operative paragraph declares that in the event
of South Africa violating the sovereignty or the territorial
integrity of Zambia the Security Council will examine the
situation further in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter.

8. This latest amendment goes to illustrate the extensive
consultations which members of the African group have
had with various delegations here. It is our hope that this
revised draft resolution will evoke no abstentions, will bring
no ill-will, will call for no misgiving, but will be adopted
unanimously. What does it say? The preambular paragraphs
are quite straightforward.

18. Yesterday we had hoped that the Council would be in
a position to take its decision on this matter. However, we
the co-sponsors were called upon to desist from pressing for
a vote and I think the last 24 hours have been most fruitful.
We have now produced a draft resolution which we hope
will be adopted unanimously.

9. The first mentions the letter of complaint /S/103.52/
which was addressed to this Council by the Permanent
Representative of Zambia and also the letter [S/10364/
from 47 Member States of this Organization which associate themselves with the complaint of Zambia and have
expressed solidarity with and sympathy for the cause of the
Zambian people in their’present crisis.

19. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): We
have taken note of the amendment incorporated in the
revised draft resolution proposed by the delegations of
Burundi, Sierra Leone and Somal.ia(S/~0365/Rev.I].

10. The second preambular paragraph takes note of the
statements made by the Permanent Representative of
Zambia concerning violations of the sovereignty, airspace
and territorial integrity of Zambia by South Africa.

20. We are gratified at the efforts made to arrive at a draft
resolution deserving of general acceptance, I shall now put
to the vote the revised draft resolution, as amended by the
representative of Somalia.

11. The third preambular paragraph takes note of the
statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the South
African Republic.

A vote ~(7s. taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution wns adopted unanimously.l
21. The PRESIDENT (interpretation j?om Spanish): As
your President I am very pleased with this result, which
reflects the collective effort made to arrive at this decision.
As President of the Security Council I wish to thank the
members of the Council for the efforts they have made. We
thank the co-sponsors for submitting a revised draft which
was able to achieve the unanimity of the votes. That is a
praiseworthy step taken by this international forum-the
Security Council-in which we participate.

12. The fourth preambular paragraph enunciates an hnportant principle of international relations in that Member
States must refrain from resorting to the threat or the use
of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State.
13. The fifth preambular paragraph recalls the fact that
the Council is conscious of its responsibility to take
efficient collective measures to prevent and eliminate
threats to peace and security. My delegation has in many
forums of this Organization drawn attention to the grave
situation which has developed in southern Africa as a result
of the racist and imperialist policies of South Africa. We
believe that the Security Council cannot ignore these
realities without imperilling its own efficiency and departing from its own responsibilities.

22. I shall now call on delegations which wish to explain
their votes.
23. Mr. PHILLIPS (United States of America): My delegation has a few comments it would like to make with respect
to the resolution which has just been adopted by the
Council and for which we voted.

14. The operative paragraphs have been kept to three. The
fust of these reiterates the principle that any violation of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a Member State
is contrary to the Charter of the United Nations. I think
that on that score there is complete unanimity.

24. My delegation gave careful study to the statements
that were made to the Council. We noted that they were
not fully consistent-they sometimes left open some question as to the timing, the nature or the extent of incidents
that may have taken place along the border between
Zambia and Namibia.

15. Operative paragraph 2 calls upon South Africa fully to
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Zambia.
In the opinion of the co-sponsors that goes to the heart of
the matter. South Africa must be made to respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Zambia.

25. However, it is clear-and my Government quite under.
stands this-that tension and apprehension have arisen over
1 Seeresolution 300 (1971).
2

the possibility that incidents of this kind might arise in the
future. Moreover, incidents in that region are of particular
concern because the United Nations has recognized responsibilities for the international Territory of Namibia. In this
connexion we reaffirm our support for General Assembly
resolution 2145 (XXI) and the conclusion in paragraph
133 (1) of the Advisory Opinion of the International Court
of Justice2 that South Africa’s presence in Namibia is illegal
and that South Africa has a legal obligation to withdraw
from Namibia.
26. My delegation believes it appropriate and proper that
the resolution reminds Member States that they must
refrain in their relations from resorting to the threat or the
use of force. We believe that both in word and in deed care
should be taken by all parties concerned so that tensions
are not exacerbated. In this connexion, unauthorized
crossings of international frontiers by irregular forces or
armed bands is contrary to the principles of the Charter. We
believe that this Council’s resolutions in this and other
comparable situations are deficient when they do not make
this unmistakably clear. In our view this resolution would
contribute more surely to a reduction of tensions in the
area if it were explicit on this point,

Council, were properly dealt with by the parties through
exchangesof notes in conformity with Article 33 of the
Charter and-if I may be permitted to refer to a recommendation of another body-with paragraph6 of the
Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security

[General Assembly resolutiorz 2734 (XXV)].
32. South Africa, on the other hand, has maintainedthat
violations of airspacearesometimescommitted by Zambian
aircraft. We think that those violations, if they are really
taking place as alleged, are committed by civilian aircraft,
whereas in the case of South Africa military aircraft are
apparently involved.
33. We have greatly appreciated the spirit of understandingand conciliation shown by co-sponsorsof the first
draft of the resolution and the subsequentefforts they
made to reformulate andrewrite the text-to usethe words
of the representative of Somalia. Another amendmentput
forward by the representative of Somalia undoubtedly
served to improve the text further, and I wish to express
my sincereappreciation to him.
34. Taking into account the considerationsI have developed we should have preferred, however, a moreconcise
and more sober resolution, one adheringmore closely to
the relevant information provided to the Council. Wevoted
in favour of the draft resolution becausethe facts reported
to us are proof of the prevailing uneasiness
in the areaand
are fraught with danger, as they may create a risk of
tension. They raise, therefore, someconcern in our minds,
particularly as they are compounded by the fact that the
refusal of South Africa to comply with its obligationsasa
Member State under Articles 73, 77, 79 and 80 (2) of the
Charter is preventing this Organization from playing its
institutional role under Chapter XII which, in our opinion,
would be beneficial to all the parties concerned since it
would remove the causesof tension,

27. We have none the less given our support to this
resolution in the hope that it will encourage all the parties
concerned
to exercise restraint and assist the United
Nations by all peaceful means to meet its responsibilities
for Namibia and promote peace and security in the region.
28. It is our desire that the resolution just adopted should
play its part in allaying the tension which has arisen in the
area, and we trust that it will thereby provide a fitting
context
for the discussions on the question of Namibia
which are to follow.
29. Mr. VINCI (Italy): We for our part have examined
carefully the complaint by Zambia that on 5 October units
of the South African army illegally entered Zambian
territory,
allegedly pursuing guerrillas who had planted
mines on the border between the Caprivi Strip and Zambia.

35. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET (France) (interpretation
j?om French): Following a debate during which we feared
that it might encompasscertain matters close to the main
subject, we have come to the crux of the matter, as
AmbassadorFarah pointed out a moment ago, Of course,
some might have thought it possible to avoid a lengthy
debate. We all know that we should not hold too many
meetingsof the Security Council asthis wotild not be in the
interests of the Member States, the Council itself, or the
United Nations. The Ambassador of Zambia came here,
however, to express to us the misgivingsof his country.
Consequently it was desirable for us to reassurehim, and
also for the Council to expressits concern.

3 0. We were glad to learn from the statement made by the
representative of Zambia that no shots had been fired inside
Zambian territory and, happily, that the Zambian Government did not have to lament loss of life or damage. We also
heard the Foreign Minister of South Africa, who denied
that the South African police had crossed the Zambian
border on 5 October. We took note ofhis statement to the
effect
that: “It is the policy of the Government of South
Africa
to avoid border incidents and violations of the
airspace
of neighbouring countries.” (1590th meeting,
rmra. 72.f

36. The unanimously adopted resolution achievesthis
purpose. It is firm, preciseand measuredin its contents.We
should consequently th‘ank the co-sponsors,you yoursetf,
Mr. President, and also AmbassadorMwaangawhosegreat
African wisdomhas been recognized by us all. Wewishedto
stressthe anxiety of the Security Council to preservethe
territorial integrity and sovereignty of a Member State.

31. The representative of Zambia also recalled other
ncidents, most of which appear to have taken place in
L96 8 and in early 1970. Welearnedalsothat most of those
ncidents, which were not reported at the time to the
2 Legal Consequences far States of the Continued Presence of
‘urrth
Africa in Natnibin (South West Africa) notwithstanding
‘ect8rity Council resolution 276 (I 970), Advisory Opinion, I.C.J.,
kports
1971, p. 16.

37. We believe that all the States directly concernedwill
abide by the text of the resolution. We ourselveshave no
doubts on this score. In any case,it was desirablefor the
3

Security Council to provide the Republic of Zambia with
this assurance. This is why we voted for the resolution.

who spoke in turn, strongly condemning South Africa for
its premeditated acts of aggression against Zambia. This is
the victory we celebrate here.

38. The CHAIRMAN (interpretation from Spanish): I am
grateful to the representative of France for his cordial
reference to my part in this matter.
39. I now call on the representative of Zambia.
40. Mr. MWAANGA (Zambia): I shouId like to say a few
words about the resolution which has just been adopted
unanimousIy by the Security Council on the question of
South Africa’s aggression against my country, the Republic
of Zambia, I must state from the outset that the Council
has done us a lot of injustice by giving South Africa such a
mild reprimand. The resolution which has just been
adopted obviously does not meet the requirements of the
situation, but we welcome it in a spirit of co-operation ‘and
compromise as the very barest minimum action the
Security Council can take under the circumstances.
41. We also recognize that the composition of the Security
Council, particularly this year, is not loaded in favour of
African questions, particularly those questions affecting the
white minority regimes of South Africa. We have noticed a
detestable tendency on the part of some members of the
Security Council to over-protect the white racist minority
regimes in southern Africa.

44. There are many friends who have supported us, both
inside and outside the Council, throughout our consideration of this very difficult problem. We have learned a lot
about the attitude of States, and particularly of the
members of the Security Council, to our problem, and we
have indeed drawn very many bitter conclusions. We only
wish to say that one day, gentlemen, we shall be strong
enough not to require your support, because it is only by
strengthening ourselves that we can assure our security. We
now realize that our security does not lie in thischamber.
It lies in our own ability to defend and protect our
territorial integrity.
45. It is our understanding that the resolution which has
just been adopted, and particularly paragraph 3, is an
indication that in the event of any further violation by
South Africa of our territorial integrity, our airspace, our
sovereignty, the Security Council will meet again to
consider further measures, not excluding measures under
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter.
46. I should like to thank you personally, Mr. President,
for the very active role you have played in bringing about a
spirit of understanding among members of the Security
Council, I should also like to thank the co-sponsors of the
resolution which has just been adopted by the Security
Council for their very constructive role and the support
which they have given us throughout the extremely
difficult negotiations we have had.

42. The Security Council, in my opinion, has set a very
dangerous precedent which will definitely not give any
comfort to Zambia and many other smah and weaker
States, not only in Africa but in various parts of the world.
The hope which we have always had in the ability of the
Security Council to protect small States against aggression
has obviously been shattered, perhaps for good,

47. It is our hope that the Security Council will remain
actively seized of this matter, and that when next we bring
our complaint to the Security Council, if we do have
occasion to do so, the Council will adopt a resolution which
will meet the demands of the situation.

43. The victory which we have just won following the
acceptance by the Security Council of our well-documented
charges against the white racist regime in Pretoria is not an
important victory from our point of view. Our victory was
won on the day the Security Council began its consideration of this question. Our complaint was supported by an
unusually large number of States-47 in all, in the present
case-and by the large number of Foreign Ministers and
Permanent Representatives from all continents of the world

48. The CHAIRMAN (interpretation from Spanish): The
Council will meet tomorrow at 10.30 am. to consider the
questionof Namibia,
Tke meetingroseat 5.30 p.m.

4

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your

NATIONS
rnoy
bookstore

PUBLICATIONS

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
ond distributors
to: United
Notions,
Sales Section,

throughout
New York

or Gcnew.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Ler publications
d6positairer
du

dea
monde

Notions

Unier,

Section

COMO

CONSEGUfR

LES PUBLICATIONS
Notions
entier.

der

Unfes
son!
Informer-vous

venter,

New York

PUELICACIONES

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$U.S.

en

venie

qupr&r

UNIES

dons
1.6 libroiries
et ler ogencer
de votre librairie
ou odrersez-vour
6:

ou Genive.

DE LAS NACIONES

Los publicocioner
de las Nociones
en tcdos
porter
del mundo.
Conrulle
Ventor,
Nuevo
York o Ginebro.

Litho

DES NATIONS

Unidor
erldn
a su librero

UNIDAS

en Yenta en librerios
o dirijore
a: Nociones

0.50 (or equivalent

y cosos dirtribuidomr
Unidos,
Secci6n

in other currencies)

de

82135-August

1973-2,050
