A/RES/73/202

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
3 January 2019

Seventy-third session
Agenda item 82

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 20 December 2018
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/73/556)]

73/202.

Subsequent agreements and subsequent practice in relation
to the interpretation of treaties
The General Assembly,
Having considered chapter IV of the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its seventieth session, 1 which contains the draft
conclusions on subsequent agreements and subsequent practice in relation to the
interpretation of treaties,
Taking note of the recommendation of the International Law Commission
contained in paragraph 49 of its report,
Emphasizing the continuing importance of the codification and progressive
development of international law, as referred to in Article 13, paragraph 1 (a), of the
Charter of the United Nations,
Noting that the subject of subsequent agreements and subsequent practic e in
relation to the interpretation of treaties is of major importance in international
relations,
1.
Welcomes the conclusion of the work of the International Law Commission
on subsequent agreements and subsequent practice in relation to the interpretatio n of
treaties, and its adoption of the draft conclusions and commentaries thereto; 2
2.
Expresses its appreciation to the International Law Commission for its
continuing contribution to the codification and progressive development of
international law;

__________________
1
2

18-22464 (E)

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/73/10).
Ibid., para. 52.

070119

*1822464*

Subsequent agreements and subsequent practice
in relation to the interpretation of treaties

A/RES/73/202

3.
Takes note of the statements in the Sixth Committee on the subject,
including those made at the seventy-third session of the General Assembly, 3 after the
International Law Commission had completed its consideration of this topic in
accordance with its statute;
4.
Also takes note of the conclusions on subsequent agreements and
subsequent practice in relation to the interpretation of treaties, the text of which is
annexed to the present resolution, with the commentaries thereto, brings them to the
attention of States and all who may be called upon to interpret treaties, and encourages
their widest possible dissemination.
62nd plenary meeting
20 December 2018

Annex
Subsequent agreements and subsequent practice in relation
to the interpretation of treaties
Part One
Introduction
Conclusion 1
Scope
The present conclusions concern the role of subsequent agreements and
subsequent practice in the interpretation of treaties.
Part Two
Basic rules and definitions
Conclusion 2
General rule and means of treaty interpretation
1.
Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties set forth,
respectively, the general rule of interpretation and the recourse to supplementary
means of interpretation. These rules also apply as customary international law.
2.
A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary
meaning to be given to its terms in their context and in the light of its object and
purpose, as provided in article 31, paragraph 1.
3.
Article 31, paragraph 3, provides, inter alia, that there shall be taken into
account, together with the context, (a) any subsequent agreement between the parties
regarding the interpretation of the treaty or the application of its provisions; and
(b) any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty which establishes the
agreement of the parties regarding its interpretation.
4.
Recourse may be had to other subsequent practice in the application of the treaty
as a supplementary means of interpretation under article 32.
5.
The interpretation of a treaty consists of a single combined operation, which
places appropriate emphasis on the various means of interpretation indicated,
respectively, in articles 31 and 32.
__________________
3

2/5

See A/C.6/73/SR.20, A/C.6/73/SR.21, A/C.6/73/SR.22, A/C.6/73/SR.23, A/C.6/73/SR.24,
A/C.6/73/SR.29 and A/C.6/73/SR.30; see also the statements in the Sixth Committee that are
available on the United Nations PaperSmart portal.
18-22464

Subsequent agreements and subsequent practice
in relation to the interpretation of treaties

A/RES/73/202

Conclusion 3
Subsequent agreements and subsequent practice as authentic means
of interpretation
Subsequent agreements and subsequent practice under article 31,
paragraph 3 (a) and (b), being objective evidence of the understanding of the parties
as to the meaning of the treaty, are authentic means of interpretation, in the application
of the general rule of treaty interpretation reflected in article 31.
Conclusion 4
Definition of subsequent agreement and subsequent practice
1.
A subsequent agreement as an authentic means of interpretatio n under article 31,
paragraph 3 (a), is an agreement between the parties, reached after the conclusion of
a treaty, regarding the interpretation of the treaty or the application of its provisions.
2.
A subsequent practice as an authentic means of interpretation under article 31,
paragraph 3 (b), consists of conduct in the application of a treaty, after its conclusion,
which establishes the agreement of the parties regarding the interpretation of the tr eaty.
3.
A subsequent practice as a supplementary means of interpretation under
article 32 consists of conduct by one or more parties in the application of the treaty,
after its conclusion.
Conclusion 5
Conduct as subsequent practice
1.
Subsequent practice under articles 31 and 32 may consist of any conduct of a
party in the application of a treaty, whether in the exercise of its executive, legislative,
judicial or other functions.
2.
Other conduct, including by non-State actors, does not constitute subsequent
practice under articles 31 and 32. Such conduct may, however, be relevant when
assessing the subsequent practice of parties to a treaty.
Part Three
General aspects
Conclusion 6
Identification of subsequent agreements and subsequent practice
1.
The identification of subsequent agreements and subsequent practice under
article 31, paragraph 3, requires, in particular, a determination whether the parties, by
an agreement or a practice, have taken a position regarding the interpretation of t he
treaty. Such a position is not taken if the parties have merely agreed not to apply the
treaty temporarily or agreed to establish a practical arrangement (modus vivendi).
2.
Subsequent agreements and subsequent practice under article 31, paragraph 3,
may take a variety of forms.
3.
The identification of subsequent practice under article 32 requires, in particular,
a determination whether conduct by one or more parties is in the application of the
treaty.
Conclusion 7
Possible effects of subsequent agreements and subsequent practice
in interpretation
1.
Subsequent agreements and subsequent practice under article 31, paragraph 3,
contribute, in their interaction with other means of interpretation, to the clarification
18-22464

3/5

Subsequent agreements and subsequent practice
in relation to the interpretation of treaties

A/RES/73/202

of the meaning of a treaty. This may result in narrowing, widening, or otherwise
determining the range of possible interpretations, including any scope for the exercise
of discretion which the treaty accords to the parties.
2.
Subsequent practice under article 32 may also contribute to the clarification of
the meaning of a treaty.
3.
It is presumed that the parties to a treaty, by an agreement or a practice in the
application of the treaty, intend to interpret the treaty, not to amend or to modify it.
The possibility of amending or modifying a treaty by subsequent practice of the
parties has not been generally recognized. The present conclusion is without prejudice
to the rules on the amendment or modification of treaties under the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties and under customar y international law.
Conclusion 8
Interpretation of treaty terms as capable of evolving over time
Subsequent agreements and subsequent practice under articles 31 and 32 may
assist in determining whether or not the presumed intention of the parties u pon the
conclusion of the treaty was to give a term used a meaning which is capable of
evolving over time.
Conclusion 9
Weight of subsequent agreements and subsequent practice as a means
of interpretation
1.
The weight of a subsequent agreement or subsequent practice as a means of
interpretation under article 31, paragraph 3, depends, inter alia, on its clarity and
specificity.
2.
In addition, the weight of subsequent practice under article 31, paragraph 3 (b),
depends, inter alia, on whether and how it is repeated.
3.
The weight of subsequent practice as a supplementary means of interpretation
under article 32 may depend on the criteria referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2.
Conclusion 10
Agreement of the parties regarding the interpretation of a treaty
1.
An agreement under article 31, paragraph 3 (a) and (b), requires a common
understanding regarding the interpretation of a treaty which the parties are aware of
and accept. Such an agreement may, but need not, be legally binding for it to be taken
into account.
2.
The number of parties that must actively engage in subsequent practice in order
to establish an agreement under article 31, paragraph 3 (b), may vary. Silence on the
part of one or more parties may constitute acceptance of the subsequent pr actice when
the circumstances call for some reaction.
Part Four
Specific aspects
Conclusion 11
Decisions adopted within the framework of a Conference of States Parties
1.
A Conference of States Parties, under these conclusions, is a meeting of parties
to a treaty for the purpose of reviewing or implementing the treaty, except where they
act as members of an organ of an international organization.

4/5

18-22464

Subsequent agreements and subsequent practice
in relation to the interpretation of treaties

A/RES/73/202

2.
The legal effect of a decision adopted within the framework of a Conference of
States Parties depends primarily on the treaty and any applicable rules of procedure.
Depending on the circumstances, such a decision may embody, explicitly or
implicitly, a subsequent agreement under article 31, paragraph 3 (a), or give rise to
subsequent practice under article 31, paragraph 3 (b), or to subsequent practice under
article 32. Decisions adopted within the framework of a Conference of States Parties
often provide a non-exclusive range of practical options for implementing the treaty.
3.
A decision adopted within the framework of a Conference of States Parties
embodies a subsequent agreement or subsequent practice under article 31,
paragraph 3, in so far as it expresses agreement in substance between the parties
regarding the interpretation of a treaty, regardless of the form and the procedure by
which the decision was adopted, including adoption by consensus.
Conclusion 12
Constituent instruments of international organizations
1.
Articles 31 and 32 apply to a treaty which is the constituent instrument of an
international organization. Accordingly, subsequent agreements and subsequent
practice under article 31, paragraph 3, are, and subsequent practice under article 32
may be, means of interpretation for such treaties.
2.
Subsequent agreements and subsequent practice of the parties under article 31,
paragraph 3, or subsequent practice under article 32, may arise from, or be expressed
in, the practice of an international organization in the application of its constituent
instrument.
3.
Practice of an international organization in the application of its constituent
instrument may contribute to the interpretation of that instrument when applying
articles 31 and 32.
4.
Paragraphs 1 to 3 apply to the interpretation of any treaty which is the
constituent instrument of an international organization without prejudice to any
relevant rules of the organization.
Conclusion 13
Pronouncements of expert treaty bodies
1.
For the purposes of these conclusions, an expert treaty body is a body consisting
of experts serving in their personal capacity, which is established under a treaty and
is not an organ of an international organization.
2.
The relevance of a pronouncement of an expert treaty body for the interpretation
of a treaty is subject to the applicable rules of the treaty.
3.
A pronouncement of an expert treaty body may give rise to, or refer to, a
subsequent agreement or subsequent practice by parties under article 31, paragraph 3,
or subsequent practice under article 32. Silence by a party shall not be presumed to
constitute subsequent practice under article 31, paragraph 3 (b), accepting an
interpretation of a treaty as expressed in a pronouncement of an expert treaty body.
4.
This conclusion is without prejudice to the contribution that pronouncements of
expert treaty bodies make to the interpretation of the treaties under their mandates.

18-22464

5/5
