"I have been authorized by the members of the
Security Council to make the following statement
on their behalf:
" 'The members of the Security Council wish
to express their profound concern at the recent
and current developments in northern Lebanon
which have caused and are still causing widespread suffering and loss of human life. The members appeal to all parties concerned to exercise
the utmost restraint and seek freely to attain, and
to respect, an immediate cessation of hostilities,
to settle their differences exclusively by peaceful
means and to refrain from the threat or use of
force. The members of the Council highly appreciate the work of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East and of the International Committee of the
Red Cross in providing emergency humanitarian
assistance to Palestinian and Lebanese civilians in
and around the city of Tripoli. The members of
the Council will continue to follow the situation in
Lebanon with the greatest attention.' "

Resolution 538 (1983)
of 18 October 1983

The Security Council,
Having heard the statement of the representative of
Lebanon, 18
Recalling its resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978)
and all subsequent resolutions on the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon,
Recalling further its resolutions 508 (1982), 509
(1982) and 520 (1982), as well as all its other resolutions on the situation in Lebanon,
Reiterating its strong support for the territorial
integrity, sovereignty and political independence
of Lebanon within its internationally recognized
boundaries,
Having studied the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon 19
and taking note of the conclusions and recommendations expressed therein,
Taking note of the letter of the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the Secretary-General, 20
Responding to the request of the Government of
Lebanon,
I. Decides to extend the present mandate of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon for a further
interim period of six months, that is, until 19 April
1984;
2. Calls upon all parties concerned to co-operate
fully with the Force for the full implementation of its
mandate, as defined in resolutions 425 (1978) and 426
( 1978) and the relevant decisions of the Security
Council;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Council on the progress made in this respect.

At its 2501st meeting, on 23 November 1983, the
Council proceeded with the discussion of the item
entitled "The situation in the Middle East: letter dated
22 November 1983 from the Permanent Representative
of France to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/ 16178)" .17

Resolution 542 ( 1983)
of 23 November 1983

Adopted at the 2480th meeting
hy 13 votes to none, with 2
ahstentions (Poland, Union of
Soviet Socialist Repuhlics).

The Security Council,
Having considered the
northern Lebanon.

Recalling the statement made on this question by
the President of the Security Council on 1 I November
1983. 21
Deeply concerned by the intensification of the
fighting, which continues to cause great suffering and
loss of human life,
I. Deplores the loss of human life caused by the
events taking place in northern Lebanon;
2. Reiterates its call for the strict respect for the
sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity of Lebanon within its internationally recognized boundaries;
3. Requests the parties concerned immediately to
accept a cease-fire and scrupulously to observe the
cessation of hostilities;
4. Invites the parties concerned to settle their
differences exclusively by peaceful means and to
refrain from the threat or use of force;

Decisions

At its 2495th meeting, on 11 November 1983, the
Council decided to invite the representative of the
Sudan to participate, without vote, in the discussion
of the question.

At the 2496th meeting, on 11 November 1983, after
consultations with the members of the Council, the
President read out the following statement: 21
'"/hid., 2480th meeting.
'"/hid., document S/16036.
20
/hid., para. 20.
21
Document S/16142, incorporated
2496th meeting.

m tht:

situation prevailing in

record of the

4

"In connection with the resolution just adopted
on the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force, I have been
authorized to make the following complementary
statement on behalf of the Security Council:
" · As is known, the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force 22 states, in paragraph 26, that
"despite the present quiet in the Israel-Syria
sector, the situation in the Middle East as a whole
continues to be potentially dangerous and is likely
to remain so, unless and until a comprehensive
settlement covering all aspects of the Middle East
problem can be reached.'' That statement of the
Secretary-General reflects the view of the Security Council.' '·

5. Pays tribute to the work done by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and by the International Committee of the Red Cross in providing emergency
humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian and
Lebanese civilians in Tripoli and its surroundings;
6. Calls upon the parties concerned to comply
with the provisions of the present resolution;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to follow the
situation in northern Lebanon, to consult with the
Government of Lebanon, and to report to the Security Council, which remains seized of the question.
Adopted unanimously at the
2501st meeting.

At its 2502nd meeting, on 29 November 1983, the
Council proceeded with the discussion of the item
entitled "The situation in the Middle East: report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (S/16169)". 17

On 3 December 1983, the Secretary-General made
the following statement at Security Council consultations: 24
"I would like to make it clear that the only issue
which I have raised is the request for the flying of
the United Nations flag, alongside the national flag
of the ship concerned, on the ships which would
evacuate the armed elements of the Palestine
Liberation Organization from Tripoli. The reason
for doing this would be on purely humanitarian
grounds to facilitate the resolution of a situation
which has already cost many innocent lives and
created great destruction. The permission to use the
United Nations flag would be given to the countries
under whose flags the ships involved are operating.
.. I understand that the probable number of ships
involved would be approximately five to evacuate
some 3,000 armed elements with the possible addition of another 1,000 militia, carrying personal
weapons only. The probable destination of the ships
would be Tunis and the Yemen Arab Republic.
There would be no financial implications and the
only purpose would be to provide symbolic protection. The nationalities of the ships concerned and
dates of departure would apparently be decided after
my reply concerning the use of the flag is received.
· 'The actual arrangements for this evacuation are
obviously primarily a matter for the Lebanese Government and the parties to the agreement that has
been negotiated with the help of Saudi Arabia and
Syria. Yesterday afternoon I spoke on the telephone
to President Gemayel and, among other issues,
mentioned this problem to him. As I understand it,
the Lebanese Government has no objection to the
use of the United Nations flag on the evacuation
ships, provided, as is the normal practice, the
Lebanese flag is also flown in Lebanese territorial
waters. I shall naturally remain in consultation with
the Government of Lebanon in this matter, which
obviously requires its concurrence.
"I need hardly add that any action I take will be
in line with the overall objective of respecting the

Resolution 543 ( 1983)
of 29 November 1983

The Security Council,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force, 22
Decides:
(a) To call upon the parties concerned to implement
immediately Security Council resolution 338 (1973);
(b) To renew the mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force for another period of
six months, that is, until 31 May 1984;
(c) To request the Secretary-General to submit, at
the end of this period, a report on the developments
in the situation and the measures taken to implement
resolution 338 (1973).
Adopted unanimously at the
2502nd meeting.

Decisions

At the same meeting, following the adoption of
resolution 543 ()983), the President made the following
statement: 23
22
Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-eighth Year,
Supplement for October, November and December /983, document
S/16169.
23
Document S/16188, incorporated in the record of the
2502nd meeting.

24

5

S/16194.
