111.

Recalling that, in paragraph 122 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General
Assembly,39 it decided that, at the earliest appropriate
time, a world disarmament conference should be convened with universal participation and with adequate
preparation,
1. Renews the mandate of the Ad Hoc Committee
on the World Disarmament Conference;
2. Requests the Ad Hoc Committee to maintain
close contact with the representatives of the States
possessing nuclear weapons in order to remain currently informed of their attitudes, as well as with all
other States, and to consider any relevant comments
and observations which might be made to the Committee, especially having in mind paragraph 122 of
the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session;
3. Requests the Ad Hoc Committee to submit a
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth
session;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-fourth session the ítem entitled "World
Disarmament Conference".
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
33/70.

United Nations Conference on Prohibitions or Restrictions of Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be
Deemed to Be Excessively lnjurious or
to Have lndiscriminate Effects

The General Assembly,
Convinced that the suffering of civilian populations
and combatants could be significantly reduced if general agreement could be attained in the prohibition
or restriction for humanitarian reasons of the use of
specific conventional weapons, including any which
may be deemed to be excessively injurious or to
have indiscriminate effects,
Mindful that positive results as regards the non-use
or restriction of use for humanitarian reasons of specific conventional weapons would serve, in addition,
as encouragement in the broader field of disarmament,
Recalling its resolution 32/152 of 19 December
1977, in which it decided to convene in 1979 a
United Nations Conference on Prohibitions or Restrictions of Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which
May be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to
Have Indiscriminate Effects,
Reiterating the task entrusted by the General Assembly at its tenth special session to the Conference,
nam.ely, that it should consider specific categories of
such weapons, including those which had been the
subject-matter of previously conducted discussions, as
well as the appeal addressed by the Assembly at its
special session to all States to contribute towards
carrying out this task, 40
Recalling its decision to convene a Preparatory
Conference for the United Nations Conference with
the task of establishing the best possible substantive
basis for the achievem.ent at the United Nations Conference of agreements on prohibitions or restrictions
39 Resolution

S-10/2.
40 lbid., paras. 86 and 87.

47

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

of use of certain conventional weapons and of considering organizational matters relating to the holding
of the United Nations Conference,41
1. Takes note of the report of the Preparatory
Conference for the United Nations Conference on
Prohibitions or Restrictions of Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be
Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscrim.inate Effects42 on its first session and of the progress made
with regard to organizational aspects;
2. Notes that a number of proposals on the
substantive work of the United Nations Conference
were introduced and views exchanged on them;
3. Reaffirms its belief that the United Nations
Conference should strive to reach agreement on specific instruments in the field of certain conventional
weapons which may be deemed to be excessively injurious or to have indiscriminate effects;
4. Endorses the decision of the Preparatory Conference to hold another session from 19 March to 12
April 1979 with a view to continuing its preparatory
work in respect of both the organizational and the
substantive aspects of the United Nations Conference;
5. Reaffirms its decision that the United Nations
Conference should be held in 1979 and endorses the
recomm.endation of the Preparatory Conference that
it should be held at Geneva from 1O to 28 September
1979;

6. Invites States to participate actively in the
further work of the Preparatory Conference and in
the United Nations Conference itself and to be represented, in so far as possible, by the required legal,
military and medical expertise;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to provide continued assistance to the Preparatory Conference in its
work and to undertake the necessary preparations for
the holding of the United Nations Conference;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-fourth session an item entitled "United
Nations Conference on Prohibitions or Restrictions
of Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May
Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have
Indiscrim.inate Effects: report of the Conference".

84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
33/71.

Review of the implementation of the
recommendations and decisions adopted
by the General Assembly at its tenth
special session
A

MILITARY AND NUCLEAR COLLABORATION WITH ISRAEL

The General Assembly,
Gravely concerned over the continued and rapid
Israelí military build-up,
Alarmed by the increasing evidence regarding Israelí attempts to acquire nuclear weapons,
Expressing its alarm. over the use by Israel of
cluster bom.bs against refugee camps and civilian
targets in southern Lebanon,
4 1 Resolution

32/152, paras. 3 and 4.

42 O/ficial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third

Session, Supplement No. 44 (A/33/44).

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session1

48

Recalling its resolutions 3263 (XXIX) of 9 December 1974, 3474 (XXX) of 11 December 1975,
31/71 of 10 December 1976 and 32/82 of 12 December 1977 on the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East,
Recognizing that the continued escalation of Israeli
armament constitutes a threat to international peace
and security and underlies Israel's persistent defiance
of General Assembly resolutions and its policy of
expansion, occupation and denial of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people,
Further recalling its repeated condemnations of the
intensification of military collaboration between Israel
and South Africa and its resolution 32/105 F of 14
December 1977, entitled "Military and nuclear collaboration with South Africa",
1. Calls upon all States to co-operate fully in
effective international action, in accordance with
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
to avert this grave menace to international peace and
security;
2. Requests the Security Council, in particular, to
call upon all States, under Chapter VII of the Charter
and irrespective of any existing contracts:
(a) To refrain from any supply of arms, ammunition, military equipment or vehicles, or spare parts
therefor, to Israel, without any exception;
( b) To ensure that such supplies do not reach
Israel through other parties;
(e) To end all transfer of nuclear equipment or
fissionable material or technology to Israel;
3. Further requests the Security Council to establish machinery for supervising the implementation of
the measures referred to in paragraph 2 above;
4. Invites all Governments and organizations to
take all appropriate action to promote the purposes
of the present resolution.
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
B
NON-USE OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS AND PREVENTION
OF NUCLEAR WAR

The General Assembly,
Alarmed by the threat to the survival of mankind
and to the life-sustaining system posed by nuclear
weapons and by their use inherent in concepts of
deterrence,
Convinced that nuclear disarmament is essential for
the prevention of nuclear war and for the strengthening
of international peace and security,
Recalling the statement contained in the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly that all States should actively participate in
efforts to bring about conditions in international relations among States in which a code of peaceful conduct
of nations in international affairs could be agreed and
which would preclude the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons, 43
I.

(a) The use of nuclear weapons will be a violation of the Charter of the United Nations anda crime
against humanity;
( b) Toe use of nuclear weapons should therefore
be prohibited, pending nuclear disarmament;
2. Requests all States, particularly nuclear-weapon
States, to submit to the Secretary-General, before the
thirty-fourth session of the General Assembly, proposals concerning the non-use of nuclear weapons,
avoidance of nuclear war and related matters, in
order that the question of an international convention
or sorne other agreement on the subject may be discussed at that session.
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978

e
URGENT NEED FOR CESSATION OF FURTHER TESTING
OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS

The General Assembly,
Grave/y concerned that continued testing of nuclear
weapons exacerbates the arms race and constitutes
a serious hazard to the environment and the health
of present and future generations of mankind,
Reiterating its conviction that the cessation of
nuclear-weapon testing in all environments would be
a major step towards controlling the development of
nuclear weapons and an important contribution to the
prevention of nuclear-weapon proliferation,
Recalling the determination of the parties to the
Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and Under Water, 44 expressed in that Treaty, to continue negotiations to
achieve the discontinuance of all test explosions of
nuclear weapons for all time,
Recalling its resolutions on the question of nuclearweapon testing adopted each year since 1958 by very
Iarge majorities and, in particular, resolution 32/78
of 12 December 1977,
Reafjirming that a comprehensive test ban is a
matter of the highest priority,
Recalling the various views expressed by non-nuclear-weapon States during the tenth special session
of the General Assembly that, pending the conclusion
of a comprehensive test-han treaty, the world community would be encouraged if all the nuclear-weapon
States refrained from testing nuclear weapons,
Regretting that the Conference of the Committee
on Disarmament has not been able to commence
negotiations on a comprehensive nuclear test-han
treaty owing to the non-submission of the joint draft
treaty expected from the three nuclear-weapon States
involved,
Calls upan ali States, in particular all the nuclearweapon States, pending the conclusion of a comprehensive test-bao treaty, to refrain from conducting
any testing of nuclear weapons and other nuclear
explosive devices.
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978

Declares that:

43 Resolution

S-10/2, para. 58.

H

United Nations, Trrnt_\' Scril's, vol. 480, No. 6964, p. 43.

111.

Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the First Committee

D
DISARMAMENT WEEK

The General Assembly,
Gravely concerned over the continued arms race,
Emphasizing the urgent need for and the importance
of wide and continued mobilization of world public
opinion in support of halting and reversing the arms
race, especially the nuclear arms race in all its aspects,
Recalling that, in paragraph 102 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General
Assembly, 45 it proclaimed the week starting on 24 October, the day of the founding of the United Nations,
as a week devoted to fostering the objectives of
disarmament,
Desirous of promoting broad measures on the mobilization of world public opinion in the celebration
of such a week in order to create an intemational
atmosphere conducive to the implementation of further
practical measures with regard to the cessation of the
arms race and disarmament,
1. Invites all States to carry out, through the dissemination of information and organization of symposiums, meetings, conferences and other national
and intemational forums, effective measures to expose
the danger of the arms race, propagate the need for
its cessation and increase public understanding of the
urgent tasks in the field of disarmament and in particular of the provisions of the Final Document of
the Tenth Special Session;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
model programme which may assist States that so
desire in developing their local programmes for Disarmament Week;
3. Invites governmental as well as non-governmental organizations to undertake annual activities to
promote the objectives of Disarmament Week and
invites Govemments to inform the Secretary-General
of such activities not later than 30 April of each
subsequent year;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fourth and subsequent
sessions on the information obtained by him in accordance with paragraph 3 above.
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
E
UNITED NATIONS PROGRAMME OF FELLOWSHIPS
ON DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision at the tenth special session
to establish a programme of fellowships on disarmament,46
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the guidelines for the United Nations programme of fellowships on disarmament, 47
l. Approves the guidelines prepared by the Secretary-General;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to make adequate arrangements in order that the programme of
4 5 Resolution
46 /bid., para.
47 A/33/305.

S-10/2.
108.

49

fellowships on disarmament may be commenced
during the first half of 1979;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session a
report on the implementation of the fellowships
programme.
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978

F
lMPLEMENTATION OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS
DECISIONS OF THE TENTH SPECIAL SESSION

ANO

The General Assembly,
Having considered its resolution S-10/2 of 30 June
1978 and the Final Document embodied therein, with
a view to examining the present status of the implementation of the recommendations and decisions
adopted at its tenth special session, the first which the
United Nations has devoted entirely to disarmament,
Reatfirming the alarm expressed in that resolution
regarding the threat to the very survival of mankind
posed by the existence of nuclear weapons and the
continuing arms race, and recalling the devastation
inflicted by all wars,
Convinced that the provisions of the Final Document constitute a consistent and articulated whole
which provides a solid basis to set in motion an
international disarmament strategy that makes it possible at the same time:
(a)
To carry out what is the most acute and
urgent task of the present day, namely, the removal
of the threat of a world war, which would inevitably
be a nuclear war,
( b) To channel the negotiations among States
towards the final goal of general and complete disarmament under effective international control, on the
understanding that such negotiations shall be conducted concurrently with negotiations on partial measures of disarmament,
(e) To strengthen intemational peace and security
and to promote the economic and social advancement of all pcoples, thus facilitating the achievement
of thc new international economic order,
Noting that the recommendations and decisions
adopted ~t its tenth special _session regarding the multilateral d1sa~mam~nt machmery, both negotiating as
well as dchberative. have already resulted or will
do so soon, in a considerable revitalizatio~ of that
machinery,
Noting also that various measures have been or are
about to be ª?opted which_ ~ill turn into reality several
recom~1endat1ons and dec1s10ns regarding studies, informat1on, teaching and training on disarmament includcd in thc Final Document, '
. Havin_g concluded that the situation is quite different w1th rcgard to the numerous other recommendations and decisions contained in the Programme of
Action set forth in section III of the Final Document
Recn!ling thc consc~sus that, in the task of achievin~
thc goals of nuclear d1sarmament, which has maximum
priority, ali the nuclear-weapon States, in particular
thosc among them which possess the most important
nuclear arsenals, bcar a special responsibility, 4 8
1H

Rcsolution S-10/2. para. 48.

50

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

Bearing in mind that, in adopting the Final Document, Member States solemnly proclaimed in the
Declaration set forth in section II thereof that they
would respect the objectives and principies stated in
it and would make every effort faithfully to carry out
49
the Programme of Action,
l. Takes note with satisfaction of the measures
adopted, or about to be adopted, to ~evitalize the
multilateral disarmament machinery avallable to the
United Nations, in particular the fact that the J?isarmament Commission has just held its first sess10n
on organizational matters and that the ~omm~ttee on
Disarmament is already properly constttuted m conformity with the relevant provisions of the Fi~al
Document embodied in General Assembly resolution
S-10/2;
2. Expresses the hope that all nuclear-weapon
States will participate in the Commit!ee on. D~sarmament and is confident that the Comm1ttee w1ll mclude
in it¡ rules of procedure provisions to ensure that it
may function effectively as a multilateral negotiating
disarmament body;
3. Notes with satisfaction that progress has been,
or is being, made in the adoption of measures aimed
at promoting studies, information, teaching and training on disarmament;
4. Regrets, however, that with regard to the Programme of Action it has not yet been possib_le to
achieve any of the priority agreements mentioned
therein, in particular the agreement for a comprehensive test ban and the agreement pursued in the second
series of the strategic arms limitation talks;
5. Urgently calls upon all States, in particular the
nuclear-weapon States, to make every effort to proceed
along the road of binding and effective international
agreements in the field of disarmament, i~ accor~ance
with what was approved at the tenth special session, 5º
in order to translate into practica! terms the measures
called for in the Programme of Action;
6. Invites all States to inform the Secretary-General, as appropriate, of all those measures adopted
outside the aegis of the United Nations regarding the
implementation of the recommendations and decisions
of the tenth special session, whether unilateral, bilateral, regional or multilateral;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit
periodically the above information, together with any
reports he may prepare on similar measures taken
within the framework of the United Nations and its
specialized agencies, to the General Assembly a nd
the Disarmament Commission.
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
G
DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ON THE ARMS RACE
AND DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Aware of the grave dangers inherent in the arms
race,
Convinced that it is essential that both the Governments and the peoples of the world should be better
para. 42.
~o lbid., para. 17.

informed of the dangers of the arms race, particularly
the nuclear arms race, and of the efforts made to
contain it,
Recalling that, in paragraph 99 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General
Assembly, 51 it recognized that, in order to mobilize
world public opinion in favour of disarmament, concrete measures must be taken to increase the dissemination of information on the arms race and
disarmament,
1. Urges Member States, the specialized agencies
and the International Atomic Energy Agency, as well
as non-governmental organizations and !he resea~ch
institutes concerned, to promote education and mformation programmes relating to the arms race and
disarmament;
2. Requests Member States to report to the General Assembly, through the Secretary-General, on their
activities in the field of dissemination of information
on the arms race and disarmament;
3. Welcomes the initiative of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in
planning to hold a world congress on disarmament
education and, in that connexion, invites the DirectorGeneral of that organization to report to the General
Assembly, at its thirty-fourth session, on the preparations for that event;
4. Requests the United Nations Centre for Disarmament, in preparing the United Nations Yearbook
on Disarmament and the disarmament periodical, to
take account of the recommendations of the General
Assembly regarding the form and content of such
publications;
5. Further requests the United Nations Centre for
Disarmament to increase contacts with non-governmental organizations and research institutions, in accordance with paragraph 123 of the Final Document
of the Tenth Special Session, and requests the Secretary-General, after appropriate consultations, to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session on
other ways of encouraging the role of such organizations and institutions in the field of disarmament;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to include in
any studies on arms limitation and disarmament
prepared under the auspices of the United Nations a
summary of those studies, drafted in easily understood
language, to facilitate their dissemination among the
general public;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to explore the
possibilities of co-ordinating the public information
activities relating to disarmament of all the specialized
agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency.
84th plenary meetin!?
14 December 1978
H
DISARMAMENT NEGOTIATIONS AND MACHINERY

The General Assembly,
Having reviewed the implementation of the recommendations and decisions adopted at its tenth special
session,
Having in mind the contribution of its tenth special
session towards highlighting the gravity of the prob-

49 lbid.,

51 Resolution

S-10/2.

111,

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

lems facing the international community in the field
of disarmament and identifying the steps conducive
to their solution,
Convinced of the need to broaden and deepen the
degree of agreement reached and to preserve the
momentum initiated at its tenth special session,
Conscious of the widely expressed interest of Member States in an urgent implementation of the recommendations and decisions of the tenth special session,
which faund expression in the course of the consideration of this itero at the thirty-third session,
Determined to encourage the taking of urgent measures in arder to secure the implementation of the
recommendations and decisions endorsed by Member
Stat:s in the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Sess1on of the General Assembly and aimed at halting
the arms race, particularly the nuclear arms race
and to proceed to disarmament,
'

I
]!..eaffirming that nuclear weapons pose the most
senous threat to mankind and its survival and that
it is therefare essential to proceed to nuclear disarmament and to the complete elimination of nuclear
weapons,
. Reaff!,rming also tha~ all the nuclear-weapon States,
m particular those wh1ch possess the most important
nuclear arsenals, bear a special responsibility far the
f~lfilment of the task of achieving the goals of nuclear
d1sarmament,
Expressing the deep cancero and disappointment of
the international community over the fact that the
ongoing negotiations have not yet been successfully
concluded and that urgent negotiations among the
nuclear-weapon States have not yet been initiated,
. 1. Calls _up~m the nuclear-weapon States involved
m the n:g?!iat10ns on the conclusion of a treaty on
the proh1b1tion of all nuclear-weapon tests to submit
to the Committee on Disarmament a draft treaty at
the beginning of its 1979 session;
. 2. Calls upo": the Union of Soviet Socialist Repubhcs_ and t~e _Dmted States of America to speed up
their n:g~tla~10ns on the second series of the strategic
arms hm1tat10n talks and to transmit the text of
their agreement to the General Assembly in accordance with resolution 33/91 C of 16 December 1978·
'
3. Urges ~11 nuclear-weapon States to proceed, in
accordance with paragraph 50 of the Final Document
?f the Tenth ~P:~ia~ Session, 52 to consultations regardmg _an early 1mtiatlon of urgent negotiations on the
haltmg of the nuclear arms race and on a progressive
and balanced reduction of stockpiles of nuclear
weapon~ and their means of delivery within a comprehens1ve phased programme with agreed timeframes, leading to their ultimate and complete
elimination;
4. Requests the nuclear-weapon States to infarm
the General Assembly, at its thirty-faurth session of
t~e results of their consultations and eventual neg~tiat1ons;

II
. Recalling w_ith sati!faction the decision adopted at
its tenth special sess1on on the strengthening of the
role of the United Nations in the field of disarmament, 53
52 Ibid.
53 Ibid., para. 14.

51

Recalling also with satisfaction its decision to establish the Disarmament Commission as a deliberative
body of the General Assembly with the function of
considering, in addition to the specific tasks deriving
from the decisions and recommendations adopted at
the tenth special session of the Assembly, various
problems in the field of disarmament and to make
recommendations thereon, 54
. l. Invites the Disarmament Commission, taking
mto account General Assembly resolution 33/91 A of
16 December 1978, to consider on a regular basis
the reports and other documents of the Committee
on Disarmament submitted by the Secretary-General
through the General Assembly;
2. Recommends the inclusion in the agenda of the
farthcoming session of the Disarmament Commission,
apart from the consideration of elements of a comprehensive programme on disarmament as a priority
1tem, the fallowing questions related to disarmament:
(a) Consideration of various aspects of the arms
race, particularly the nuclear arms race and nuclear
disarmament, in arder to expedite negotiations aimed
at the effective elimination of the danger of nuclear
war;
( b) Harmonization of views on concrete steps to
be undertaken by States regarding a gradual, agreed
reduction of military budgets and reallocation of
resources now being used far military purposes to
economic and social development, particularly far the
benefit of the developing countries, noting the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly;

III
B~aring i_n mind the decision adopted at its tenth
special sess10n to fix, during its thirty-third session,
the date of the second special session devoted to
disarmament, 55
Desiring to contribute to the furthering and broadening of positive processes initiated through the laying
down of the faundations of an international disarmament strategy at its tenth special session,
l. Decides to convene a second special session
of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament in
1982 at United Nations Headquarters in New York;
2. Decides also ~o set up, at its thirty-fifth session,
a preparatory comm1ttee far the second special session
of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament;
IV
W elcoming the agreement reached at its tenth
special session on the constitution of the Committee
on Disarmament, 56
Bearing in mind that the Committee on Disarmamcnt will meet at Geneva in January 1979,
1. Invites the Committee on Disarmament to take
into account, when determining its priorities and programme of work, the priorities established in paragrap_h ~5 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Sess10n· 17 and the present resolution;
2. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to
undertake on a priority basis, at its first session to
be held in January 1979, negotiations concerning:
(a) A treaty on the complete prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests;
54 /bid.,

para. 118.
119.
120.
57 Resolution S-10/2.

55 lbid., para.
56 lbid., para.

General Assemhly-Thirty-third Session,

52

( b) A treaty or convention on the complete and
effective prohibition of the development, production
and stockpiling of all types of chemical weapons and
on their destruction;
3. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to
submit reports to the General Assembly annually or
more frequently, as appropriate, and provide its formal
and other relevant documents to Member States on a
regular basis;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-fourth session an itero entitled "Consideration of the report of the Committee on Disarmament".
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978

I
0ISARMAMENT ANO OEVELOPMENT

The General Assembly,
A ware of the disproportion existing between the
resources allocated to expenditure on armaments and
those devoted to development assistance,
Convinced of the need to take concrete measures
reflecting the desire of Member States to encourage
the allocation to development assistance of the resources released by reductions in expenditure on
armaments,
Recalling the concerns expressed in that regard by
it at its tenth special session, in particular concerning
the harmful economic and social consequences of
pursuing the arms race, 58
Noting that a study on the relationship between
disarmament and development has been initiated by
the Secretary-General, with the assistance of a group
of governmental experts, in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs 94 and 95 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General
Assembly, contained in resolution S-10/2,
Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Group of Governmental Experts on the Relationship
between Disarmament and Development, for its consideration, the proposal to establish an international
disarmament fund for development which was submitted to the General Assembly at its tenth special
session. 59
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
J
MONITORING OF DISARMAMENT AGREEMENTS ANO
STRENGTHENING OF INTERNATIONAL SECURITY

The General Assembly,
A ware of the essential role to be played by appropriate international monitoring measures, satisfactory
to all interested parties, in establishing and implementing disarmament agreements, and in strengthening
international security and confidence,
Considering the progress made in the field of earth
observation satellite technology,
Convinced of the important contribution which such
technology can make to the solution of monitoring
58 /bid., para. 16.
119 See A/S-10/ AC.1/28.

problems, taking into account, in particular, the need
to provide for international measures which are nondiscriminatory and do not constitute interference in
the internal affairs of States,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to obtain, not
later than 31 March 1979, the views of Member
States on the proposal to establish an international
satellite monitoring agency, as explained in a memorandum dated 30 May 1978 submitted to the General
Assembly at its tenth special session; 60
2. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake,
as from 1 May 1979, with the assistance of a group
of qualified governmental experts, a study on the
technical, legal and financia! implications of estabIishing an international satellite monitoring agency;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session on the
replies received from Governments and the preliminary
conclusions of the Group of Governmental Experts
on the Question of the Establishment of an International Satetlite Monitoring Agency.
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
K
PROGRAMME OF RESEARCH ANO STUOIES
ON DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Convinced that negotiations on disarmament and
the continuing effort to ensure greater security must
be based on objective in-depth technical studies,
Convinced also that sustained research and study
activity by the United Nations in the field of disarmament would promote informed participation by all
States in disarmament efforts,
Considering that, in addition to the work being
done in this field by the United Nations Centre for
Disarmament, with a view to gathering basic data on
disarmament problems and, in particular, facilitating
the negotiations currently in progress, it is advisable
to undertake more forward-looking research, within
the framework of the United Nations,
Noting that various proposals that studies of this
type should be carried out have been put forward
at the tenth special session and the thirty-third session
of the General Assembly, thus reflecting the need of
the international community to be provided with more
diversified and complete information on problems
relating to disarmament,
A ware of the importan ce of ensuring that such
studies should be conducted in accordance with the
criteria of scientific independence,
l. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session on possible ways of establishing, operating and financing
an international institute for disarmament research, 61
under the auspices of the United Nations;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to seek in this
regard, inter afia, the advice of the Advisory Board
on Disarmament Studies, established in implementation of paragraph 124 of the Final Document of the
(io A/S-1 O/ AC.1 /7.
,n See A/S-10/ AC.1/8.

111,

Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the First Committee

Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 62 in
view of the competence to be assigned to that body
in respect of a programme of studies on disarmament.
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
L
PARAGRAPH

125 OF THE FINAL DocUMENT OF THE
TENTH SPECIAL SESSION

The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision, contained in paragraph 125
of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session
of the General Assembly, 63 to request the SecretaryGeneral to transmit to the appropriate deliberative
and negotiating organs dealing with the questions of
disarmament all the official records of the special
session devoted to disarmament, in accordance with
the recommendations which the General Assembly
may adopt at its thirty-third session,
Commending the active participation of Member
States in the consideration of the agenda items of
its tenth special session and the proposals and suggestions which they submitted,
Noting the valuable contribution such proposals
and suggestions have made to the work of the special
session and its eventual outcome,
Considering that further and more thorough study
of the proposals and suggestions listed in paragraph
125 of the Final Document than was possible at the
special session is essential,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the deliberative and negotiating as well as the studying
organs dealing with the question of disarmament all
the proposals and suggestions listed in paragraph 125
of the Final Document, together with all the official
records of the tenth special session of the General
Assembly, as well as information and comments made
by Member States at the thirty-third session of the
Assembly on those proposals and suggestions, except
those covered by separate resolutions;
2. Requests the Disarmament Commission and the
Committee on Disarmament to report on the state of
the consideration of those proposals and suggestions
to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session.
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978

M
STUDY ON THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
DISARMAMENT AND DEVELOPMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions contained in paragraphs 94
and 95 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly, 64 about the relationship between disarmament and development,
Noting with satisfaction that the Secretary-General,
pursuant to paragraphs 94 and 95 of the Final Document, with the assistance of a group of qualified governmental experts appointed by him, has initiated a
study on the relationship between disarmament and
development,
62 Resolution
63 Jbid.
6 4 Jbid.

53

Re-emphasizing that one of the principal aims of
the study should be to produce results that could
effectively guide the formulation of practica! measures,
1. Takes note of the organizational report of the
Group of Governmental Experts on the Relationship
between Disarmament and Development; 65
2. Appeals to all Governments seriously to consider giving, as a supplement to the financia! resources
allocated for the study in the regular budget of the
United Nations, voluntary contributions to the Disarmament Project Fund or to finance, on a voluntary
basis, and in domestic currency, where appropriate,
national research projects, in arder to ensure the
total resources necessary to carry out the study;
3. Appeals to Governments to make available
data and information relevant to a meaningful completion of the study;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-fourth session an item entitled "lnterim
report of the Secretary-General with respect to the
study on the relationship between disarmament and
development".
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
N
NEW PHILOSOPHY ON DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, as stated in the Programme of
Action adopted at its tenth special session, 66 an essential condition for halting the arms race and an
indispensable step towards the goal of disarmament
is the mobilization of world public opinion in support
of this effort,
Noting the enormous expansion of concepts of
disarmament as developed at the tenth special session
and in the First Committee at the thirty-third session
of the General Assembly,
Noting, in particular, the many new concepts developed as a result of advances in science and technology with respect to the growth of entirely new
generations of weaponry, and their impact on changing
strategies with their proliferation of military and
defence alliances,
Noting a/so the changing concepts of disarmament
in the light of its relation to the economies of nations,
especially its effect on the global dimensions of
development,
A ware of the growing realization that the old
balance-of-power approach to security is being radically altered by the rapid qualitative changes in the
ever increasing complexity and proliferation of "surprise" and "secret" weapons,
T aking into account the pervading conviction that,
in the light of the increasing uncontrollability of the
new weapons, the old concept of armed national
security to which the peoples of the world are conditioned has becorne obsolete,
Observing with interest the tendency to brand the
arms race in terms of moral and ethical strictures,

S-10/2.
(\:-; An3 /317. r.nnex.
m Resolution S- 10/2, sect. 111.

1

54

General Assembly-Thirty-third SessiOln

Convinced that the world is in fact witnessing a
revolution in its mode of thinking as regards the
historie legacy of armed national security and is giving
way to new concepts in a manner that will require the
full partnership of peoples,
Confronted by an explosion of new ideas, new
theories, new proposals and new strategies, in the
effort to cope with short-term and long-term plans
submitted by statesmen and Govemments in an intolerable fragmentation, which need to be formulated, as a fused and organized departure from
past outrnoded premises, into a new philosophy on
disarmament,
1. Considers it necessary that all the new ideas,
new proposals, new thinking and new strategies set
forth in the broad range of general debates preceding
and following the adoption of the Final Docurnent of
the Tenth Special Session be forrnulated into a single
comprehensive and co-ordinated systern, into a new
philosophy on disarmament, in a rnessage that can
effectively reach the minds of men in a rnobilization
of world public opinion in support of the United
Nations goal for the halting of the present arms race
and eventually for complete and general disarmament
centred on a new order of national and intemational
security;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance of the Advisory Board on Disarmament Studies,
to study ways and means whereby the objectives in
paragraph 1 above can be accornplished and to report
to the General Assernbly at its thirty-fourth session;
3. Expresses the hope that the Advisory Board
may be able to report results, as appropriate, in time
for consideration by the General Assembly at its
thirty-fourth session.
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
33/72.

Conclusion of an international convention on the strengthening of guarantees
of the security of non-nuclear States
A

The General Assembly,
Convinced of the need to take effective rneasures
for the strengthening of the security of States and
prompted by the desire shared by all nations to
eliminate war and prevent a nuclear holocaust,
Noting that the non-use of force or threat of force
in international relations is one of the fundamental
principies enunciated in the Charter of the United
Nations and reaffirmed in a nurnber of United Nations
declarations and resolutions,
Noting with satisfaction the desire of States in
various regions to prevent nuclear weapons frorn being
introduced into their territories through the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones, on the basis of
arrangernents freely arrived at among the States of
the region concerned, and being anxious to contribute
to this objective,
Recognizing that effective measures to assure the
non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat
of use of nuclear weapons can constitute a positive
contribution to the prevention of the spread of nuclear
weapons,

W elcoming the determination of States in various
regions of the world to keep their territories free
from nuclear weapons,
Mindful of the statements and observations made
by various States on the strengthening of the security
of non-nuclear-weapon States,
Desiring to promote the irnplementation of the
relevant provisions of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 67
l. Considers it necessary to take effective measures for the strengthening of the security of nonnuclear-weapon States through appropriate intemational arrangements;
2. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to
consider to that end, at the earliest possible date,
the drafts of an intemational convention on the subject, subrnitted to the General Assernbly at its thirtythird session, as well as all proposals and suggestions
conceming effective political and legal rneasures at
the international level to assure the non-nuclearweapon States against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to transrnit to
the Cornmittee on Disarrnament all the documents
relating to the discussion by the General Assernbly
at its thirty-third session of the item entitled "Conclusion of an intemational convention on the strengthening of guarantees of the security of non-nuclear
States";
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-fourth session an item entitled "Strengthening of guarantees of the security of non-nuclearweapon States".
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978

B
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the need to allay the legitimate
concern of the States of the world with regard to
ensuring lasting security for their peoples,
Convinced that nuclear weapons pose the greatest
threat to rnankind and to the survival of civilization,
Deeply concerned at the continuation of the arms
race, in particular the nuclear arms race, and the
threat to mankind due to the possibility of the use
of nuclear weapons,
Convinced that nuclear disarmament and the complete climination of nuclear weapons are essential to
remove the danger of nuclear war,
Taking into account the principie of the non-use
of force or threat of force enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations,
Deeply concerned about any possibility of the use
or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Recognizing that the independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty of non-nuclear-weapon States
need to be safeguarded against the use or threat of
use of nuclear weapons,
Considering that, until nuclear disarmament is
achieved on a universal basis, it is imperative for the
6 7 Resolution S-10/2.
