A/63/PV.105

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

105th plenary meeting
Monday, 14 September 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. d’Escoto Brockmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

The meeting was called to order at 10.50 a.m.
Agenda item 12
Prevention of armed conflict
The President (spoke in Spanish): Members will
recall that, at its 2nd plenary meeting, held on
19 September 2008, the Assembly decided to include
this item in the agenda of the sixty-third session.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable
to defer the consideration of this item to the sixtyfourth session. May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to defer the consideration of this
item and to include it in the draft agenda of its sixtyfourth session?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has thus concluded its consideration of agenda item 12.
Agenda items 21 to 26
Question of Cyprus
Armed aggression against the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas)
The situation of democracy and human rights in Haiti

Armed Israeli aggression against the Iraqi nuclear
installations and its grave consequences for the
established international system concerning the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons and international peace
and security
Consequences of the Iraqi occupation of and
aggression against Kuwait
The President (spoke in Spanish): Members will
recall that, at its 2nd plenary meeting, held on
19 September 2008, the Assembly decided to include
agenda items 21 to 26 in the agenda of the sixty-third
session, in accordance with paragraph 4 (b) of the
annex to its resolution 58/316, of 1 July 2004. In that
resolution, the General Assembly decided that those
items shall remain on the agenda for consideration
upon notification by a Member State. Accordingly,
those items have been included in the draft agenda of
the sixty-fourth session.
The Assembly has thus concluded
consideration of agenda items 21 to 26.
Agenda items 44 and 107 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation of and
follow-up to the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic,
social and related fields

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

09-51026 (E)

*0951026*

its

A/63/PV.105

Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolutions (A/63/L.80/Rev.1 and
A/63/L.99)
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before we
proceed, I should like to inform members that draft
resolution A/63/L.99 has been withdrawn by the
sponsors. Members will recall that the General
Assembly held the debate on agenda item 44 jointly
with agenda item 40 at the 36th plenary meeting, held
on 3 November, as well as jointly with agenda items
107 and 112 at the 51st plenary meeting, held on
17 November 2008. Members will also recall that the
Assembly adopted two resolutions under agenda item
44 — resolution 63/9 and resolution 63/199 — on
3 November and 19 December 2008, respectively, and
four resolutions under agenda item 107: resolutions
63/23, 63/142, 63/235 and 63/281 on 17 November,
11 and 22 December 2008 and 3 June 2009, respectively.
Also, at its 95th plenary meeting, held on 9 July 2009,
the Assembly adopted resolution 63/76, under both
items.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Guatemala
to
introduce
draft
resolution
A/63/L.80/Rev.1.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized a debate that, four years later, is beginning to
follow up on the mandate given to us by our heads of
State in 2005 in the Outcome Document (resolution
60/1) of the Summit held that year, specifically in
paragraph 189.
On behalf of 66 delegations, we have put forth a
brief procedural draft resolution that attempts to affirm
three issues: first, that we received the report
(A/63/677) of the Secretary-General; secondly, that we
held a very productive debate; and, thirdly, that we
wish to continue the debate.
I have been asked to read out the list of
co-sponsors, which I shall now do. They are Andorra,
Australia, Austria, Denmark, Greece, Guinea, Iceland,
Ireland, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Madagascar,
Malta, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Portugal, Saint Lucia, Singapore, Slovakia, Ukraine,
the United Kingdom, the United States of America, and
my own country, Guatemala.
I would also like to note that we have held broad
consultations. With a view to ensuring that the draft

2

resolution is adopted by consensus, the sponsors have
asked me to introduce an oral revision, namely, that the
expression “with appreciation” be omitted from
paragraph 1.
We hereby submit the draft resolution, as orally
revised, for consideration by this plenary meeting of
the General Assembly. We trust that it will enjoy
consensus support.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now proceed to take a decision on draft resolution
A/63/L.80/Rev.1, entitled “The responsibility to
protect”, as orally revised. May I take it that the
General Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/63/L.80/Rev.1, as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/63/L.80/Rev.1, as
revised, was adopted (resolution 63/308).

orally

The President (spoke in Spanish): Several
speakers have asked for the floor in explanation of
position following the adoption of the resolution.
Before giving the floor to speakers, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela requests that this statement be
fully included in the official records of this meeting.
We also request that a footnote be included in the
resolution to refer to the symbol of the corresponding
record.
As this is the last meeting of the sixty-third
session of the General Assembly, as well as the last of
Mr. Miguel d’Escoto Brockmann’s term as President of
this body, our delegation would like to acknowledge
the very efficient manner in which he has conducted
the business of this principal organ of the United
Nations. Mr. Miguel d’Escoto Brockmann’s respectful
relations with every Member country of the
Organization, his full respect for the norms of the
Charter of the United Nations, his intellectual acumen,
his humanistic wisdom, his ethics, and his daring,
honesty, transparency, generosity and sensitivity in the
conduct of the work of the Assembly have earned him
a very special place among those who have held the
responsibility of leading the Assembly.
The General Assembly wisely decided to hold an
interactive debate that included the participation of
well-known intellectuals. Some of them, basing their

09-51026

A/63/PV.105

arguments on irrefutable historical events connected to
imperial intervention against countries defending their
sovereignty, warned of and condemned the
sophisticated intervention mechanism that some are
trying to develop under the concept of the
responsibility to protect. President Miguel d’Escoto
Brockmann proposed to the General Assembly four
points of reference to be used as indicators in
evaluating factors to determine whether the concept is
genuinely applicable. Without a doubt, the document is
valuable as a reference for future debates. As our heads
of State have decided, the Assembly has sole
responsibility for this issue. That responsibility has not
been conferred upon any other organ.
We would like to reiterate the statement we
delivered on this issue on behalf of my country on
24 July 2008. In that statement, we reiterated the
position taken by President Hugo Chávez Frías at the
2005 Summit. At the Summit, our President raised two
irrefutably relevant questions: Who will be doing the
protecting and how will they protect? Those are
questions that the General Assembly is certainly far
from clarifying. To the contrary, the proposals that
some have put forward have borne out Venezuela’s
concerns.
Our country’s democratic institutions are fully
geared towards overcoming the obstacles threatening
the lives and dignity of human beings. Likewise, they
demand unlimited respect for the dignity of all the
world’s peoples, as well as for the observance of full
human rights for all. It is therefore essential to prevent
a recurrence of the horrendous crimes committed
against defenceless peoples. We join our voice to the
call concerning Rwanda: Never again! However, what
is to be said about the heinous crimes being perpetrated
daily against the Palestinian people? The most
enthusiastic defenders of the responsibility to protect
do not consider the systematic massacres against the
peoples of Palestine, Iraq and Afghanistan to be a
crime.
We have pointed out that were this idea to be
instituted, it would be absolutely necessary to convene
a conference to amend the Charter of the United
Nations in order to reconfigure the Security Council
and strengthen the General Assembly. However, the
debates that have taken place in the General Assembly
on these issues have yielded meagre results. Some have
defended the status and prerogatives they conferred
upon themselves in a historical context that is

09-51026

completely different from today’s environment. It is
anti-democratic on the part of some permanent
members of the Security Council to continue to impose
themselves on the Secretary-General against the
supreme will of the General Assembly. The emphatic
refusal to eliminate the veto, which has been used
indiscriminately to protect their interests and
specifically not to defend international peace and
security, confirms our fears. Exploiting the vague
concept of the responsibility to protect, they seek to
implement a new and sophisticated means for
intervention.
History has a lesson to teach us. When some have
set up obstacles to the exercise of sovereignty, the
countries of the South have had to surrender not only
their territorial integrity, but also effective control over
their national resources. Nations have been broken up.
Populations, once citizens of their countries of origin,
have joined the hoards of refugees and displaced
persons. If we truly wish to develop in good faith a
collective mechanism to prevent grave crimes against
humanity, we need to substantively revise the Charter
of the United Nations in terms put forward by a
qualified majority of the General Assembly.
Finally, it is important to indicate that, in
paragraph 1 of the resolution under discussion,
reference is made to the word “report”. Our delegation
believes that this term should be interpreted as a
written statement in accordance with the established
rules of the General Assembly.
Mr. Benítez Versón (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, may I most warmly congratulate you, Sir,
and express Cuba’s gratitude for the outstanding way
in which you have presided over the sixty-third session
of the General Assembly, which concludes today. You
have been the kind of special President that today’s
world requires, and Cuba will always remember you.
When Cuba was first contacted, we informed the
sponsors that, in all frankness, we were not convinced
of the necessity of adopting a draft resolution on the
responsibility to protect at this time, when the
discussion of the issue in the General Assembly has
scarcely begun. However, the Cuban delegation, acting
with flexibility and in a constructive spirit,
demonstrated its willingness to work to achieve an
acceptable text, provided that it would be a strictly
procedural resolution that did not reopen a substantive
discussion and in no way prejudice the basic positions

3

A/63/PV.105

of any State with regard to future consideration of this
item.

an even more primitive order based on
reinterpretation of the Charter and international law.

We are pleased that the proposals put forward by
Cuba have been duly taken into account by the
sponsors, and have thus been able to support the
revised text introduced a few minutes ago by the
Ambassador of Guatemala. At the same time, we wish
to place on record that, in Cuba’s view, the text should
have included an explicit reference to the document on
the issue submitted by you, Mr. President, which had
the merit of launching the debate on this item in this
organ.

Some seek to put the concept of the responsibility
to protect into practice even before it is clearly defined.
Cuba is opposed to any such attempt. The truth is that
there is as yet no clear definition of the responsibility
to protect that is accepted by all. We underscore that
the resolution adopted today is solely procedural in
nature and can in no way be interpreted as being the
result of an agreement reached by this Assembly on the
scope and implications of the concept of the
responsibility to protect, much less on specific policies
to implement it.

We are aware of the good intentions that have
inspired various States to promote the establishment of
the responsibility to protect as a norm of international
law. At the same time, the many legitimate concerns to
which the issue gives rise cannot be ignored. There is a
real danger that the concept of the responsibility to
protect may end up being manipulated by covert
interventionists to justify, in different ways,
interference and the use of force.
We are not calling on the international
community and the United Nations to look on
impassively and idly at genocide and other crimes.
Quite the opposite — within the United Nations and
outside, Cuba has always been and will always be a
staunch defender of the need to address urgently the
serious problems afflicting millions of human beings
throughout the world. We are of the belief that this will
be possible only through the establishment of an
international order based on solidarity, social justice,
equity and respect for the rights of peoples and every
individual human being.
History eloquently demonstrates that peace,
stability and development cannot be imposed by force
or by war, and that military operations never lead to
lasting solutions. The principles of sovereignty,
territorial integrity and non-interference in the internal
affairs of States must be defended because, without
them, the United Nations cannot continue to exist, and
poor and weak nations will be abandoned to the
mercies of the powerful and strong.
Cuba is and will remain resolutely opposed to any
forcible action that is not consonant with the provisions
of the Charter because such action can in no way be
justified. The current international order, which is
unjust and profoundly unequal, cannot be replaced by

4

a

The debate held by the General Assembly in July
clearly revealed the differences among positions. A
long road still has to be travelled with regard to this
issue. The resolution adopted today establishes the fact
that future discussions will be held in the framework of
the General Assembly. We hope that other organs of the
system, including the Security Council, will respect the
letter and spirit of the resolution and refrain from
acting on their own. Prudence and transparency must
prevail in this process. Any attempt to impose
decisions that fail to take duly into account the
legitimate concerns of each and every delegation must
be firmly rejected. Only in this way can we achieve
agreements acceptable to all.
Mr. Adi (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation wishes to speak concerning
resolution 63/308, entitled “The responsibility to
protect”. My delegation thanks the sponsors of the
resolution for their efforts to promote and ensure its
adoption and for taking into consideration the
suggestions made by delegations in the course of its
drafting.
My delegation has a good deal to say concerning
the report of the Secretary-General referred to in the
resolution (A/63/677), and in particular to its failure to
refer to the need for due protection for populations
under foreign occupation. We also believe that the
issue of the responsibility to protect still needs to be
considered transparently and in depth.
Despite the foregoing, my delegation joined in
the consensus adoption of the resolution on the
responsibility to protect.
Mr. Loayza Barea (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We take the floor in this

09-51026

A/63/PV.105

plenary meeting to affirm the commitment of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia to the responsibility to
protect. The prevention of and protection against
genocide, crimes against humanity and ethnic
cleansing are not mere words, but also clear principles
for ensuring against impunity for their perpetrators.
Resolution 63/308, which has just been adopted,
addresses some of the expectations that Bolivia
considered necessary to strengthen the procedural
nature of the text. We wish to state once again that it is
important to reiterate the obligation of States to protect
their citizens and ensure their survival. Our principal
goal should be to achieve that. That obligation also
entails the responsibility to preserve our resources,
without which we cannot survive and the
overexploitation of which threatens the very survival of
the human race.
Exercising that obligation is fundamental to
ensuring stable internal policies, an essential
foundation of our economic and social development
that guarantees the full exercise of the rights of our
populations, from whose sovereign mandate, and not
from that of external bodies, this irrevocable
responsibility arises. Contrarily, failure to exercise that
obligation would establish a conditional right whereby
a State, if it does not wish to protect or is unable to do
so, would lose the right to invoke the principle of
sovereignty as an argument against international
interventions, including on various justifications, that
could result in the use of force.
It is necessary to overcome the lack of
international commitment and, in particular, to
consider in greater depth the root causes of such
potential situations, which may also promote the
emergence of international mercenary groups that fan
conflicts as a pretext for intervention in the guise of the
right to protect. Such conflicts would be taken as
unilaterally justification of the supposed right to
intervene, which represents a neocolonial threat to the
poorest and most vulnerable countries.
We reiterate that the General Assembly is the
most representative organ of the entire international
community, and should therefore serve as the catalyst
for the adoption, under its jurisdiction, of measures
underpinning action by the Secretary-General once the
concept and legal basis that legitimize such action are
fully defined. That is integral to the explicitly
mandated preparation of future documents and

09-51026

consideration of the issue, which must not overlook
vital realities that have not been duly addressed.
Recognition of the importance of the
responsibility to protect remains limited. The concept
is inherently controversial. A definition is necessary,
and we must therefore continue to ask the questions
that will enable us to define its true scope once and for
all. The document before us addresses many sensitive
areas, but clearly reveals the ground that we still have
to cover. It would have been useful to acknowledge
that in the resolution just adopted.
Lastly, on behalf of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia, allow me, Mr. President, to commend you on
the humanity with which you have presided over the
sixty-third session of the General Assembly.
Mr. Ajawin (Sudan): At the outset, allow me to
convey my country’s warm greetings to you,
Mr. President, as we come to the close of this sixtythird session of the General Assembly. We wish you all
the best in your future endeavours.
That said, although the issue of the responsibility
to protect (R2P) has generated some interesting
intellectual debates, it was to be expected that there
would be much controversy regarding its implications
and practicality as an instrument of international law.
First, there is a tendency to misinterpret the
notion of the responsibility to protect to mean the right
of intervention in the affairs of sovereign States.
Secondly, there has been the contention — which is
true to some extent — that the definition of the
responsibility to protect has already was finalized in
the 2005 World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1) and
that there is no room for interpretation or negotiation.
That could be true in that there is worldwide consensus
that the Summit reaffirmed the role of the State in
protecting its citizens against humanitarian crimes.
However, there is still no consensus as to the
applicability of R2P to political realities. It is precisely
those misinterpretations that cause the majority of
countries to be apprehensive and cautious about the
debate surrounding the idea of the responsibility to
protect.
My delegation strongly believes in the notion of
non-interference, as articulated in Article 2 of the
Charter of the United Nations, which states that “[a]ll
Members shall refrain in their international relations
from the threat or use of force against the territorial

5

A/63/PV.105

integrity or political independence of any State”. That
Article is very much in the spirit of the Peace of
Westphalia, which emphasized that international
relations must be based on mutual respect and that
every State shall refrain from interfering in the affairs
of other States.

United Nations to continue the debate on this concept
and to address the concerns and questions of many
delegations concerning the concept and its
implications.

The doctrine of non-interference has, we believe,
governed the politics of international relations and
made people work collectively for international
security, culminating in the creation of the United
Nations. It is only when that cardinal principle of
non-intervention is violated that international peace
and security are threatened.

The Islamic Republic of Iran believes that the
notion of the responsibility to protect needs to be
further discussed, clearly defined and refined in order
to prevent it from being abused and misused against
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of States. I would like here to recall the
concept note (A/63/958) distributed by the President of
the General Assembly on the occasion of the thematic
debate on the responsibility to protect held in July.

In conclusion, we believe that the reopening of
the issue of R2P is just a procedural matter. Much time
is needed for a detailed analysis of this doctrine if it is
to move from the phase of the hypothetical to
becoming a theory, let alone a norm in international
law.

My delegation could not approve any document
that contained elements which could undermine the
lofty principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. My delegation expresses its reservations on
the first part of operative paragraph 1 of document
A/63/L.80/Rev.1.

Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): The
Islamic Republic of Iran joined the consensus adoption
of resolution 63/308, as amended by the Permanent
Representative of Guatemala, as a procedural
resolution merely mandating continued consideration
of the notion of the responsibility to protect
populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity. That is
evidently without any prejudice to our principled
position concerning the notion and its implications.

In conclusion, we stand committed to remain
engaged in further consideration within this body of
the notion of the responsibility to protect and its
implications.

The Islamic Republic of Iran fully shares the
sentiment that the international community must be
vigilant in the future in preventing the recurrence of
the horrors of the mass killings and genocide of the
past. However, we doubt that this could be achieved by
introducing loose concepts under different names that
might erode the recognized principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and pave the way for all manner of
intervention in the affairs of sovereign States. After all,
the inaction on the part of the United Nations in the
face of grave mass atrocities over the past decade was
not the result of an absence of concepts or of a
normative framework. It was rather a consequence of
the failure of the Security Council to act when action
was needed.
My delegation believes that we are still far from a
consensus understanding on the R2P concept, let alone
the emergence of any authoritative norm in that area.
The General Assembly is the competent organ of the

6

Ms. Espinosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the delegation of Guatemala for its flexibility in
meeting the concerns of a number of Member States on
the content of resolution 63/308, which we have just
adopted. Ecuador therefore joined consensus on the
adoption of the text, because my country attaches great
importance to the role of the United Nations, and in
particular of the General Assembly, in the
establishment of a world order based on respect for
international law, the principles and purposes of the
United Nations Charter, human rights and international
humanitarian law.
It is undeniable that paragraph 139 of the 2005
World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1) refers to the
need for the General Assembly to continue
consideration of this matter, but in the view of my
delegation the elements and guidelines set out in the
report that the Secretary-General introduced to the
General Assembly in July (A/63/677) do not meet all
the concerns and questions of a number of Member
States regarding the implementation and implications
of the responsibility to protect. Those concerns and
questions, Mr. President, were clearly stated during the
thematic debate that you convened.

09-51026

A/63/PV.105

We believe that full consideration should be
given to the outcome of that debate in future discussion
of this matter. We believe too that this subject should
be addressed in the sole United Nations deliberative
forum — the General Assembly — within parameters
defined by Member States.
This matter thus requires comprehensive, careful
and lengthy consideration that must reflect the position
of each and every Member State. Hence, we consider
this resolution to be solely procedural in nature.
I do not wish to conclude, Sir, without thanking
you for your invaluable contribution during your
presidency to the strengthening of multilateralism and
the role of the General Assembly and thus to building a
fairer, more inclusive and more humane world.
Ms. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): Resolution 63/308, which has just been
adopted, was the subject of consultations, during which
my delegation proposed a number of changes, the
majority of which were taken into account. We
therefore decided to join the consensus, on the
understanding that this is a solely procedural resolution
and that we have barely begun the debate on this item.
The debate must be transparent, open and inclusive.
My delegation believes that the concept of the
responsibility to protect must be understood as the duty
of each State to watch over the security of its citizens
by ensuring the rights to life, food, education and
health care and respect for human rights.
But we are concerned that some wish to construe
this concept differently. The delegation of Nicaragua
reaffirms the principles of the United Nations Charter,
which is the most important and most universal
instrument at our disposal. The development of the
concept of the responsibility to protect must be
considered as carefully as possible, as there are
shortcomings in the text of the 2005 World Summit
Outcome (resolution 60/1) and in the report of the
Secretary-General (A/63/677) and could easily turn
this concept into a right to intervene, something from
which we small countries have suffered on a number of
occasions.
This is an ambiguous concept that can easily be
manipulated. It is set out in a General Assembly
resolution whose legal value, in accordance with
Article 10 of the Charter, is that of a recommendation.
The concept encompasses the possibility of the use of

09-51026

force and could run counter to well-established
principles of the Charter, such as non-interference in
the internal affairs of States and non-use of force in
international relations.
We thank you, Mr. President, for the concept note
circulated as document A/63/958, which very clearly
sets forth the elements that my country believes should
be taken into account in this debate. We would have
liked to see a reference to that document in the
resolution we have just adopted.
As we come to the end of the sixty-third session,
I pay tribute to you, Father Miguel, on behalf of my
country, President Ortega and the Nicaraguan
delegation, and on my own account for your excellent
work over the past year. Yours has been a presidency of
the South. It has been the most tangible proof that true
revitalization of the General Assembly — that is, of the
G-192, as you have dubbed it and as we shall call it in
your honour — is possible and necessary. Indeed, it is
more necessary now than ever before. Under your
leadership, we have taken firm steps towards the
establishment of a General Assembly in which the
voice of the voiceless can be heard and in which we are
all equal. You have taught us that we all have the same
rights.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): My delegation welcomes
the adoption of resolution 63/308, entitled “The
responsibility to protect”. Allow me to express our
sincere appreciation to the delegation of Guatemala
and to all sponsors of the resolution for bringing
forward this item, which is of pivotal importance in
preventing the four crimes articulated in the SecretaryGeneral’s excellent report on the responsibility to
protect (A/63/677). My delegation welcomes the
General Assembly’s continued consideration of the
responsibility to protect in order to ensure the
implementation of the mandates set out in paragraphs
138 and 139 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome
Document (resolution 60/1).
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of position.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item
44?
It was so decided.

7

A/63/PV.105

The President (spoke in Spanish): The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 107.

related to the Security Council (A/63/47). May I take it
that the Assembly decides to adopt the draft decision?

Agenda item 48 (continued)

The President (spoke in Spanish): As noted
earlier, intergovernmental negotiations have been
conducted in full compliance with General Assembly
decision 62/557 of 15 September 2008, which are still
ongoing. May I therefore take it that the General
Assembly
decides
to
immediately
continue
intergovernmental negotiations on Security Council
reform in informal plenary of the General Assembly at
its sixty-fourth session as mandated by General
Assembly decision 62/557, building on the progress
achieved during its sixty-third session, as well as the
positions of and proposals made by Member States,
while noting with appreciation the initiative and efforts
of the President of the General Assembly and the
Chairman in the process of comprehensive reform of
the Security Council?

Follow-up to and implementation of the outcome of
the 2002 International Conference on Financing for
Development and the preparation of the 2008 Review
Conference
Draft decision (A/63/L.102)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now take action on draft decision A/63/L.102,
entitled “High-level Dialogue of the General Assembly
on Financing for Development”. May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt the draft decision?
Draft decision A/63/L.102 was adopted.
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude
its consideration of agenda item 48?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 111 (continued)
Question of equitable representation on and increase
in the membership of the Security Council and
related matters
Report of the Open-ended Working Group on
the Question of Equitable Representation on
and Increase in the Membership of the Security
Council and Other Matters related to the
Security Council (A/63/47)
Draft decision (A/63/47, para. 17)
The President (spoke in Spanish): Members will
recall that the General Assembly held a joint debate on
agenda items 9 and 111 at its 53rd to 56th plenary
meetings, on 18 to 20 November 2008. Members will
also recall that, pursuant to General Assembly decision
62/557 of 15 September 2008, the Assembly conducted
intergovernmental negotiations in informal plenary
meetings during its sixty-third session.
The Assembly will now take action on the draft
decision contained in paragraph 17 of the report of the
Open-ended Working Group on the Question of
Equitable Representation and Increase in the
Membership of the Security Council and Other Matters

8

The draft decision was adopted.

It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to express my sincerest thanks to Ambassador Zahir
Tanin of Afghanistan for having conducted, on my
behalf, the intergovernmental negotiations on Security
Council reform and for having done so with
impartiality towards all positions in order to move
ahead. Many aspects of Ambassador Tanin’s invaluable
endeavours are reflected in my note contained in
document A/63/960. I urge Member States to endorse
his work in order to turn the significant progress made
at the sixty-third session to practical benefit at the
sixty-fourth session. We cannot put off to the future the
task of creating a better Council if we wish to ensure a
better tomorrow.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to conclude its consideration of agenda item 111?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 115
Follow-up to the recommendations on the
administrative and internal oversight of the
Independent Inquiry Committee into the United
Nations Oil-for-Food Programme
The President: Members will recall that, at its
2nd plenary meeting on 19 September 2008, the
General Assembly decided to include this item in the

09-51026

A/63/PV.105

agenda of the sixty-third session. It is my
understanding that it would be desirable to defer
consideration of this item and to include it in the draft
agenda of the sixty-fourth session of the Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of this item and to
include in the draft agenda of the sixty-fourth session?
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
its consideration of agenda 115.
Agenda item 137
Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor
The President (spoke in Spanish): Members will
recall that, at its 2nd plenary meeting on 19 September
2008, the Assembly decided to include item 137 in the
agenda of the sixty-third session.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable
to defer consideration of this item to the sixty-fourth
session of the General Assembly. May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to defer
consideration of this item and to include it in the draft
agenda of its sixty-fourth session?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has thus concluded its consideration of agenda item
137.
Agenda item 152
Observer status for the Agency for International
Trade Information and Cooperation in the
General Assembly
The President (spoke in Spanish): Members will
recall that, at its 2nd plenary meeting on 19 September
2008, the Assembly decided to include item 152 in the
agenda of the sixty-third session.
It is my understanding that the sponsor of this
item later requested that no action should be taken on
this item at the sixty-third session.
The Assembly has thus
consideration of agenda item 152.

09-51026

concluded

its

Agenda item 158
The scope and application of the principle of
universal jurisdiction
Draft decision (A/63/L.100)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Republic of
Tanzania to introduce draft decision A/63/L.100.
Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): I
have the honour, on behalf of the African Group, to
introduce draft decision A/63/L.100. The request for
the inclusion of this agenda item is brought before the
United Nations following the decision of the Assembly
of Heads of State and Government of the African
Union to refer the issue of the principle of universal
jurisdiction for discussion by the General Assembly.
This decision of the Assembly was a result of a
thorough study undertaken by the African Union
Commission.
Universal jurisdiction is a well-established
principle of international law the purpose of which is
to ensure that individuals who commit grave offences,
such as piracy, slavery, torture, genocide, war crimes
and crimes against humanity, do not do so with
impunity and are brought to justice, irrespective of the
place where the offence was committed or of the
nationalities of the offenders or the victims. No place
should be a safe haven for war criminals and violators
of international human rights and humanitarian law.
This principle should therefore be impartially and
objectively applied, upon the exhaustion of all local
remedies, so that it may not be misused for the political
ends of some individuals or countries. For this reason,
the principle of universal jurisdiction must be applied
in a manner that promotes international order and
security and minimizes potentials for misuse.
The African States fully subscribe to and support
this principle, as enshrined in article 4 (h) of the
Constitutive Act of the African Union and as
emphasized in several African Union decisions.
The African Group emphasizes that the controversy
surrounding the concept of universal jurisdiction is not
about whether the concept validly exists, but rather
about the scope of its applicability. Many African
States have expressed approval of the principle of
universal jurisdiction on a treaty basis. However, the
scope and applicability of the principle of universal
jurisdiction outside the context of such treaties remain

9

A/63/PV.105

to be determined. The extent of application of this
important principle has never been substantively
discussed at the level of the General Assembly. It is in
this context that African States urge the General
Assembly to include this item on the agenda of the
sixty-fourth session for further discussion and to reach
agreement on the extent and applicability of the
principle that would create uniformity in its application
by our domestic courts, and further to ensure that the
doctrine is applied as justly as possible by all States
without limitation.
In conclusion, there is a need for the international
community to come up with clear rules and approaches
that could be taken into consideration in guiding the
application of the principle of universal jurisdiction
and to provide a uniform set of regulations that would
guide our national courts in meeting the challenges of
prosecuting perpetrators of international human rights.
There is also a need to clarify in international law the
rights and obligations of States under this important
principle in order to minimize potentials for misuse and
to maximize the benefits of extraterritorial jurisdiction.
The African Group has taken into consideration
the concerns of other delegations and has exercised
great flexibility in coming up with a title and the
proposed decision to be adopted today. We thank all
the delegations that have worked constructively to
arrive at this consensus decision. By the decision
before us, the General Assembly would include the
item entitled “Scope and application of the principle of
universal jurisdiction” in the agenda of its sixty-fourth
session for further consideration.
With these words, I am pleased to commend draft
decision A/63/L.100 for adoption by this Assembly.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We shall now
proceed to take action on draft decision A/63/L.100.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the
draft decision?
Draft decision A/63/L.100 was adopted.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
call on those representatives who wish to speak in
explanation of position on the decision just adopted.
May I remind delegations that explanations of position
are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): My delegation welcomes
the inclusion in the agenda of the sixty-fourth session

10

of the General Assembly of the item entitled “Scope
and application of the principle of universal jurisdiction”.
Let me also express my delegation’s sincere appreciation
to the African Group and, in particular, to the delegation
of the United Republic of Tanzania, for their diligent
efforts in bringing this item before the General Assembly.
As was unequivocally stated by the Permanent
Representative of Tanzania, the African Group of States
fully subscribes to the principle of universal jurisdiction
as enshrined in international law. This otherwise noble
principle has, however, been left open to abuse and
used to serve narrow and often misguided political
interests, as in the case of my own country, Rwanda.
Such misapplication, in the view of my delegation,
endangers and undermines the very principles of
universal jurisdiction and international law. It is
therefore imperative that a clear universal mechanism
be established to ensure the impartial and appropriate
application of the principle of universal jurisdiction.
My delegation remains committed to contributing
to the consideration of this item.
Mr. Lundkvist (Sweden): I have taken the floor
on behalf of the European Union to explain our
position following the adoption of the decision to
include in the agenda of the sixty-fourth session of the
General Assembly the item entitled “Scope and
application of the principle of universal jurisdiction”,
with the recommendation that it be considered in the
Sixth Committee at that session.
With regard to the inclusion of this item in the
agenda of the sixty-fourth session, the European Union
believes that the discussion about universal jurisdiction
is, first and foremost, a legal subject that rightly
belongs in the Sixth Committee. We therefore look
forward to discussing the item in the Sixth Committee
during the coming session.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of position.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item
158?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 18
The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan
The President (spoke in Spanish): Members will
recall that, at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 19 September

09-51026

A/63/PV.105

2008, the Assembly decided to include this item in the
agenda of the sixty-third session.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable
to defer consideration of this item to the sixty-fourth
session of the General Assembly. May I take it that it is
the wish of the Assembly to defer consideration of this
item and to include it in the draft agenda of its sixtyfourth session?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I call on the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): My delegation would
like to make a brief statement. As has been the case in
previous sessions, this year, once again, the delegation
of Armenia disassociates itself from the consensus on
the decision to defer consideration of agenda item 18 to
the sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly. I
request that this statement be included in the record of
this meeting.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has thus concluded its consideration of agenda item 18.
Agenda items remaining for consideration during the
sixty-third session of the General Assembly
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to remind delegations that the following agenda items,
on which action has been taken at previous meetings,
have remained open for consideration during the sixtythird session of the General Assembly: items 9, 14 to
16, 20, 40, 45, 49 (d), 59, 65 (b), 71, 79, 89, 99, 100,
103 (c), 104 (a), 105 (d), 106, 112, 114 (h), (p), (q) and
(u), 116 (a) to (q), 117 to 136, 138 to 149, 154 and 157.
As members are aware, those items have been
included in the provisional agenda of the sixty-fourth
session of the General Assembly with the exception of
agenda item 14, entitled “Zone of peace and
cooperation of the South Atlantic”; agenda item 59,
entitled “Holocaust remembrance”; agenda item 71,
entitled “Request for an advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice on whether the unilateral
declaration of independence of Kosovo is in
accordance with international law”; agenda item 114,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations”; agenda item 126,
entitled “United Nations pension system”; agenda item
127,
entitled
“Administrative
and
budgetary
coordination of the United Nations with the specialized

09-51026

agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency”;
agenda item 145, entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone”; and agenda item
154, entitled “Judges of the International Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed on the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of all of those
items at the present session?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
inform members that we have still to hear statements
on the programme budget implications of draft
resolutions A/63/L.103, under agenda item 107,
“Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium
Summit”, and A/63/L.101, under agenda item 114 (a),
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union”, as well as the draft resolution
contained in paragraph 55 of the report of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the General
Assembly (A/63/959), under agenda item 110,
“Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly”.
I propose to suspend the meeting now and to
resume it at 3 p.m. so that the Assembly may continue
its work.
The meeting was suspended at 12.10 p.m. and
resumed at 4.05 p.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly closed consideration of agenda item
71, entitled “Request for an advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice on whether the unilateral
declaration of independence of Kosovo is in
accordance with international law”, earlier in this
meeting. I have since received a request from the
representative of Serbia to reopen consideration of the
item. May I take it that the General Assembly agrees to
reopen agenda item 71?
It was so decided.

11

A/63/PV.105

Agenda item 71
Request for an advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice on whether the unilateral declaration
of independence of Kosovo is in accordance with
international law
The President: I
representative of Serbia.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Starčević (Serbia): This morning, I was
ready to speak on this item and my name was inscribed
on the list of speakers, but somehow, due to some
oversight by the Secretariat or otherwise, I was not
called to speak and the item was included in a list of
other items that were deferred for consideration to the
sixty-fourth session.
This agenda item was designed in order to ask for
an advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice on this issue. Resolution 63/3 was adopted
under this item, and we are now awaiting the opinion
of the International Court of Justice. Therefore, the
issue has not been closed. It is an open item and an
open question, and therefore my delegation requests
that item 71 be maintained on the agenda of the sixtyfourth session of the General Assembly.
The President: Members have heard the request
by the representative of Serbia to include agenda item
71 in the provisional agenda of the sixty-fourth session
of the General Assembly. May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to include this item in
the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session?
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
its consideration of agenda item 71.
Agenda item 110 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the General Assembly
(A/63/959)
Draft resolution (A/63/959, para. 55)
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
the draft resolution contained in paragraph 55 of
document A/63/959. In that connection, I give the floor
to the representative of the Secretariat.

12

Mr. Shaaban (Under-Secretary-General for
General Assembly and Conference Management): In
connection with the draft resolution contained in
paragraph 55 of document A/63/959, I wish to put on
record the following statement of financial
implications on behalf of the Secretary-General, in
accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly.
By paragraph 2 of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would decide
“to establish, at its sixty-fourth session, an Ad
Hoc Working Group on the revitalization of the
General Assembly … and [t]o submit a report
thereon to the Assembly at its sixty-fourth session”.
With regard to the functioning of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the General
Assembly, it is understood that the Working Group
would use the conference facilities and services
allocated to the General Assembly and its working
groups, that the Working Group cannot meet in parallel
with the General Assembly plenary, and that no two
working groups of the General Assembly can meet
simultaneously. Accordingly, should the General
Assembly adopt the draft resolution contained in
paragraph 55 of the report of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Revitalization of the General Assembly,
no additional requirements would arise under the
programme budget for the biennium 2008-2009 or the
proposed programme budget for the biennium 20102011.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution entitled “Revitalization
of the work of the General Assembly”, contained in
paragraph 55 of the report of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Revitalization of the General Assembly
(A/63/959). May I take it that the Assembly decides to
adopt the draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/309).
The President: Before giving the floor to the
speakers in explanation of vote after the vote, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Yaroshevich (Belarus): We appreciate the
tremendous work done by the Co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the General

09-51026

A/63/PV.105

Assembly, the Permanent Representatives of Ecuador
and Norway, and their open-minded, goal-oriented
approach. We would also like to commend the Member
States and political groups that made valuable
contributions to the report (A/63/959) and resolution
63/309.

statements to the press, easy access for the media to
General Assembly meetings, indication of speakers’
names and titles during video or television
transmission of meetings, and enhanced capacity and
institutional memory of the spokesperson section of the
Office of the General Assembly President.

We praise the active participation in our work of
the five permanent (P5) delegations of the Security
Council. The Belarusian delegation believes that the
interest and engagement of the permanent members of
the Security Council in our deliberations on how to
enhance the role of the General Assembly are key
factors in the success of our common endeavour. We
also sincerely hope that the P5 recognize their special
responsibility in facilitating — or sometimes simply
allowing — the bold and meaningful strides of the
entire membership to increase the role of the General
Assembly and regard the whole revitalization process
not as an unavoidable nuisance, but rather as an
indispensable way of ensuring the viability and good
health of the whole United Nations system.

Third is the continued analysis of the reasons for
the lack of implementation of previously adopted
resolutions on the revitalization of the General
Assembly. The chart worked out as a result of the work
of our Group during the previous session should form
the basis for such an exercise.

The report that we have just adopted is a
comprehensive and well-balanced document with vivid
evidence of the results of our work. It contains the
ideas that we have expressed and briefings that we
have heard. We believe that the following key views
and ideas that found their due place in the report
should be developed further in the course of the next
session of the General Assembly.
First is the importance of holding thematic
debates on issues of relevance to the international
community and of concern and interest to the United
Nations. Such debates should be more results-oriented
and could lead to the adoption of a resolution or the
establishment of an open-ended group on the issue
discussed, and a list of proposals made by Member
States during the debates could be drafted.
Second is the support for increasing the public
visibility of the work of the General Assembly. We
have to continue examining the reasons for the
apparent public disconnectedness with the work of the
General Assembly by extending cooperation with
major media outlets and using modern media
techniques. In that regard, we note with great interest
the proposals made by the representative of the United
Nations Correspondents Association during her
briefing on ways that the General Assembly’s work
could be facilitated, such as the quick delivery of

09-51026

Resolution 63/309, which we have just adopted,
is the first substantive resolution on General Assembly
revitalization in years. It covers most of the themes
that we discussed and includes our conclusions. In
adopting that document, we highly praise the tenacity
and expertise of the Co-Chairs, as well as the good will
of the many delegations that made the resolution
possible.
During one of our very fruitful meetings in June,
the Belarusian delegation took the liberty of quoting a
popular music band from Norway, since one of our
Co-Chairs was the Permanent Representative of
Norway, to urge our Co-Chairs and other delegations to
“Stay on these roads”. Today let me quote the name of
the brand new album issued by the group this summer,
which is called “Foot of the mountain”. With the help
of the Co-Chairs and colleagues, we have climbed
much higher than that. The foot of the mountain is far
behind us and, with some courage and determination,
the peak of the mountain should be conquered soon.
Since today is the last day of the sixty-third
session of the General Assembly, the Belarusian
delegation would like to wish you, Mr. President, good
health, well-being and success in all your future
endeavours.
Ms. Rovirosa (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, allow me, Mr. President, to express the great
appreciation of the Rio Group for your leadership of
the work of the sixty-third session of the General
Assembly, which we are concluding today, and to wish
you every success in your future endeavours.
The Rio Group welcomes the painstaking and
instructive work of the Co-Chairs, Ambassador
Espinosa of Ecuador and Ambassador Wetland of
Norway, and reiterates its steadfast commitment to the

13

A/63/PV.105

revitalization process of the General Assembly. The
Rio Group believes that resolution 63/309, which we
adopted today, covers the main concerns expressed by
the various groups and delegations throughout the
process, in which we witnessed the active and
substantive participation of the membership with a
view to strengthening the principal organ of the United
Nations.
The Rio Group calls for continued work to
improve the Assembly’s working methods through the
rationalization of the items on its agenda and the
United Nations voting system. The Rio Group supports
the process launched to further strengthen
institutionalization of the Office of the President of the
General Assembly, acknowledging the progress in
recent years.
However, the Group believes it important to
continue to consider measures and procedures that will
enable us to make best use of the current human and
financial resources available to the Office of the
President. The Rio Group also considers it essential
that the General Assembly consider matters of general
interest, which will lead to its enhanced authority, in
particular with regard to issues that need the
appropriate and timely response of the Organization.
With regard to the role and responsibility of the
General Assembly in the process of selecting the
Secretary-General, the Rio Group is convinced that a
transparent and inclusive selection process should be
established in which the General Assembly plays a
more engaged role, in accordance with the provisions
of the Charter and the resolutions previously adopted
on the issue by the relevant body.
The President: I should like to express my
sincere thanks to Ambassador María Fernanda
Espinosa of Ecuador and Ambassador Morten Wetland
of Norway, Co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group,
who so ably conducted the discussions and complex
negotiations of the Group. I am sure that members of
the Assembly join me in extending to them our sincere
appreciation.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item
110?
It was so decided.

14

Agenda item 114 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(a) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union
Draft resolution (A/63/L.101)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly held the debate on agenda item 114 and its
sub-items (a) to (u) at its 36th and 37th plenary
meetings, on 3 November 2008.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Algeria to introduce draft resolution A/63/L.101.
Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria): At the outset, allow
me, on behalf of the African Group, to express our
deep appreciation to you, Mr. President, for the
commitment, wisdom and excellent skills you have
demonstrated while presiding over the sixty-third
session of the General Assembly. We would like to
wish you every success in your future endeavours.
On behalf of the African Group, I am pleased to
introduce the draft resolution contained in document
A/63/L.101, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and African Union”. I would like to underline
that, since the publication of the draft resolution, the
following countries have joined the African Group as
co-sponsors: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada,
Croatia, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland,
Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg,
the Netherlands, Portugal, Romania, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, the United Kingdom and the United States of
America.
The preamble of the draft resolution provides an
overview of the progress achieved so far in
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union, in particular during the past few
years, during which the structures of the African Union
in various fields have been established, most notably in
the area of the maintenance of peace and security. The
draft resolution recognizes the pivotal need to bring
Africa into the mainstream of the global economy and
to strengthen the global partnership to address the
special development needs of Africa, in particular the
eradication of poverty.
In its operative part, the draft resolution contains
an agenda for urgent action, notably an appeal for the
implementation of the declaration on enhancing United

09-51026

A/63/PV.105

Nations-African Union cooperation, including the
framework for the 10-year capacity-building programme
for the African Union. It further requests the United
Nations system to intensify its assistance to the African
Union, as appropriate, in strengthening the institutional
and operational capacity of its Peace and Security
Council. The draft resolution also stresses the need for
the United Nations and the African Union to develop
close cooperation and joint programmes and to
intensify efforts to address illicit arms trafficking, the
global fight against terrorism, the promotion and
protection of human rights in Africa and efforts to
implement the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation.
For its part, the African Group would like to
reaffirm the commitment and determination of our
Governments and our peoples to fully assume their
role. We attach great significance to joining our efforts
with those of the United Nations on the basis of the
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and the Constitutive Act of the African Union.
I would like to express our gratitude to all
delegations that have extended their support to the
African Group in co-sponsoring the draft resolution. It
is our hope that the General Assembly will adopt it by
consensus.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/63/L.101, in connection with which I
give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Shaaban (Under-Secretary-General for
General Assembly and Conference Management): In
connection with draft resolution A/63/L.101, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union”, I wish to place on the record the
following statement of financial implications on behalf
of the Secretary-General, in accordance with rule 153
of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
By paragraph 3 of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would emphasize the need to pursue
the ongoing measures to improve the effectiveness and
efficiency of United Nations and African Union
cooperation; and would recommend the continued
improvement of the field presence of the United
Nations Secretariat at the headquarters of the African
Union, recognizing the need to ensure an appropriate
level of representation at the United Nations Liaison
Office in Addis Ababa commensurate with the
increasing political integration of the African Union,
the responsibilities for implementing all aspects of the

09-51026

10-year capacity-building programme, coordinating the
United Nations system in existing and emerging areas
of cooperation in peace and security, political and
humanitarian affairs, in order to enhance the strategic
and operational partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union and its subregions.
In that regard, it is envisaged that the
implementation of that paragraph could potentially result
in financial implications. However, in order to ensure
comprehensive, effective and efficient arrangements in
support of the partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union, the level of representation at
the United Nations Liaison Office in Addis Ababa
would be reviewed, taking into account the provisions
of paragraph 3 of draft resolution A/63/L.101 in the
context of the report of the Secretary-General referred
to in paragraph 4 of the same draft resolution.
Programme budget implications, if any, would be dealt
with in accordance with established procedures.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/63/L.101. May I take it
that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/63/L.101?
Draft resolution A/63/L.101
(resolution 63/310).

was

adopted

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 114 and of agenda item
114 as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 107 (continued)
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/881)
Draft resolution (A/63/L.103)
The President: It is my understanding that it
would be desirable to defer consideration of the report
of the Secretary-General (A/63/881) to the sixty-fourth
session under the agenda items entitled “Report of the
Peacebuilding Commission” and “Report of the
Secretary-General on the Peacebuilding Fund”. May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
defer consideration of the report of the SecretaryGeneral to the sixty-fourth session under the agenda
items entitled “Report of the Peacebuilding

15

A/63/PV.105

Commission” and “Report of the Secretary-General on
the Peacebuilding Fund”?
It was so decided.
The President: Before we proceed further, I
should like to consult the Assembly with a view to
proceeding to consider draft resolution A/63/L.103 at
this meeting. In that connection, since the draft
resolution was circulated only earlier today, it would
be necessary to waive the relevant provision of rule 78
of the rules of procedure, which reads as follows:
“As a general rule, no proposal, shall be
discussed or put to the vote at any meeting of the
General Assembly unless copies of it have been
circulated to all delegations not later than the day
preceding the meeting.”
Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it that the
Assembly agrees with this proposal.
It was so decided.
The President: I invite the attention of members
to operative paragraphs 2, 3 and 12 of the draft
resolution and to inform them of the following
technical corrections to the text.
In operative paragraph 2, the words “the concept”
should be deleted. The paragraph will therefore read,
“supports that the composite entity shall be led by”,
with the rest of the paragraph remaining unchanged.
In operative paragraph 3, the phrase “the
composition of” should be deleted. The paragraph
should therefore read:
“Requests the Secretary-General to produce,
for the consideration of the General Assembly at
its sixty-fourth session, a comprehensive proposal
specifying, inter alia, the mission statement of the
composite entity, the organizational arrangements,
including an organizational chart, funding and the
executive board to oversee its operational
activities”,
with the rest of the paragraph remaining unchanged.
In operative paragraph 12, the word “united”
should be replaced with “untied”.
Should there be any other technical corrections in
other languages, representatives are invited to inform
the Secretariat directly.

16

We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/63/L.103, as orally corrected.
In connection with draft resolution A/63/L.103, I
give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Shaaban (Under-Secretary-General for
General Assembly and Conference Management): In
connection with draft resolution A/63/L.103, entitled
“System-wide coherence”, I wish to place on record
the following statement of financial implications on
behalf of the Secretary-General, in accordance with
rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly.
In paragraphs 3 and 16 of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would request the Secretary-General
to produce, for the consideration of the General
Assembly at its sixty-fourth session, a comprehensive
proposal specifying, inter alia, the mission statement of
the composite entity, the organizational arrangements,
including an organizational chart, funding and the
executive board to oversee its operational activities in
order to commence intergovernmental negotiations;
and request the Secretary-General to create a central
repository of information on United Nations operational
activities for development, including disaggregated
statistics on all funding sources and expenditures,
building on the Secretary-General’s comprehensive
statistical analysis of the financing of operational
activities for development of the United Nations
system, and to ensure appropriate and user-friendly
online access and regular updating of the information
contained therein.
As regards the request contained in paragraph 3
of the draft resolution, on strengthening the institutional
arrangements for support of gender equality and the
empowerment of women, there are insufficient details
at this time on the modalities of the new composite
entity. In the absence of the agreed structure, including
a precise number and level of posts, as well as of an
indication of the proposed activities and their cost, it is
not possible to prepare any reliable estimates of
financial and administrative implications. It is
anticipated that, when all these issues are addressed in
the comprehensive proposal to be produced for the
consideration of the General Assembly at its sixtyfourth session, as requested in draft resolution
A/63/L.103, the related financial implications would be
issued in accordance with established procedure.

09-51026

A/63/PV.105

As regards the request contained in paragraph 16
of draft resolution A/63/L.103 to create a central
repository of information on United Nations
operational activities for development, it is recalled
that, in paragraph 28 of its resolution 62/208, the
General Assembly, inter alia, requested the SecretaryGeneral, making use of existing capacities within the
Secretariat and, if necessary, voluntary contributions:
(a) to continue to broaden and improve the coverage,
timeliness, reliability, quality and comparability of
system-wide financial data, definitions and classifications
for the financial reporting of operational activities for
development of the United Nations system, in a
coherent way; (b) to build a comprehensive,
sustainable and consistent financial data and reporting
system for the operational activities for development of
all the relevant organizations and entities of the United
Nations system; and (c) to include, in this regard, in
the report to be submitted to the Economic and Social
Council in 2008 a concise assessment of progress made
and a description of planned activities.
As indicated in the report of the SecretaryGeneral on comprehensive statistical analysis of the
financing of operational activities for development of
the United Nations system for 2006 (A/63/71), the
work to build a comprehensive and sustainable
financial data and reporting system on Untied Nations
operational activities would aim to provide
comprehensive data and analysis on United Nations
system financing that is easily accessible to all, and
data and information on trends in financing,
disaggregated at the level of each entity, and to
amalgamate them for a consolidated statement of
United Nations financing. Consequently, the creation
of a central repository of information on United
Nations operational activities constitutes part of the
ongoing work to build a comprehensive and sustainable
financial data and reporting system and would be
financed from the resources already available for this
purpose under section 9, “Economic and Social
Council Affairs”, of the programme budget for the
biennium 2008-2009.
In summary, at this stage there are no programme
budget implications arising from draft resolution
A/63/L.103.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/63/L.103, entitled
“System-wide coherence”. May I take it that the

09-51026

Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/63/L.103,
as orally corrected?
Draft resolution A/63/L.103, as orally corrected,
was adopted (resolution 63/311).
The President: I give the floor to those
representatives wishing to make statements in
explanation of position on the resolution just adopted.
May I remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the honour to
make this statement in explanation of position on
resolution 63/311, entitled “System-wide coherence”,
on behalf of the Joint Coordinating Committee of the
Non-Aligned Movement and the Group of 77 and
China.
The Joint Coordinating Committee would like to
express its sincere appreciation to you, Mr. President,
and to the two co-chairs of the informal consultations,
the Permanent Representatives of Namibia and Spain,
for all your efforts in guiding the process of systemwide coherence forward throughout the consultations
in the General Assembly. I should also like to thank the
Secretary-General and the Deputy Secretary-General
for having actively responded to the requests for the
necessary reports that have been and will be important
for continued intergovernmental work on this subject.
The Joint Coordinating Committee would like to make
the following comments on the resolution.
The Joint Coordinating Committee strongly
supports the consolidation of the four entities in the
United Nations system dealing with gender issues into
a composite entity, as stated in operative paragraph 1
of the resolution. In the same context, and based on
operative paragraph 3, the Joint Coordinating
Committee looks forward to proactive, intensive
intergovernmental negotiations during the sixty-fourth
session of the General Assembly on all details of that
composite entity, including, inter alia, its mandate,
mission statement, organizational arrangements,
intergovernmental oversight, funding and executive
board.
With regard to operative paragraph 2, the Joint
Coordinating Committee supports that the composite
entity, upon its establishment, shall be led by an undersecretary-general to be appointed by and to report to
the Secretary-General.

17

A/63/PV.105

As we move forward on the gender architecture
issue, the Joint Coordinating Committee considers the
issue of funding to be key and a top priority for
system-wide coherence. The Joint Coordinating
Committee strongly believes that it is vital to achieve
substantive progress on this issue during the sixtyfourth session of the General Assembly. The Joint
Coordinating Committee is also of the view that
discussions on this issue should be conducted in an
action-oriented and proactive manner. They should
build on the discussion notes on strengthening funding
of operational activities referred to in the seventh
preambular paragraph of the resolution, particularly
when the General Assembly addresses the continued
imbalance between core and non-core funding outlined
in paragraphs 13 and 14 of the resolution, as well as
the urgent need to increase the quantity of funding.
On governance, the Joint Coordinating Committee
stresses the need for all partners to work together to
make progress on this front during the sixty-fourth
session of the General Assembly. Therefore, and as
stated in paragraph 6 of the resolution, the Joint
Coordinating Committee looks forward to receiving
actionable proposals from the Secretary-General during
the sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly on
improving the governance of operational activities, the
focus of which should not be limited to existing
intergovernmental bodies. These proposals should
build on the discussion notes on strengthening the
governance of operational activities referred to in the
seventh preambular paragraph of the resolution.
Additionally, with regard to paragraph 7 of the
present resolution, which requests the SecretaryGeneral to propose modalities to the General Assembly
at its sixty-fourth session for the submission and
approval of common country programmes on a
voluntary basis, the Joint Coordinating Committee
stresses that our main terms of reference in the
coordination of these proposals shall remain paragraph
139 of General Assembly resolution 62/208, on the
triennial comprehensive policy review of operational
activities for development of the United Nations
system, on the need for an independent evaluation of
voluntary efforts at the country level of some
programme country pilots, as well as the fifth
preambular paragraph of General Assembly resolution
62/277 on system-wide coherence, and paragraphs 19
and 20 of resolution 63/311 addressing the same issue.

18

Finally, the Joint Coordinating Committee
reiterates its continued intention to engage actively and
constructively on all issues relating to system-wide
coherence during the sixty-fourth session through an
integrated approach, as stipulated in paragraph 22 of
resolution 63/311. It is imperative to achieve the same
level of progress on all five issues under discussion
through a single undertaking at the conclusion of this
process of system-wide coherence. Accordingly, the
Joint Coordinating Committee looks forward to an
extensive process of intergovernmental consultations
on any future draft resolution or decision on systemwide coherence. The intergovernmental negotiating
process should follow a workplan that would be
developed at an early stage to ensure an open,
transparent
and
all-inclusive
intergovernmental
negotiating process that would lead to the desired
agreement by consensus.
Mr. Lidén (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The following
countries align themselves with this statement: Croatia,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia,
Liechtenstein, Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova,
Armenia and Georgia.
The European Union warmly welcomes the strong
and unanimous support of the General Assembly for
the establishment of a composite gender entity within
the United Nations system. The consolidation of the
four existing entities into one single structure, headed
by an under-secretary-general, will strengthen the
capacity, accountability and effectiveness of the United
Nations system in the area of gender. The EU believes
that the new entity will bring an important shift to the
work of the United Nations in the area of gender
equality and the empowerment of women. On the eve
of the fifteenth anniversary of the Beijing Platform for
Action, the decision today to reform the current gender
architecture could not have been timelier.
There is widespread recognition of the need to
improve gender equality and the empowerment of
women in order to build sustainable, just and
developed societies. Gender equality is a prerequisite
for reaching the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) and other internationally agreed development
goals. Meeting the gender-related MDG targets is
proving to be particularly challenging. The United
Nations needs to mobilize if these targets are to be
reached by 2015. There is also a growing realization of

09-51026

A/63/PV.105

the urgency of addressing the needs of women during
armed conflict and the essential role of women in
peacebuilding and reconstruction.
Through the new entity, the United Nations will
be able to play the central role it must play for the
empowerment of women in all regions of the world,
meeting the ever-increasing requests of Governments
for support in this area. It will help to close the current
gap between the normative work and the operational
work in the area. Moreover, it will strengthen gender
mainstreaming and help other parts of the United
Nations system to improve their work on gender.
During the past three years, detailed options for
the new structure have been debated by Member States
on the basis of information provided by the SecretaryGeneral in earlier reports. The European Union stands
ready to work with other Member States to finalize,
through a swift process, the remaining details for the
new entity. We should set ourselves an ambitious goal,
aiming to finish the intergovernmental process in the
first quarter of 2010, at the latest. We are almost there.
There should be no further delays in operationalizing
this essential reform.
The European Union thanks the SecretaryGeneral and the Deputy Secretary-General, as well as
the President of the General Assembly, for their crucial
support for gender reform, and urges the SecretaryGeneral, on the basis of today’s resolution, to begin the
process of appointing the new under-secretary-general.
On behalf of the European Union, I also want to
thank the co-chairs, my colleagues Ambassador Mbuende
of Namibia and Ambassador Yáñez-Barnuevo of Spain,
for their tireless efforts in bringing Member States to
this consensus decision on the establishment of a new
gender entity and for bringing about progress in other
important areas within the system-wide coherence
process.
In this regard, the European Union warmly
welcomes the progress made so far in the areas of
funding and governance. The European Union
recognizes that improving the governance structures
and funding modalities for the United Nations
development work is essential if the United Nations is
to be an effective partner for developing countries as
they work towards achieving the MDGs. The European
Union is willing to contribute constructively to further
progress in those areas.

09-51026

In addition, the European Union welcomes the
acknowledgement by the General Assembly of the
interim assessments of progress made and challenges
remaining in those countries that are implementing the
“delivering as one” approach, including the programme
country pilots. The EU will also continue to engage in
this area within the system-wide coherence process
during the sixty-fourth session.
Finally, the European Union wants to recognize
the essential contribution of civil society over the past
three years towards the new gender entity. The ongoing
dialogue between States and a wide range of
organizations, at the country level and at the United
Nations, has helped us to identify the gaps, focus our
deliberations and alert us to the urgency of reform. It is
essential to find sustainable formats for this important
dialogue to continue once the gender entity is
operational.
Mr. Pálsson (Iceland): I have the honour to
deliver this explanation of position on behalf of the
five Nordic countries: Denmark, Finland, Iceland,
Norway and Sweden. The Nordic countries welcome
today’s long-awaited unanimous decision to create a
new and consolidated gender entity of the United
Nations. This is a fresh start for our Organization in
promoting gender equality and strengthening gender
mainstreaming for improved effectiveness and impact,
including at the country level.
The strong support of the Secretary-General and
the Deputy Secretary-General throughout has been of
great importance. The Secretary-General has made it
clear that the time is now ripe for action, a view we
fully share. Today’s adoption will enable the SecretaryGeneral to take the next important steps towards
realizing the new entity. We look forward to the
appointment of an under-secretary-general and believe
that the new entity should be up and running by the
middle of 2010. There is no time to lose.
The Nordic countries want to recognize the role
of civil society in our deliberations over the past three
years and reiterate the need to find sustainable formats
for this important dialogue to continue once the gender
entity is operational. With a strong and efficient new
gender entity in place, we must all commit to the
ambitious goal of increasing voluntary funding to the
entity in the years to come.
The Nordic countries also look forward to
following up on the strengthening of the governance

19

A/63/PV.105

and funding system of operational activities for
development. With a more accountable, transparent and
efficient governance that ensures the delivery of better
results on the ground, we believe that more and more
predictable funding will follow. In this respect, we
should start drawing on the experiences gained by the
countries that have taken part in the “delivering as
one” process.
Finally, allow me to thank the two co-chairs,
Ambassadors Mbuende of Namibia and YáñezBarnuevo of Spain, for their diligent work, as well as
you, Mr. President. Indeed, we would like to
congratulate you on the result obtained on this final
day of your tenure.
Ms. Davies (Australia): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of Canada, Australia and New Zealand
(CANZ).
Canada, Australia and New Zealand congratulate
the co-chairs for their important work in fostering
consensus among Member States on the range of
issues. The adoption of resolution 63/311 clearly
demonstrates Member States’ will to move forward in
supporting greater effectiveness in all five areas of
system-wide coherence and represents a call to the
Secretary-General and the wider United Nations to
support these efforts.
CANZ supports the creation of a composite entity
led by an under-secretary-general that will consolidate
the four agencies working to advance equality between
women and men and women’s empowerment. This is
required to provide a stronger voice for women
worldwide and to deliver more effective support to all
countries in implementing our collective mandate and
commitments.
We are pleased that resolution 63/311 documents
the General Assembly’s strong commitment to creating
a single consolidated organization in the form of a
composite entity, with the details to be determined at
the next session of the Assembly to complete its
establishment. We understand that today’s decision
means that at the next session we will move quickly
with concrete decisions on functions and organizational
arrangements. In that regard, we look forward to the
early recruitment of an under-secretary-general.
CANZ is also pleased that progress has been
made in three important areas of the system-wide
coherence agenda, namely, the governance and funding

20

of operational activities and delivering as one. We look
forward to concrete decisions with regard to, inter alia,
the approval of common country programmes, thus
ensuring more efficient United Nations support to
those Member States that have voluntarily adopted this
approach. CANZ remains committed to improving the
effectiveness of the United Nations operational
activities, including through the system-wide coherence
process.
Mr. Okuda (Japan): First of all, I would like to
join the many previous speakers in commending the
very excellent and efficient manner in which you,
Mr. President, have conducted the work of the sixtythird session of the General Assembly. My delegation
also wishes you every success in your future endeavours.
We would also like to express our sincere
appreciation to the co-chairs, Ambassador Mbuende
and Ambassador Yáñez-Barnuevo, for their committed
leadership and tireless efforts to lead this important
discussion on United Nations system-wide coherence.
With regard to the resolution that was presented
by the co-chairs, my delegation, with maximum
flexibility and tolerance, decided to join the consensus
on its adoption. The Government of Japan strongly
believes that it is crucial to promote gender
mainstreaming. To that end, we support the efforts
made on the architectural reform of gender organizations
to promote United Nations system-wide coherence.
However, we would like to take this opportunity to
explain our position on that very significant issue.
First, we would like to express our strong
dissatisfaction at the fact that the resolution was
introduced to Member States with less than a week
remaining in the sixty-third session. Furthermore, in
spite of our concerns relating to the resolution, there
was no opportunity for open consultation neither
among Member States nor among concerned
delegations. We are displeased by such an opaque
consultation process.
Secondly, we would like to reiterate some of the
critical aspects that we have repeatedly emphasized in
past consultations with regard to the establishment of
the new gender entity. My delegation firmly maintains
the position that, in order to avoid unnecessary
bloating of the new entity, the principle of scrap-andbuild should be strictly applied to rebuilding a
streamlined entity that is efficient and meets the needs
of the times. By conserving United Nations resources,

09-51026

A/63/PV.105

creating an effective United Nations system and
investing the resources saved in developing countries,
the benefits to those really needing support will be
increased to the maximum extent possible. We would
therefore like to emphasize once again that if we
cannot secure those resources, we cannot achieve the
goals of United Nations system-wide coherence.
Thirdly, my delegation would like to reaffirm
that, in the course of future consultations specifying
details of structural reform, we should ensure a
consultation process that is transparent and secures
adequate lead time for consideration. It is also very
important that consultations among Member States be
held based on the established financial rules and
procedures as set forth by the United Nations.
Finally, my delegation pledges its proactive
engagement in the forthcoming consultations to discuss
the issue of the composite entity, with respect to how
effectively and efficiently gender will be mainstreamed
in all United Nations activities and to thoroughly
discuss matters pertaining to the mandate of the undersecretary-general who will lead the composite entity,
including financial aspects.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): The
United States was pleased to join the consensus on the
system-wide coherence resolution 63/311. The broad
support for this issue is heartening. It shows that, after
several years of intense consultations, Member States
have come together to take a number of practical
decisions to further our shared objective of a more
effective and coherent United Nations development
system. We thank the co-chairs, the Permanent
Representatives of Namibia and Spain, for their tireless
efforts over the past year, which led to the adoption of
the resolution.
We strongly endorse the resolution’s call for
consolidating the Office of the Special Adviser on
Gender Issues and the Advancement of Women, the
Division for the Advancement of Women, the United
Nations Development Fund for Women and the United
Nations International Research and Training Institute
for the Advancement of Women into a composite entity
headed by an under-secretary-general. Over the past
several months, there has been a growing realization
that a composite entity offers the best hope for
improving how the United Nations can help women
worldwide. We are confident that such consolidation
will improve the situation in the field. Developing

09-51026

nations stand to gain from the changes that the
composite entity will effect on the ground — progress
necessary to reach the Millennium Development Goals.
All nations will benefit from the advances that the
entity will bring about on women’s equality,
empowerment and rights.
It is essential that the head of the agency be an
under-secretary-general. We ask Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon to move expeditiously on appointing an
under-secretary-general with in-depth knowledge, a
strong track record on gender issues and credibility
within the women’s movement. Member States still
need to decide on many details involving the composite
entity, including questions of staffing, funding and
governance. Those are important questions, and the
United States stands ready to work with colleagues on
these issues. The sooner the under-secretary-general is
in place, the sooner he or she can offer the benefit of
his or her views to Member States.
In accordance with paragraph 3 of the resolution,
we look forward to seeing comprehensive proposals on
the gender entity developed as quickly as possible in
the course of the next session of the General Assembly,
so that intergovernmental deliberations on the entity’s
parameters can get under way. The resolution also
contains important language on the governance and
operations of the United Nations development system
that should further improve the transparency and
effectiveness of a broad range of development
activities.
The United States looks forward to working with
partners to make further progress in those areas during
the sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly.
Working together, we can put the United Nations
development system on a path towards stronger and
more predictable funding.
Ms. Rovirosa (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to express my delegation’s gratitude to
Ambassador Kaire Munionganda Mbuende of Namibia
and Ambassador Juan Antonio Yáñez-Barnuevo of
Spain and their teams for their excellent work in
conducting this stage of the discussions process.
As we have indicated, we believe it essential to
make progress in increasing the coherence and
effectiveness of the United Nations development
system. We must maximize the benefits of international
development efforts, particularly in a complicated

21

A/63/PV.105

economic context such as the current economic and
financial crisis.
We must consider at the intergovernmental level
the specific implications of reform for efforts on the
ground. It is time to move forward and produce
concrete results, although we understand the
difficulties posed by the transformation of a large and
complex system.
With regard to the issue of strengthening the
institutional arrangements to promote gender equality
and the empowerment of women, Mexico strongly
supports the establishment of a composite entity. Such
an entity should preserve the mandates of existing
institutions — the United Nations International
Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of
Women, the Division for the Advancement of Women,
the Office of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
the Advancement of Women and the United Nations
Development Fund for Women.
The new entity should be equipped with the
leadership, visibility and coherence necessary to
accelerate progress in this very important area, both
within the United Nations system and on the ground,
through increased operational activities and technical
assistance to countries requesting it.
That is why Mexico supported the proposed text.
However, we must also point out that, from our
perspective, the efforts to improve the processes of the
system — including the establishment of the composite
entity — should be based on the building of synergies
and use existing resources. Greater coherence must
entail not a more burdensome institutional structure,
but rather more effective arrangements.
Mexico considers the adoption of the resolution
to be a significant step forward for the Organization —
a step in the right direction. We also believe that much
remains to be done and that we should engage in an
intensive process of intergovernmental discussions and
negotiations at the forthcoming session of the
Assembly. My delegation will continue to participate
enthusiastically and constructively in that process.
Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): At
the outset, I should like to thank the two co-facilitators,
Ambassador Kaire Mbuende of Namibia and
Ambassador Juan Antonio Yáñez-Barnuevo of Spain,
for their work in advancing the intergovernmental
deliberations on system-wide coherence. Having been a

22

co-facilitator myself, I know how arduous that task is. I
congratulate them on their energy and creativity in
facilitating a consensus on the subject at the sixty-third
session of the General Assembly.
My delegation is pleased and encouraged to see
that a consensus has been reached in all areas —
particularly on the gender entity — with strong
leadership at the Under-Secretary-General level. We
look forward to further discussions with a view to
concluding and operationalizing a composite form of
the gender entity as soon as possible at the sixty-fourth
session.
While significant progress has also been reached
in the other areas of funding and governance, further
efforts and concessions are still needed from all of us
so as to secure balanced agreements on all areas.
As a pilot country, Tanzania can confirm that the
reform process on system-wide coherence in many
areas of development at the country level has had a
transformative impact on the development of my
country. It has also enabled us to assume national
ownership of the development process in partnership
with the United Nations. We thus wish to underscore
the need for the speedy execution of the independent
evaluation of the pilot countries in the area of
delivering as one by the United Nations.
I should also like to take this opportunity to thank
the Secretary-General and the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for their leadership, support and encouragement
of the entire membership in engaging in implementing
system-wide coherence reform as set out in the 2005
World Summit Outcome Document (resolution 60/1).
Finally, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President,
and to thank you for your historic contributions as
President of the General Assembly. You have left an
indelible mark on the leadership, thinking and wisdom
that will be part of the depository of the United
Nations. We wish you every success in your future
work, and we thank you for what you have bequeathed
to us.
Mr. Alimov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation joined the consensus
on resolution 63/311, on system-wide coherence.
Nevertheless, we cannot fail to express our regret that
the text was submitted to the General Assembly for
consideration without a review or substantial and open
intergovernmental consultations. We do not believe

09-51026

A/63/PV.105

that that is fully in keeping with the mandate entrusted
to the facilitators of the process.

current economic crisis, this is more important than
ever, so today’s decision is critical.

In that connection, we wish to express and place
on record our position on certain provisions of the
resolution that are of concern to us. In particular, we
are not prepared to decisively support the establishment
of a composite entity on gender issues until we receive
information about its institutional arrangements and
financing mechanisms and until answers are provided
to the many questions raised during the discussions
that took place within the framework of the systemwide coherence process.

Like others who have spoken today, we warmly
welcome the unanimous, strong support of Member
States expressed in resolution 63/311, which we have
just adopted, for the establishment of the composite
gender entity. By establishing that entity we are
sending an important message to women and girls
around the world. We are saying that the States
Members of the United Nations are prepared to take
concrete action to help alleviate their disproportionate
suffering from conflict and poverty, and that we are
committed to empowering them and unlocking their
unrealized potential to make our world more peaceful,
just and prosperous. It is important to recognize this
achievement, for which we have worked so hard,
especially on the eve of the fifteenth anniversary of the
Beijing Platform for Action.

Once again, we wish to reiterate that we do not
consider it necessary to focus exclusively on
intergovernmental bodies in the reform on system-wide
coherence. In addition, it is essential to improve
transparency and reporting in the work of the Secretariat
and between the Secretariat and its coordinating
structures.
Finally, we are also concerned about operative
paragraph 7 of the resolution, which must be brought
into conformity with the provisions of resolution
62/208, entitled “Triennial comprehensive policy
review of operational activities for development of the
United Nations system”. We would not like to see a
situation in which the General Assembly takes a
decision on a text that was distributed after the
deadline set out in rule 78 of the General Assembly’s
rules of procedure. I do not think we are being
effective in this regard.

The United Kingdom will at least double its core
voluntary funding for the work of the United Nations
on women’s equality through the new body. We need
now to move forward quickly with its implementation.
Strong leadership of the new entity will be critical. We
call upon the Secretary-General to move forward with
the recruitment of the under-secretary-general. We also
call upon the membership to formalize as soon as
possible the details of the new entity. We need to see
concrete progress in the coming months.

Ms. Hendrie (United Kingdom): I would like to
align myself with the comments made by the
representative of Sweden on behalf of the European
Union and to make a few additional comments on
behalf of the United Kingdom.

Meanwhile, on funding and governance,
delivering as one and business practice harmonization,
this resolution shows that we can move forward. We
are pleased to see the support for developing proposals
on common country programme approvals. On
funding, we look forward to discussing positively and
constructively with Member States at the next session
how we can build on this year’s discussion and further
improve the funding of the system. It is clear that core
funding remains a critical source of support for the
United Nations development system. The United
Kingdom provides a significant amount of core funding
already and has increased its core funding this year.
And we are ready to do more.

The United Kingdom has been a strong supporter
of the system-wide coherence process for many years.
The more effective the United Nations development
system is, the more the United Nations, in partnership
with national Governments, will make a real
difference, in real time, for real people in need. In the

On delivering as one, we welcome progress being
made on the country-led evaluations and see these as
sufficient basis for the Secretary-General to move
forward with the independent evaluation, as a priority.
We have waited long already for evidence of progress
made.

My delegation does not believe that there is a
consensus among Member States on the content. We
would be establishing a procedure and a precedent that
would have a real impact on the effectiveness of the
General Assembly and on the way in which it adopts
documents.

09-51026

23

A/63/PV.105

Finally, let me warmly thank the co-chairs for
their tireless work in delivering this resolution today
and achieving consensus. We are particularly
encouraged by the strong statements of support here
today from colleagues from diverse regions. Let me
also thank you, Mr. President, for your unwavering
support for the establishment of the gender entity.
Mr. Kelly (Ireland): Ireland aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Sweden on
behalf of the European Union.
We would like to thank our co-chairs, the
Permanent Representative of Namibia and the
Permanent Representative of Spain, and their
colleagues for their tireless work this session in
steering us to the very important resolution we have
just adopted, resolution 63/311.
We warmly welcome the unanimous support for
the establishment of a composite gender entity, which
will consolidate the four existing entities and be
headed by an under-secretary-general. This progress in
strengthening the capacity, accountability and
effectiveness of the work of the United Nations on
gender equality and women’s empowerment has been
long awaited and is urgently needed. It is vital that this
composite entity become operational as soon as
possible, and we look forward to a swift transitional
period, as we finalize the outstanding areas relating to
how the entity will function. In that regard, we request
the Secretary-General to begin the process of
appointing an under-secretary-general and provide us
with the requested proposals as soon as possible so that
Member States may finalize outstanding issues at the
next session.
Ireland also welcomes the progress made in other
important areas of system-wide coherence, including
funding and governance. We look forward to receiving
the Secretary-General’s proposals in these areas as
soon as possible so that we can continue our work in
improving the governance structures and funding
modalities
for
the
United
Nations
system.
Strengthening these areas is essential if we are to
realize our collective vision of an efficient, effective
and well-resourced United Nations system as a strong
partner for developing countries.
We welcome the fact that the General Assembly
has again acknowledged the progress made and the
challenges remaining for those countries which are
voluntarily implementing the delivering as one

24

approach. We reiterate the General Assembly’s request
to the Secretary-General to urgently move ahead with
an independent evaluation of lessons learned from
those countries, in line with the well established
principles of national ownership and leadership.
We believe that the adoption of this consensus
resolution by the General Assembly is a significant
step forward towards a better performing and more
effective United Nations, particularly in the area of
gender equality and women’s empowerment, as well as
in other important areas of operational activities. We
look forward to continuing this work at the next
session.
Finally, Sir, my delegation would like to thank
you for your unwavering support for this process
throughout the year and to congratulate you on all your
accomplishments during your term as President of the
General Assembly.
Mr. Park In-kook (Republic of Korea): The
Republic of Korea welcomes the unanimous adoption
of resolution 63/311, on system-wide coherence, which
was the result of long and broad interaction among
Member States under the leadership of the former and
current co-facilitators, the representatives of Spain,
Namibia, Ireland and the United Republic of Tanzania.
We believe that this resolution is a historic
landmark in the system-wide coherence process, in
particular in the efforts of the United Nations to meet
the needs, aspirations and rights of the world’s women
and to help them make best use of their talents, by
establishing a composite gender entity. In that regard,
we highly appreciate the strong leadership of the
Secretary-General, Deputy Secretary-General Migiro
and the President of the General Assembly, and the
hard work of the Office of the Special Adviser on
Gender Issues and the Advancement of Women to
facilitate the consultations and move the discussion
forward with a view to reaching a consensus.
My delegation expects the Secretary-General to
implement this resolution in a timely manner, so that it
can bear fruit as early as possible, including the
introduction of a comprehensive proposal on the
composite entity and beginning the process of the early
appointment of a new under-secretary-general.
We also hope that during the sixty-fourth session
we can achieve further substantive action in all areas of
system-wide coherence.

09-51026

A/63/PV.105

Finally, Sir, I take this opportunity to convey to
you our support and our appreciation for your great
work as President of the General Assembly for the
current session.
Mr. Gálvez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
aligns itself with the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Egypt on behalf of the Joint
Coordinating Committee of the Non-Aligned Movement
and the Group of 77 and China regarding resolution
63/311, on system-wide coherence.
Likewise, Chile should like to express its
appreciation of the hard work done by the
co-facilitators, the Permanent Representatives of Spain
and Namibia, Ambassadors Yáñez-Barnuevo and
Mbuende, and the Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Rachel N. Mayanja. Their work has
enabled us to obtain a consensus text and will allow us
to continue making substantive progress during the
sixty-fourth session of the Assembly. Chile would also
like to thank you, Sir, for your ongoing support for this
work in your role as President of the General Assembly
for the current session.
As we have stated repeatedly in the informal
negotiations on the gender architecture, Chile gives its
decisive support to the establishment of the composite
entity, with unified and visible leadership by an undersecretary-general with access to the Chief Executives
Board. This would enable us to address the current
fragmentation and would consolidate coordination and
programming within the system. Moreover, with regard
to funding, it is our position that the composite entity
should be given significant financial resources. The
type and level of those resources should be discussed
in detail by Member States.
Three years on from the report of the High-level
Panel on United Nations System-wide Coherence
(A/61/583), four years on from the 2005 World Summit
and its outcome (resolution 60/1), in which heads of
State or Government reiterated that progress for
women is progress for all, 15 years on from Beijing
and 30 years on from the adoption of the Convention of
the Elimination of All Forms of Violence against
Women, Chile reiterates its support for the guiding
principles of the composite entity: proper chain of
command, universal coverage, accountability and a
cross-cutting approach. Likewise, we reiterate our firm
support for moving forward in this and other areas of

09-51026

system-wide coherence during the sixty-fourth session
of the General Assembly.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): My delegation welcomes
the adoption of resolution 63/311, entitled “Systemwide coherence”, and wishes to express its sincere
appreciation to the Permanent Representatives of
Namibia and Spain for their excellent work in
facilitating the consultations on system-wide coherence.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
The resolution just adopted is an important step
in ensuring a more efficient and effective United
Nations development system. We look forward to
making swift progress on the independent evaluation
process to consolidate the progress made in the
delivering as one pilot countries, of which Rwanda is
one. We warmly welcome the decision to establish a
new gender entity and look forward to its prompt
operationalization to better deliver on gender on the
ground and follow the example set by my Government
under the leadership of President Kagame in placing
gender at the forefront of the political, social and
economic agenda.
In conclusion, I should like to join others in
thanking the President of the General Assembly for his
stewardship of this sixty-third session and to wish him
every success in all his future endeavours.
Mr. Chave (Switzerland): We should like to
thank the co-chairs for having guided us through the
system-wide coherence process this year and for their
efforts in fostering consensus among Member States on
a variety of issues of great importance for the further
improvement of the effectiveness of the United Nations
system.
We welcome in particular the establishment of a
composite gender entity, led by an under-secretarygeneral, which will consolidate the four agencies
working to advance the equality between men and
women and women’s empowerment. We look forward
to moving rapidly forward at the next session on the
functions and organizational arrangements of the
entity. To that effect, we urge the Secretary-General to
initiate without any further delay the recruitment of an
under-secretary-general. This would be of great
assistance in finalizing the technicalities of this entity.
The President returned to the Chair.

25

A/63/PV.105

Switzerland is also pleased to see that progress
has been made on governance, the funding of
operational activities and delivering as one. We look
forward to concrete decisions at the next session, in
particular on the approval process for common country
programmes. We remain committed to further engaging
in the process in a supportive and constructive manner.
Mr. Hackett (Barbados): At the outset, my
delegation would like to endorse the statement made by
the Permanent Representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Joint Coordinating Committee of the Non-Aligned
Movement. I should also like to thank the
co-facilitators for the system-wide coherence process
during the sixty-third session, the Permanent
Representatives of Spain and Namibia. We would like
to thank them for bringing before us a draft resolution
encompassing the important issue of establishing a new
gender entity that has been able to achieve broad
consensus. My delegation welcomes the consensus
support for the establishment of the new gender entity
through the consolidation of the four existing entities.
We should also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral and his advisers, including the Deputy
Secretary-General, who is here with us this afternoon,
for their continuing leadership and support and for the
information they have provided us at various points
along the way. We would request the Secretary-General
and his team to continue to provide this support, in
particular in the form of information on the functions,
structure and financing of the composite entity, we
hope as soon as possible during the sixty-fourth session
of the General Assembly so that the implementation of
resolution 63/311 will not be unduly delayed.
I should also like to recall that the Permanent
Representative of Barbados was one of the first
co-chairs of the system-wide coherence process,
together with the Permanent Representative of
Luxembourg. My delegation is thus particularly
pleased to see that what was established some three
years ago has now led to the present resolution. We
certainly look forward to continuing the work on other
aspects of system-wide coordination during the next
session of the General Assembly.
In closing, let me take this opportunity to thank
you, Sir, for the guidance you have provided on this
item as well as others during your tenure as President
of the General Assembly. We wish you well in your
future endeavours.

26

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the vote.
I should like to express my sincere thanks to
Ambassador Kaire Munionganda Mbuende of Namibia
and Ambassador Juan Antonio Yáñez-Barnuevo of
Spain, who have conducted on my behalf the
intergovernmental negotiations on system-wide
coherence. I am sure that the members of the Assembly
join me in extending to them our sincere appreciation.
Guided by General Assembly resolution 63/194
of 18 December 2008, entitled “Improving the
coordination of efforts against trafficking in persons”,
the Assembly, at its sixty-third session, started
considering the advisability of adopting a United
Nations global plan of action against trafficking in
persons. Following two thematic debates convened on
this issue, at the sixty-second and sixty-third sessions
of the General Assembly, several steps have been taken
in that regard under the leadership of the two
facilitators appointed to lead the process. In view of
time constraints, the General Assembly may wish to
continue this process at its sixty-fourth session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item
107?
It was so decided.
Statement by the President
The President (spoke in Spanish): Tempus fugit,
the Romans used to say. And they were right: time
flies. It is passing us by. It is running out for us. And as
time passes us by, so do the opportunities for us to do
what we must to ensure a fitting future for the coming
generations.
Older persons, like me, are more aware of that
reality. With one foot practically already in the grave,
we seem to be more aware of the urgency not to
continue to delay taking essential steps to prevent the
worst possible scenarios from becoming a reality.
However, in this case, I do not believe that it is simply
an old man’s foolishness. For the world, time is
definitely running out.
If we fail to make solidarity and a sense of social
and environmental responsibility the main driving
force of our human society, then, quite simply, we will
not survive. The egoism, individualism, greed and
exclusive national interests that characterize and drive

09-51026

A/63/PV.105

human behaviour today can lead only to the extinction
of our species. We are already heading down this path.
At some point, it might not be possible to turn back.

always ready to shake my hand and to wish me good
luck as I came in every morning. My most sincere
appreciation goes to all of them and to their colleagues.

One year ago, from this very rostrum, I shared
with you, my colleagues, the vision of what I hoped to
achieve during my year in the high office to which,
with such trust and affection, you had elected me. Now
the time has come to take stock.

The most important months of my presidency
occurred in the shadow of the current deep economic
and financial crisis, which does not yet appear to have
bottomed out. However, as an eighteenth-century
English philosopher once said, perhaps the carping of
our worst critics sounds less triumphant when we
observe that, while we did not accomplish as much as
we would have liked, we nevertheless accomplished a
great deal.

I would like to begin by expressing my gratitude
not only for your trust, but also for the generous
cooperation afforded to me, including by many who
did not disguise their concerns about my being a
Catholic priest committed to the theology of liberation
and to the freedom struggle of my people, led by the
Frente Sandinista de Liberación Nacional in my
homeland, Nicaragua. Fortunately, those doubts and
suspicions did not prevent a frank and fraternal
dialogue with those who would have been expected to
oppose me most strongly. Today, as I step down, I am
very happy and extremely grateful for all the generous
cooperation that I received from all of you without
exception.
I would like in particular to express my deep
appreciation to the Secretary-General, our dear brother
Ban Ki-moon, with whom I have shared strong bonds
of affection and sincere friendship since the start of my
time in office. I am also grateful for the generosity
shown by all of our bodies and specialized agencies in
preparing me for the initial briefings and in providing
me with the necessary cooperation for the holding of
this sixty-third session, which we are concluding today.
Of course, the successful conclusion of this sixtythird session, which I believe we can fearlessly and
without exaggeration call one of the most turbulent in
many years, would also have been impossible without
the support and cooperation of the 27 Vice-Presidents
and the excellent work of my Cabinet.
I am grateful to the entire Secretariat team — the
translators, security staff and general support staff who,
in addition to fulfilling their duties, offered constant
prayers to the Lord that everything would turn out well
for us for the benefit of the most disadvantaged of our
brothers and sisters around the world. That was always
true of our dear sister Altagracia Rossi, the lift
attendant; or security officer Ralph Herring, who
always greets us and cheers us all with a friendly smile
at the delegates’ entrance to the United Nations; or
maintenance engineer Gregory Yanushkevich, who was

09-51026

In accordance with Article 13 of the United
Nations Charter, the General Assembly shall “make
recommendations for the purpose of ... promoting
international cooperation in the economic, social,
cultural, educational and health fields”. However, for
approximately the past 30 years, the Organization has
been prevented from performing the role assigned to it
by the Charter on the pretext that only the Bretton
Woods institutions had expertise in those fields.
The work of my presidential Commission of
Experts on Reforms of the International Monetary and
Financial System made it clear that the General
Assembly was indeed capable of bringing together
specialists with sufficient expertise to discuss global
financial, economic, monetary and trade governance.
Furthermore, the Commission produced what is
undoubtedly the most serious and complete proposal
for how we should tackle the current global financial
and economic crisis.
The adoption on 26 June of the outcome
document of the United Nations Conference on the
World Financial and Economic Crisis and its Impact on
Development, held from 24 to 30 June 2009, was a
historic milestone for the United Nations. The Group
of 192 was established as the most appropriate forum
in which to address issues that affect the international
community as a whole.
The Group of Eight (G-8) and even the Group of
20 will remain significant minorities, owing more to
the fact that they are rich and powerful than to their
demonstrated ability to do things well. We cannot and
should not forget that, after all, it is because of their
extremely grave errors and those of the Bretton Woods
institutions, run by the G-8, that the world is currently
experiencing what could well turn out to be the worst
crisis in history.

27

A/63/PV.105

The proposals of the Commission of Experts
chaired by Joseph Stiglitz; the report of the Department
of Economic and Social Affairs; obviously, the
statements made by heads of State and Government at
the plenary meeting of the Conference itself, such as,
for example, the excellent statement by President
Rafael Correa of Ecuador; and the comments made at
the round tables and the working breakfasts all made
very important contributions to the conclusions
reached. However, we must also recognize that,
without the extraordinary support and active
participation of non-governmental organizations and
the South Centre, headed by Martin Khor, we would
not have made as much progress as we did.
The draft Outcome Document, despite the fact
that it was negotiated by 192 countries and contrary to
the fears expressed by some significant minorities, not
only was ready two days before the Conference, but
also addressed a series in depth of complex issues that
went beyond the debates and documents originating in
other forums.
It should also be pointed out that the Outcome
Document of our historic June Conference finally
initiated the process of following up the
recommendations set out in the report of the World
Commission on the Social Dimension of Globalization,
entitled “A Fair Globalization: Creating Opportunities
for All”. The report states that globalization is making
multilateralism both indispensable and inevitable, and
that the multilateral system of the United Nations is
uniquely equipped to spearhead the process of reform
in economic and social policies.
The role of the United Nations in addressing the
most urgent issues of our time was institutionalized
with the establishment, on 31 July 2009, of the Ad Hoc
Open-ended Working Group of the General Assembly
entrusted with following up on the issues set out in the
Outcome Document. Those issues include reform of
the Bretton Woods institutions, the same supposedly
expert institutions that have reduced the implementation
of Article 13 of the Charter of the United Nations to a
minimum over the past three decades.
Today, the most urgent issue continues to be
providing resources to the most vulnerable countries,
primarily in the form of donations or, better yet, of
compensation through a global fund or special drawing
rights for development, in order to finance both public

28

goods and efforts
Development Goals.

to

attain

the

Millennium

It is precisely because of our inability to resolve
the fundamental problems of the economic system and
to put to an end the extreme poverty and inequality on
which it is based that we have had to resort to palliative
measures, such as the Millennium Development Goals,
or to press for the urgent implementation of the
concept of the responsibility to protect. However
necessary the Millennium Development Goals may be,
they do not meet the need for urgent and indispensable
international economic reforms.
In the absence of the political will to tackle the
serious injustices and inequalities afflicting the world,
it is far more convenient to have recourse to the
responsibility to protect to alleviate their consequences.
Nevertheless, we should be satisfied that we have been
able to comply with the provisions of paragraph 139 of
the 2005 World Summit Outcome Document
(resolution 60/1), which calls on the General Assembly
to continue consideration of the responsibility to
protect and its implications.
Our panel on that issue was not only balanced,
but also one of the most distinguished in the history of
the United Nations. Its participants included intellectuals
of the calibre of Noam Chomsky, Ngugi wa Thiong’o,
Jean Bricmont and former Australian Foreign Minister
Gareth Evans. The rich and comprehensive discussions
clarified our understanding of this concept, which
continues to be an important aspiration. However, great
care must be taken to ensure that it is not interpreted or
used — as it has been so often in the past — as a right
to intervene.
We are at a critical juncture on the path on which
we set out in San Francisco 64 years ago. The
institutions established at that time have, like all
institutions, experienced a natural, gradual and
inevitable process of attrition. As a result, the current
crisis is affecting both international economic
governance and policy.
There is a broad consensus that the Security
Council is incapable of effectively addressing many of
the most crucial issues in the area of international
peace and security and that it requires thorough reform
in order to overcome the increasing limitations
imposed by its restrictive methods and its narrow
decision-making base. At the same time, we have taken
important steps in that regard and have made progress

09-51026

A/63/PV.105

in the implementation
15 September 2008.

of

decision

62/557

of

With regard to reform of the Security Council, I
believe we can say that, during the sixty-third session
of the General Assembly, we have turned a dream into
a reality, since we have succeeded in changing the
reform process from a study by the Open-ended
Working Group into the object of intergovernmental
negotiations held at informal plenary meetings.
Since the negotiations began in February under
the leadership of Ambassador Zahir Tanin of
Afghanistan, we have held 26 meetings to consider
specific issues. More than two thirds of Member States
have participated actively in these meetings and
detailed proposals have been submitted, which clearly
demonstrates the importance that Member States attach
to this issue.
In May, we made even further progress on that
basis, and negotiations received further encouragement
with the submission of a document outlining the main
options and a series of negotiable issues. Thus, we
established a robust framework for subsequent
negotiations. I am convinced that there is light at the
end of the tunnel. If we continue the negotiations and
show greater commitment at the forthcoming session of
the General Assembly, this process will soon yield
concrete results.
I am grateful to Ambassador María Fernanda
Espinosa of Ecuador and Ambassador Morten Wetland
of Norway for their commendable work as Co-Chairs
of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of
the General Assembly. Their efforts were a focused
response to my long-standing call to prioritize the
democratization of the United Nations.
Only a strong General Assembly that vigorously
exercises its deliberative, policymaking and decisionmaking roles will be capable of enhancing
multilateralism as the best option for relationships
between States. It must be borne in mind that the most
significant revitalization has been the capacity
demonstrated by the General Assembly to address
existential economic problems that it had been unable
to tackle for almost three decades. Revitalization is a
political rather than a technical issue.
I am also grateful to the co-chairs of the systemwide coherence process, Ambassador Juan Antonio
Yáñez-Barnuevo of Spain and Ambassador Kaire

09-51026

Mbuende of Namibia, for the progress achieved under
their able guidance. Indeed, harmonized cooperation in
line with the national plans of developing countries
should continue to be a key objective to ensure systemwide coherence of the United Nations through
governance focused on the principles of transparency,
inclusiveness and national ownership. These principles
should, in turn, ensure that the forces of change are
mobilized to achieve gender equality at the global level
and, in due course, enhanced results at the national
level.
Further efforts must therefore be resolutely
pursued to secure an agreement between Member
States on the need for a global institutional incentive to
achieve gender equality, thereby ensuring that the
women of the world have a strong and coherent voice
within an effective structure.
For my part, I leave satisfied at having spared no
effort to conscientiously fulfil my obligation to carry
out the agenda of the sixty-third session and, at the
same time, to ensure that the General Assembly
remained attuned to events of international relevance
not foreseen in the agenda, such as, for example, the
Israeli aggression against Gaza, the global financial
and economic crisis, and the recent coup d’état in
Honduras, a heartening development for the pro-coup
forces of the twenty-first century by which
international reactionaries sought to impede the
victorious and promising advance of the Bolivarian
Alternative for the Americas.
If we had had more time, we would have taken up
as an agenda item in the General Assembly the serious
threat to peace in Latin America posed by plans to
build seven new United States military bases in
Colombia, but, regrettably, the sixty-third session has
run out of time. That item will therefore have to wait
until the next session, if the work of the General
Assembly remains in step with events in our world.
As has happened with the Governments of many
Member States, the magnitude and gravity of the global
financial and economic crisis — the greatest crisis
since the foundation of the United Nations — have
held centre stage in our agenda over the past year, and
have in fact prevented us from considering, to the
extent we should have wished, such other issues as
nuclear disarmament, the situation in Palestine,
decolonization and the extremely dangerous and illegal
concept of preventive war, which has nothing to do

29

A/63/PV.105

with that of “pre-emptive war”, despite the fact that,
regrettably, we use the same word in Spanish to refer to
these two such key and critically different concepts.
We should also have liked to have considered the
so-called war on terror in greater depth in our agenda.
Most salient in that regard is the universally
condemned case of the five Cuban heroes, unjustly and
arbitrarily detained for exactly 11 years and two days,
and subsequently condemned to serve heavy prison
terms in the United States for having brought to light,
in Miami, terrorist schemes against the heroic and
ever-supportive sister Republic of Cuba. Despite the
fact that the information was duly provided to the
authorities of our host country, who have always
claimed to have no knowledge of it, the response was
to jail them. It is to be hoped that with the much-touted
policy change and rectification of the new Government
of the host country, there will be a correction of that
miscarriage of justice, which has caused so much
suffering to the five families affected and so much
damage to the image of the United States that its new
President is committed to improving.
My greatest frustration this year has been the
situation in Palestine. The question of Palestine
continues to be the most serious and prolonged
unresolved political and human rights issue on the
agenda of the United Nations since its inception. The
evident lack of commitment to resolving it is a scandal
that has caused me much sorrow.
I promised a proactive presidency, and sincerely
believe that I have done everything I possibly could in
this regard, explicitly requesting and attempting to
persuade those who should have been most closely
involved to call for the convocation of the General
Assembly to consider the Palestinian situation.
However, whether at the time of the three-week
invasion of Gaza that began on 27 December or now,
all I have received has been advice to give the process
more time because things were always on the verge of
being resolved and we should do nothing that could
endanger the success that has always been just beyond
our reach.
Faced with this situation, I sincerely did not
know what to do. I have wanted to help Palestine, but
those who should supposedly have been most
interested have withheld their support for reasons of
caution that I have been incapable of understanding. I
hope that they have been right and that I have been

30

wrong. Otherwise, we shall continue to face the ugly
situation of ongoing complicity with the aggression
against the rights of the noble and long-suffering
Palestinian people.
A just resolution of the question of Palestine must
be based on the provisions of international law and will
be attained only when the unity of the Palestinian
people has been achieved and the international
community speaks with all its representatives who
enjoy credibility and have been democratically elected.
In addition to Israeli withdrawal from all territories
illegally occupied since 1967, international law
demands that all Palestinians displaced during the
creation of the State of Israel, their children and
grandchildren be permitted to return to their homeland,
Palestine.
I sent my chief adviser on humanitarian affairs,
Mr. Kevin Cahill, to Gaza from 17 to 22 February to
prepare a report on the humanitarian situation in Gaza
immediately after the aggression. Mr. Cahill’s report,
originally intended for release at a special session on
Gaza that did not take place for the reasons I have
noted, was issued on Wednesday 19 August, World
Humanitarian Day, when the sacrifices of United
Nations staff in conflict zones are commemorated.
I find disgraceful the passivity and apparent
indifference of some very influential members of the
Security Council to the fact that the blockade of Gaza
has continued uninterrupted for two years in flagrant
violation of international law and of a resolution of the
Security Council, causing immense damage and
suffering to the Palestinian population of Gaza. The
situation may become even more serious if immediate
measures are not taken, now that winter is
approaching. It is time to demonstrate, with actions and
not only words, a true commitment to the concept of
the responsibility to protect.
It would not be right for me to leave without
sharing what I feel to be the main lesson or perception
that I have gained during this year of work, dedication
and total commitment to the cause of peace through the
democratization of the United Nations; the
revitalization of the General Assembly; the total
elimination of nuclear weapons by the year 2020, the
seventy-fifth anniversary of the dropping of atomic
bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki; the eradication of
poverty and hunger, which this year passed the
psychological barrier of a billion hungry people in the

09-51026

A/63/PV.105

world; measures to ensure the availability of clean
water and food to all; the promotion of effective
policies to tackle climate change; putting an end to the
disgrace of human trafficking and to the shameful
abuse of and discrimination against women; guaranteeing
the right to education of children and young people,
including girls and boys in situations of armed conflict
or humanitarian disasters caused by natural phenomena;
and guaranteeing universal access to health care, which
is an ethical and religious imperative.
In all those endeavours, the ongoing counsel of
Brother David Andrews of the Congregation of the
Holy Cross, and of Maude Barlow, Mohammed
Bedjaoui, Byron Blake, Leonardo Boff, Noam
Chomsky, Ramsey Clark, Michael Clark, Kevin Cahill,
Aldo Diaz Lacayo, François Houtart, Michael
Kennedy, Francisco Lacayo Parajón, Carlos Emilio
López, Paul Oquist, Nuripan Sen, Joseph Stiglitz and
Oscar-René Vargas was of great use to this presidency,
which we intended to be a team effort from the
beginning. However, clearly, our greatest gratitude
should be to God, our Lord, for having allowed us to
contribute something to the cause of world peace.
There was much talk this year of the need to
reform the United Nations and to do everything
possible to improve its image, credibility and
effectiveness. According to data of the most recent poll
of the Pew Research Center’s Global Attitudes Project,
carried out in 24 nations and the Palestinian territories,
there has been a noticeable improvement in how the
United Nations is perceived. That pleases us, but is not
enough. Much remains to be done if the United Nations
is to become worthy of the prestige, trust and
credibility that it needs to effectively carry out its very
important mission in today’s sorely troubled world.
It is said that the League of Nations failed
because those who sponsored it did not have the power
or will needed to make it a reality. I believe that
something similar can be said of the United Nations. I
am among those who believe that the United Nations is
potentially an indispensable Organization to help
humanity survive all the crises converging to threaten
its extinction. The main problem, without doubt, is that
not all its founders really believed, or believe even
today, in the vision or principles explicit and implicit
in its founding Charter.
I believe that it is not far-fetched to note what the
whole world knows, which is the fact that, among

09-51026

many other truths, some of our most powerful and
influential Member States do not believe wholeheartedly
in the rule of law in international relations, preferring
to believe that compliance with the legal norms to
which we formally committed in signing the Charter is
something that applies only to weak countries. With
such a low level of commitment, it should not surprise
us that the United Nations has been unable to achieve
the main objectives for which it was created.
Certain Member States feel that they can act
according to the law of the jungle and defend the right
of the strongest to do whatever they like with complete
and absolute impunity, without being accountable to
anyone. Moreover, they think it right to rail against
multilateralism and proclaim the virtues of unilateralism,
while simultaneously pontificating unashamedly from
their privileged seats on the Security Council about the
need for Member States conscientiously to fulfil their
obligations under the Charter or to be sanctioned,
selectively of course, for not doing so. The sovereign
equality of all Member States and the obligation to
prevent wars are, for them, small details that need not
be taken very seriously.
All these and many other equally serious
anomalies have led many to believe in the urgent need
to reform the United Nations, but during this year as
President of the General Assembly, I have come to the
conclusion that our Organization is already beyond
reforming or repairing. What we need to do is to
reinvent it, and we need to do so urgently for the
greater glory of God and the common good of the
Earth and of humanity.
In the 64 years since the United Nations was
created, many scientific advances and developments in
the ethical consciousness of humankind now allow us
to identify the main elements of another possible
world, one that is indispensable for our survival, and to
proceed on that basis to the drafting of a proposed
declaration on the common good of the Earth and
humanity. Once the required consensus of Member
States has been obtained on this declaration, we will
have to convert that shared vision into a draft for a new
Charter of the United Nations, one that is attuned to the
needs and knowledge of the twenty-first century.
Our dear brother Evo Morales Ayma, President of
the Plurinational State of Bolivia, and our brother and
liberation theologian Leonardo Boff have helped us
understand, in a more comprehensive and holistic

31

A/63/PV.105

form, man’s place in creation and his relation to
Mother Earth. We understand that the Earth and
humanity are part of a vast evolving universe, sharing
the same destiny and threatened by destruction as a
result of the irresponsibility and recklessness of human
beings.
We now understand that ties exist linking all
living beings because we all carry the same basic
genetic code that underlies the sacred unity of life in
all its many forms. We are more clearly aware that all
human beings, with their cultures, traditions, religions,
arts and visions of the world, are members of a single
family of brothers and sisters with equal dignity and
equal rights. We are impelled towards a new culture —
a culture of cooperation that will replace the culture of
competition. Our goal should be living well, not living
better. That means living in harmony with the cycles of
Mother Earth and of the cosmos, and in balance with
all that exists.
We now know, or perhaps I should say are more
aware than ever that Mother Nature provides us with
everything necessary for life, and that natural life,
including human life, depends on a healthy biosphere,
capable of maintaining and preserving water, forests,
animals and innumerable microorganisms. But we are
also more aware than ever of the precarious situation of
human life and capacity of the Earth to support life.
Human beings, who have become the principal
predators of nature and the greatest enemies of life,
have begun a process that is hurtling us towards
disaster at great speed. It is the primary cause of
climate change, which is without a doubt the most
serious and urgent of all the multiple and converging
crises that currently threaten the human species with
extinction. To be effective, our response to climate
change must be immediate and forceful. In terms of
economic resources, at least 1 per cent of the gross
domestic product of the entire world will be required.
The major culprits will have to bear the costs in
proportion to their responsibility for the problem.
All of this knowledge and awareness of the real
and serious threats to life must have practical
consequences for our behaviour and our conduct with
respect to the common good of the Earth and humanity.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights is, to date,
the most we have been able jointly to achieve here at
the United Nations. Obviously, however, if the
Declaration is to have an effect, it must be put into

32

practice, conscientiously respected throughout the
world, and continue to be updated as human
consciousness becomes more sensitive and discovers
rights hitherto unrecognized as such.
Nevertheless, it is no longer enough to speak only
of human rights. The knowledge afforded us by science
obliges us to adopt a more holistic and integral vision,
because we know that we are, together with the Earth
and nature, an indivisible whole. As I have already
said, we must adopt a universal declaration of the
common good of the Earth and humanity as the first
indispensable step in reinventing the United Nations. It
must be recalled that we must either behave as we
should, serving Mother Earth instead of having her
serve us, and mutually loving and serving one another,
or we will all perish. That is the simple truth. Tempus
fugit. Time is running away from us; it is running out.
In Copenhagen, we will have the opportunity to show
that we understand well what that means and that we
are determined to do what is needed to defend life.
Mr. Salsabili (Islamic Republic of Iran): I take
the floor today to express our deep appreciation for the
great privilege of having you, Mr. Miguel d’Escoto
Brockmann, with us as the President of the General
Assembly at its sixty-third session.
We are thankful to you for your resolve to relieve
people from poverty, hunger and disease, and yet that
is not all. We are indebted to you for your
independence, courage and persistence in pursuing
peace, solidarity and justice on many occasions, and
particularly with respect to the Palestinian cause, and
yet that is not enough. We are grateful to you for your
determination and objectivity in addressing the
financial crisis and many other key issues, and yet this
assessment is not complete.
Going through the long list of your valuable
contributions and excellent initiatives would consume
the entire day; thus, suffice it to say that you have
contributed greatly to the work of the General
Assembly and promoted its important role. Allow me
once again to congratulate and thank you for your
patience, dedication and compassion, and for the
sacrifices you have made in fulfilling this important
responsibility and leading this lofty body of the United
Nations.
Mr. Askarov (Uzbekistan): I should like to
express our sincere appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for your exceptional and exemplary leadership of the

09-51026

A/63/PV.105

sixty-third session of the General Assembly. Over the
past year, under your leadership, the General Assembly
has achieved substantial progress in addressing the
most important issues facing human civilization today.
The General Assembly addressed the most urgent
issues of international security, threats to global
stability and challenges to sustainable development in a
timely, adequate and responsible manner. I would like
to highlight in particular the very important Conference
on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its
Impact on Development, held in the General Assembly
on your initiative and under your personal leadership in
June. Indeed, we have already started to feel the
positive effects of that Conference in the form of solid
and comprehensive analyses and reports from leading
authorities and experts in international economics
which bear the imprints of our deliberations of a few
months ago.
Conservative economic policies and socially
oriented Government spending on health care,
education, job creation, effective and innovative
agricultural and industrial policies and other measures
for establishing sustainable economic growth, as those
adopted in Uzbekistan and many other countries, have
taken on new meaning and dimensions in view of the
consequences of ongoing global financial crisis. We
may safely expect that there is more to come.
Developing countries in particular are very grateful to
you, Mr. President, for your thoughtful responses to
their requests and concerns and your strategic vision in
addressing them.
Once again, I should like, on behalf of the
delegation of the Republic of Uzbekistan, to thank you
for your dedication to human causes and justice and for
the exceptional leadership you have displayed
throughout the year.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): At the
close of this session of the General Assembly, I should
like, Sir, to express our sincere and fraternal thanks for
your significant work at the head of this organ. Your
leadership and determination have left an indelible
mark on our work.
The United Nations and its Charter are based on
the permanent tension between reality and utopia,
between the world as it is and the world as it should be.
As President, you have constantly reminded us of the
moral imperative to work tirelessly towards the ideal.
You challenged us to see the work of this Organization

09-51026

not as an end in itself, but as an effective instrument
for building peace, justice and sustainable
development, as a means of genuinely bettering the
lives of those millions of individuals for whom the
United Nations represents the hope of a better future.
Your presidency has revitalized the Assembly by
setting before it the most relevant and urgent matters
currently on the international agenda. Your actions
were based on the conviction, shared by Brazil, that the
universal character of the General Assembly bestows
upon it a unique role within the community of nations.
I should like to wish you every personal
happiness and great success in the endeavours for the
common good that I am sure that you will undertake in
the future.
Mr. Davide (Philippines): I requested the floor,
Mr. President, in order to add the voice of my
delegation to the chorus of commendations articulated
by my colleagues in acknowledging the exemplary
leadership you have provided during the sixty-third
session of the General Assembly.
The outcomes of the various activities you have
initiated and engaged in during your stewardship have
raised the bar for the conduct of the affairs of this
multilateral Organization. You acquitted yourself with
honour of the solemn task with which the President of
the General Assembly is burdened. We have, more than
that, witnessed your determination, endurance and
wisdom.
You have been able to conclude your stewardship
with a resounding success, with the same vision and
mission with which you embarked upon it, as recorded
in both your acceptance address of 4 July 2008 and
your statement at the opening of the sixty-third session
on 16 September 2008. In your acceptance address you
said,
“The United Nations still has a lot to
contribute to the world. However, in order to do so
effectively, it must be precisely what its name
implies: an organization of united nations, not an
organization of nations in disarray, much less one
of subjugated nations. Unity based on the principle
of the sovereign equality of all its Members is
currently the greatest demand placed on the
Organization — unity in the struggle to democratize
the United Nations”. (A/62/PV.99, p. 2)

33

A/63/PV.105

You continued, “The unity that the world requires of us
is born of love and a desire to transform each of us into
instruments of peace, justice and solidarity” (Ibid., p. 3).
And you went on,
“In addition to paying priority attention to
the fight to eliminate hunger and poverty from
the world and to democratize the United Nations,
we will pay very special attention to such issues
as climate change, the energy crisis, terrorism,
human rights, disarmament and nuclear control,
the rights of women and children and the
preservation of biodiversity and cultural
diversity”. (Ibid., p. 4)
In your statement at the opening of the sixty-third
session, you reiterated your mission and declared that
the “central and overarching objective of the sixtythird session of the General Assembly will be to
democratize the United Nations” (A/63/PV.1, p. 2). You
stressed the imperative of dealing with the root causes
that limit the institutional capacity of the General
Assembly. You expanded on the issues which you took
up in your acceptance statement. You ended with what
you consider the watchword of the day: change, real
and credible.
We have witnessed several crises of global
impact, and you have taken them on with brave,
decisive and timely responses, crafting strategies for
global solutions. The ultimate result of these crises,
including climate change and the global food and
financial crises, was their adverse effect on all peoples.
You have provided a voice for the marginalized sectors
of our respective societies. As to democratization: we
have made progress, and we hope to continue.
We cannot but commend and praise you,
Mr. President. We need more of your prayers. Tempus
fugit, but there is always time for prayer.
Mrs. Navarro Barro (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
On behalf of the Cuban delegation, I should like at the
outset to express our deepest gratitude for the brilliant
leadership that you have shown during the sixty-third
session of the General Assembly. You have drawn
attention to the principal ills affecting our world. You
have issued a clear call for us to leave aside banal
excuses for failing to stop millions of people from
dying from hunger, failing to protect the environment
and letting arms continue to dictate the rhythm of our
lives.

34

We thank you, in particular, for the clear and
explicit reference you made to the fight against
terrorism. Like you, we would like to reaffirm our
country’s steadfast commitment to fighting terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations.
I would like in particular to thank you,
Mr. President, for reminding the General Assembly of
the fate of the five Cuban anti-terrorism warriors who
are unjustly imprisoned in United States jails. As you
are aware, that is an issue of the utmost importance and
sensitivity for the Cuban people. It is also one that
Cuba has raised at the United Nations and that you, Sir,
have highlighted during several of your statements. We
are therefore deeply grateful for your words.
We would like to wish you, Mr. President, all the
best for the future. We hope that you will be back here
very soon. On behalf of Cuba, many thanks to you,
Father Miguel.
The President: Before the Assembly observes a
minute of silent prayer or meditation, I would like to
remind members that, tomorrow, Tuesday, 15 September,
is the International Day of Democracy. I would
encourage all Member States to commemorate the Day
by remembering our commitment to promote and
consolidate real democracy worldwide.
Agenda item 2 (continued)
Minute of silent prayer or meditation
The President: We are now coming to the end of
the sixty-third regular session of the General Assembly.
May I invite representatives to stand and observe one
minute of silent prayer or meditation.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silent prayer or meditation.
Closure of the sixty-third session
The President: Before proceeding further, I
should like to invite to the podium the President-elect
for the sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly,
His Excellency Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki, so that I
may hand over the gavel to him.
I declare closed the sixty-third session of the
General Assembly.
The meeting rose at 6.45 p.m.

09-51026
