TIIZRTY-SECOND

YEAR

rd
MEETING:

25 MARCH

1977

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agcuda/1993)

. . . . . . . . +. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Page

1

I’
,’

s/w. 1993

-

‘,

:

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
of the Official Records of the Security Coutzcil. The date of the document
indkates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.

Supplements

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutiotts attd Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

1993rd MEETING
Held in New Yurl; on Friday,
President: Mr. Andreb YOUNG (United States of America).

3. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Egypt has
addressed a letter to me as President of the Council which
reads as follows:

PtYser1t: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Republic, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, lioillailia, hion of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

“With reference to the Security Council meeting to
discuss the situation in the Middle East in the li&t of the
report of the Secretary-General, I kindly request the
participation of the Palestine Liberation Organization in
the debate of the Council in accordance with the previous
decisions of the Council in that respect.”

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1993)
1. Adoption of the agenda

4. It is my understanding that this proposal is not being
put forward under rule 37 or rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure of the Council but that, if it is adopted
by the Council, the invitation to the Palestine Liberation
Organization to participate in this debate will confer upon
it the same rights of participation as those conferred on a
Member State when it is invited to participate under
rule 37.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General submitted under
General Assembly resolution 31/62 concerning the
Peace Conferene on the Middle East (S/12290 and
Corr. 1)
The mctirlg

25 March 1977, at 3 p.m.

was culled to order at 3.35 p. III.

5. Does any member of the Council wish to speak in
connexion with this proposal‘!

Adoption of the agenda
1. The PRESIDENT: I would like to recall that during the
course of consultations in which all Council members
participated, on 15 March, it was agreed that the Council
would take up consideration of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the Peace Conference on the Middle East at an
appropriate time. The request of the representative of
Egypt, dated 23 March, for a meeting of the Council on 25
March is now before the Council /S/12306], If 1 hear no
objection, I shall consider the agenda adopted.

6. As that is not the case, 1 shall speak now in my capacity
ai the representative of the UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA.
7. I wish to state that my Government is not able to agree
to the proposal to invite the representative of the Palestine
Liberation Organization to participate in the debate of the
Council with the same rights of participation as a Member
State. We thought the terms of the Council’s invitation
were inappropriate on past occasions and want to repeat
our opinion. For this reason we wish the proposed
invitation put to the vote.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East

8. ,Resuming my role as PRESIDENT, I shall now put to
the vote the request to extend an invitation to the Palestine
Liberation Organization to participate in the discussion, on
the understanding I have indicated.

Report of the Secretary-Gelera submitted under General
Assembly resolution 31/62 concerning the Peace Conference on the Middle East (S/12290 and Corr.1)

A vote WI,Ytaken by show

2. The PRESIDENT: Letters have been addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the representatives of
Egypt, Israel and Jordan, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the question
inscribed on the agenda, In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the representatives of the States I have just mentioned to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

of hands.

In favour: Benin, China, India, Libyan Arab Republic,
Mauritius, Pakistan, Panama,Romania, Union of Soviet
SocialistRepublics,Venezuela.
Against; United Statesof Amedca.
Abstaining: Canada,France,Germany, Federal Republic
of, United Kingdomof Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
The proposal was adopted by 10 votes to 1, with 4
abstentions.

It was so decided,
1

9. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision just
taken and the practice followed on previous occasions, I
now invite the representative of Israel and the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization to take
places at the Council table.

Conferencecontain elementsthat may further the negotiating process. It is, I believe, also a matter of general
agreementthat, in order for the Conferenceto succeed,the
necessarygroundwork mustbe laid. I hope that my report
will prove useful to the membersof the Council in their
discussionof this vitally important matter.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. C Herzog (Israel)
and Mr, Z. I.. Terzi (Palestine Libera tiolz Organizatiotz)
took places at the Council table.

16. I should like to emphasizeonce again the absolute
necessity of seizing the presentopportunities and taking
advantage of the prevailing climate for making definitive
steps forward towards a settlement of the Middle East
problem. 1 remain firmly convincedthat neither the parties
iI1 the Middle East nor the international community asa
whole can afford a continuing stalemate. It is therefore
essentialthat we redoubleour efforts in assistingthe parties
to create conditions favourable to the resumption of the
negotiating process.Failure to do so may well result in a
drift away from the arduoussearchfor a just and lasting
settlement in the Middle East. For my part, 1shallcontinue
my contacts with the partiesand the two Co-Chairmen,in
order to make progressin the attainment of the desired
results.

10. The PRESlDENT: In view of the limited number of
places available at the Council table, I invite the representatives of Egypt and Jordan to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber, 011the usual
undBrstandingthat they will be invited to take a place at
the Council table whenever they wish to addressthe
Council.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. E Abdel
Meguid (Egypt) and Mr. H. Nuseibeh (Jordan) took the
placesreservedfor them at the sideof the Council chamber.
11. The PRESIDENT: The report of the Secretary-General
on the PeaceConference on the Middle East wassubmitted
on 28 February under General Assembly resolution 31/62
and is reproduced in document S/12290 and Corr. 1. The
Council hasalso received a letter dated 7 January from the
Secretary-Geaerai, transmitting the text of that resolution
and drawing attention to paragraph3. The letter is reproducedin document S/12272.

17. I am sure that the membersof the Council sharemy
preoccupations and will do their utmost to assistin the
generaleffort to tnake possiblethe conveningof the Peace
Conferenceon the Middle Eastin conditionsin which it can
‘:ilgage in constructive negotiationswith a real chanceof
achievingprogress.

12. Members of the Council will recall that when we met
in informal consultations on 1.5 March, it was agreedin
principle that, at an appropriate stage,the Council would
consider the Secretary-General’sreport. I understandthat
the Secretary-General is prepared to present his report to
the Council. I therefore call on the Secretary-General.

18. The PRESIDENT: I have just received a letter from
the representativeof the Syrian Arab Republic in which he
asksto be invited to participate in the discussionon the
questionnow before the Council, I propose,therefore, with
the consent of the Council, to invite him to participate in
the discussionwithout the right to vote, in accordancewith
the usual practice and in conformity with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rulesof procedure.

13. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: The Council has
before it my report of 28 February, submitted under
General Assembly resolution 3 l/62, concerning the Peace
Conferenceon the Middle East.

19. As there is no objection, I invite the representativeof
the Syrian Arab Republic to take a place at the sideof the
Council chamber, on the usual understandingthat he will
be invited to take a place at the Council table wheneverhe
wishesto addressthe Council.

14. The importance which all concerned attach to the
convening of the Peace Conference on the Middle East in
conditions conducive to its ultimate successis underlined
by all the meetings and discussions,in various placesand
between various parties, concerning the possibility of
resumingthe negotiating processin the Middle East. While
it is, I believe, the generalwish that the Conferenceshould
be convened at the earliest possibledate, it is also fully
realized 011 ail sides that certain problems must be
overcomebefore that is possible.

At the invitation of the President,Mr. M Allaf (Syrian
Arab Republic] took the placereservedfor him at the side
of the Council chamber.
20. The PRESIDENT: The first speakeris the represen.
tatlve of Egypt. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to makehis statement,

15. In that connexion, 1 have already indicated that
certain changes of attitude on all sidesare desirable. I
remain hopeful that the diplomatic efforts now under way
will contribute to such changes.Obviously, basicchangesin
seeminglyintractable problems, suchasthosein the Middle
East, will be necessarilyslow and painful. It is, therefore, of
the utmost importance that we should not be discouraged
when progressis slow; we should persevere with all the
energy at our command. I note that recent statementson
the Middle East problem by the Co-Chairmen of the
2

21. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): Mr. President,I hope
it is a good omen that the Security Council is meeting
today under your presidencyto debatethe important issue
of the Middle East in the light of the report which the
Secretary-Generalhasjust introduced,
22. AS Co-Chairman of the Peace Conference on the
Middle East, your country hasa specialresponsibility and
its efforts to advance the processof negotiation are well
known to all of us. The present time is propitious for

initiating real progress in the right direction, towards a
genuine peace and stability in our area, and not mere
movement. The role of both Co-Chairmen, the United
States of America and the Soviet I!Kon, should be to
further progress towards that goal. Let us all hope that the
opportunity now afforded us is not missed, as were others
before it.
‘.

almost 30 years to the Palestine question and the serious
situation in the Middle East. In fact, the Secretary-General
was very conscious of the seriousness of the situation in the
area when, before his trip to the Middle East, he declared
that if the present circumstances were not correctly
exploited, war could easily break out in the area. He is also
correct in the assessment of the seriousness of the situation
he gives in his report. He says:

23. Needless to say, the presence of the representative of
the Palestine Liberation Organization is a manifestation of
the preoccupation of the Council with the important and
overriding fact that the participation of the representative
of the Palestinian people is essential in any debate
concerning the situation in the Middle East. During the last
1.5 months, the Council has been wisely consistent in this
policy of inviting the representatives of that valiant people
to participate in its debates.

“ 9 . . there is, I believe, an increasing consciousness in
the area that an opportunity now exists to resume
negotiations in a meaningful way and that, if tins
opportunity is not seized, there are grave dangers that the
situation will deteriorate once again, with incalculable
consequences not only for the Middle East but for the
international community as a whole.” /S/12290 a&
Cm-r. I ~ pm. 19.1
28. In paragraph 3 of its resolution 31/62, the General
Assembly also requested the Security Council to convene
subsequent to the submission of the Secretary-General’s
report in order to consider the situation in the Middle East
in the light of that report and to promote the process of
establishing a just and lasting peace in the area, Copse.
queiitIy, it was natural for the Council to decide to convene
to discuss the situation in the area in the light of that
important report. In doing so, the Council has demonstrated its prime responsibility as the guardian of peace and
security in the world.

24. In its historic resolution 31/62 of 9 December 1976,
the General Assembly affirmed its determination to strive
for peace in the Middle East by calling for the early
convening of the Peace Conference under the auspices of
the United Nations and the co-chairmanship of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of
America. That resolution was indeed historic, particularly
so, since 122 hlember States supported it. As might have
been expected, Israel chose to oppose that significant
resolution in order to demonstrate two things: first, its
usual defiance of the United Nations and the will of the
vast majority of the Members and, secondly, its defiance of
the peace process in the Middle East itself. I shall dwell on
this particular point later.

29. I should like here to emphasize the importance my
Government attaches to that resolution, which led it to
extend to the Secretary-General all possible help and
co-operation to ensure the success of his mission, As the
Secretary-General mentions in his report, it invited him so
that he could resumehis contacts in the areaitself, 111
fact,
the Arab side-Egypt, Syria, Jordan and the Palestine
Liberation Organization-were very firm in emphasizing
to
the Secretary-General their desireto achievea just and
lastingpeacein the Middle East.

25. Aware of the explosive situation in the area, the
General Assembly expressed its grave concern at the lack of
progress towards the achievement of a just and lasting peace
in the Middle East, at the same time emphasizing that any
relaxation in the search for a comprehensive settlement
constituted a grave threat to the prospects of peace in the
area as well as to international peace and security. The
Assembly then asked our distinguished and able SecretaryGeneral to resume his contacts with all the parties to the
conflict and the Co-Chairmen of the Peace Conference, in
accordance with his initiative of 1 April 1976 [see S/l221 0
of 18 October 1976, paru. 81, in preparation for the early
convening of the Conference, and to submit to the Council,
not later than 1 March 1977, a report on the results of his
contacts and on the situation in the Middle East.

30. Is this genuine quest for peacereciprocatedby Israel?
Certainly not, Israel, as usual, has relied on its outmoded
tactics of procrastination. It hasevendeclared,through its
khnister for Foreign Affairs, that the United Nationsandits
Secretary-Generalhave nothing to do with the questfor
peacein the area, Thusit hasstartedto put obstacles
on the
road to convening the Peace Conferenceby creating
procedural difficulties concerning the participationin this
Conferenceof the main party, the Palestinianpeople.

26. The Secretary-General went to the area, where he
contacted the parties, namely, Egypt, Syria, Jordan, the
Palestine Liberation Organization and Israel. He also contacted the Co-Chairmen of the Peace Conference and
prepared a detailed and comprehensive report on those
contacts and his conclusions. That report was duly presented to the Council in document S/l 2290 and Corr. 1. Let
me take this opportunity to express Egypt’s thanks and
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his tireless efforts
to push forward the cause of a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East and his pledge to continue those efforts.

31. The logical consequence of what I have said-a
consequencein which Egypt believesand which is recog
nized now by the vast majority of countries,if not by
almost all of them-is that the rights of the hkstikin
people are no lessimportant than the rightsof all the other
peoples in the area and should be acknowledgedand
guaranteed.It would therefore follow that they shouldalso
be given the opportunity to express their
legitimate
demandson an equal footing with the other peoplesin the
area, in order that all-1 repeat all-the peoplesof the area
may live in peaceand security.

27. His strenuous efforts are supported by all peace-loving
countries of the world, and they demonstrate the importance attached by the United Nations over a period of

32. It is apparent now that th.eentireworld is fed up with
theseIsraeli manoeuvreswhich have only one aimin mind:
3

strongly deplored the measures taken by Israel in the
occupied territories which altered their demographic cornposition or geographical character, and in particular the
establishment of settlements. Such measures, the Council
decided, had no legal validity and could not prejudice the
outcome of the efforts to achieve peace and therefore
constituted an obstacle to peace.

to prevent peace from prevailing in the area. Is Israel the
guardian of the Palestinians to choose the representatives
for those valiant, couragedus and patient people? It tried
once before, in elections in the West Bank, but the
Palestinian people who live in the occupied territories,
under the most brutal occupation in recent history,
demonstralcd clearly who was their true representative: the
Palestine Liberation Organization. The daily dcmonstrations of the people of the West Bank and Gaza in favour of
the Palestine Liberation Organization are clear proof of this
support. Do they not provide enough proof to Israel to
make it change its policy if it really wants to live in peace in
the area with the people it has persecuted so much in the
past’? But no; Israel has always been true to its tradition. It
wants to sweep under the carpet the core of the whole
problem: the fate of 3 million Palestinians who have
suffered SO much and so long, living in miserable conditions
in tents and refugee camps for more than a quarter of a
century.

36. ‘It is very obvious that Israel has not heeded this
unanimous decision of the Council or any of the resolutions
previously adopted by this body. On the contrary, it has
intensified its efforts and policies of repression in the
occupied territories. An example of special brutality is the
treatment of the thousands of Arab prisoners in Israeli
concentratton camps, which are called prisons. Most of
these people have been arbitrarily arrested, tortured and
put in prison without a trial. This, of course, conforms with
Israel’s own conception of law in the occupied territories.
The records of the International Red Cross, Amnesty
International, church organizations and the United Nations
itself are full of cases verifying this barbaric Israeli policy.
The fate of these prisoners was recently brought to the
notice of the civilized world, when they went on a hunger
strike to draw attention to the miserable treatment they
were receiving in Israeli prisons. The Wushingtorz Post of 20
March described at length the inhuman conditions in which
more than 3,000 Arab prisoners were suffering in Israeli
prisons and said that, in one prison alone, at Ashkelon, no
fewer than 350 detainees were condemned to life sentences.

33. The Council last met on this question in November
197G and any review of the events of these last moilths
proves beyond any doubt that it is Israel’s persistent policy
to consolidate its occupation of the Arab territories, to
exploit and plunder their natural resources, to establish
more Israeli settlements and expel large segments of the
population of these territories. This is in addition to its
shameful record of violating every aspect of human rights
there. The latest innovation applied by the occupying
forces ,is the so-called taxes, including value-added taxes,
which are collected by force from the inhabitants under the
threat of confiscation of what little they still own. The
proceeds are not spent on services in the occupied
territories but are channeled directly to the Israeli treasury
for financing Israeli settlements and other expansionist
projects in these territories.

37. A ridiculous argument was presented by Israeli authorities and published by the Israeli paper The ~Jerusulem Post
on 7 March. It quoted an Israeli prison official who had said
that “security prisoners”-that
is the terminology Israel
uses for these people-on hunger strikes around the country
were being fed through tubes and that this method was
carried out with the consent of the prisoners themselves.
But even this Israeli governmental newspaper found such a
story too much to swallow, and it said the Israeli official
could not explain why the prisoners preferred tube feeding
to eating normally. I wonder whom the lsraeli Government
is trying to fool? I do not know.

34. The Security Council itself was very conscious of these
facts when it unanimously expressed on 11 November
1976, and I quote from the consensus,
“its grave anxiety and concern over the present serious
situation in the occupied Arab territories as a result of
continue’d Israeli occupation” [see 1969th meeting].

38. The Commission on Human Rights, on 10 February
1977, expressed its dismay at that Israeli policy and sent a
telegram to the Israeli Government2 in which it called upon
it to refrain from the ill treatment of detainees. The
Commission also adopted a resolution3 condemning the
policies and practices of Israel in the occupied Arab
territories and deploring Israel’s continued violations of the
basic norms of international law. This dismal picture should
concern all who champion the cause of human rights in the
world.

This occupation has led even some Israeli politicians to
conclude that it is abnormal and hostile-even Mr. Shlomo
Avineri, the Director-General
of the Israeli Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, who stated recently that it would be
wrong for Israel to ignore the intensely provocative effect
of its occupation of the areas. It was a fact, he said, to be
faced, whatever one’s political vievjs regarding an ultimate
settlement. It is unnecessary to say here that Israeli acts
coritradict completely what Mr. Avineri said.

39. Among the Israeli policies condemned by the Commission on Human Rights were territorial annexation and the
establishment of settlements in the occupied territories.
The Security Council decided last November [ibid.] that
those particular measures, among others, “which have no
legal validity and cannot prejudice the outcome of the

35. 1 shall not dwell at length on the other parts of this
unanimous decision taken by the Council; suffice it to
mention here that the Council was very firm when it called
upon the Government of Israel to ensure the safety, welfare
and security of the inhabitants and to comply strictly with
the fourth Geneva Convention.’
Specifically, the Council
1 Geneva Convention relative to the
in Time nfwar, of 12 August 1949.

2 official Records
of the Economic
secorld Session, Supplement
No. 6,

Protection of Civilian Persons

and Social Cowwil, sixtychap. XXI, sect. B, decision

1 (XxxIrr).
3 Ibid., sect. A, resolution 1A (XXXIN.
4

search for the establishment
obstacle to peace”.

of peace, constitute

an

40. That deliberate and reckless Israeli policy could 011ly
lead to one conclusion: that Israel has 110 intention Of
reaching a peaceful settlement, that it wants to expand and
annex Arab territory and that it does not care about what
the entire world thinks about such a dangerous policy. Does
Israel wish to establish an empire in the Middle East? The
Jerusalem Post of 7 February boastfully described occupied
Sinai as a “kingdom in Sinai, Israel’s desert kingdom”.

,

41. The Egyptian Government considers that the COYItinuation of such Israeli policy is bound to jeopardize the
progress for peace and will have very serious ramifications
for the potential achievement of peace. It was for this
reason that my Government drew the attention of the
Security Council several times to this dangerous situation,
most recently in the statement on 16 February by
Mr. Ismail Fahmy, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Egypt, which was published as Council
document S/12287. Foreign Minister Fahmy referred to the
Israeli plan of establishing a belt of settlements in the
north-eastern part of the Sinai, including a full-fledged city
called Yamit, and the eviction by force of several thousand
Arab families to permit the establishment of those Israeli
settlements. As I mentioned during a previous meeting of
the Council /1966rh meeting], Israel intends to bring
settlers, mainly from South Africa, to live in Yamit and
other settlements. There is no need for me here to stress the
close co-operation, in military and other fields, between the
racist r&mes of Israel and South Africa, simply because
both of them boast about such co-operation and consider it
a.,model of relations between two similar rbgimes. Those
identical policies led Mr. Oded Lifshitz of the kibbutz Nir
Or to declare to The New York Times, in commenting
about Israeli settlements in Sinai and the eviction of
inhabitants from their homes, that such a situation “makes
us something like Rhodesia”. How correct he is! The only
difference is that Israel is doing it on a larger scale and in
the territories of three States Members of the United
Nations. Obviously it is the teacher and South Africa is the
good pupil.
42. Mr. Fahmy, in his statement, emphasized again that
Egypt would not stand idle in the face of this Israeli policy
of challenging international law and agreements, of ob.
strutting peace and trying to sabotage the attainment of
that peace. He added that it remained Egypt’s firm stand
that such measures would not give lsrael any rights
whatsoever, whatever the circumstances. Israel would bear
all the consequences of’its policy. In the end it would be
forced to remove all those settlements, as well as al1 the
changes it had introduced in the occupied Arab territories.

opposed to the estabIishment of certain settlements. But
such a screen usually clears very quickly and the whole
world cdl1 see for it&f that this Israeli policy is based on a
deliberate plan prepared by a special committee on settlements in the occupied territories, formed inside the Israeli
Cabinet itself. That Cabinet only recently approved a plan
for the creation of more new settlements deep in the heart
of the West Bank and other parts of the occupied
territories. Even Mr. Allon went to the extent of declaring,
on Israeli radio, on 4 March 1977, that he supported the
resolution of the ministerial committee for settlement
affairs, and considered that such settlements were in what
he termed “the category of the minimum border modifications important to Israel’s tactical security”.
45. The leader of the Israeli Gush Emunim movement,
which wants to establish what it calls “Greater Israel”, was
more precise tllan Mr. Allon, when he said at the beginning
of this month that new settlements were to be established,
with Government approval, within a month, and that the
present Israeli Government and any new Government which
might come to power after the 17 May elections would
have to permit Jews to settle anywhere they wished. He
spelled out the Israeli notion of peace by saying “The idea
that the Government can barter away dur birthright to the
land of Israel for peace with the Arabs is an illusion”.
46. The hypocrisy of the Israeli position on this issue even
went so far as the claim of the Israeli Prime Minister, on 10
January 1977, that settlements strengthened the peace bid.
These “semantic acrobatics” cherished and used very often
in the Security Council and in other organs of the United
Nations by the representatives of Israel, cannot succeed in
convincing anyone about the validity of Israeli policy. The
President of the World Jewish Congress, Mr. Nahum Goldman, was right in criticizing Israel for overestimating the
vaIue of propaganda and public relations in putting its case
to the world. He continued by saying that the decisive thing
in influencing world public opinion was the character of
Israeli policy; if that policy was criticized by most States,
the best propaganda was useless.
47. Some other courageous Jews are starting to rethink
their old attitudes, like Mr. Arthur Waskow, a fellow of the
Institute for Policy Studies in Washington, who published
an open letter to an Israeli, in which he said:
“It used to be that most of us thought it was
irresponsible ta criticize Israeli policy, especially in
public. But more and more of us are feeling that it is
irresponsible now not to criticize. Your Government has
lost touch with reality. Holding the West Bank and Gaza
and insisting that no Palestinian State can emerge there is
a policy that means permanent war.”

43. Consequently, Egypt considers any help given to
Israel, from any source or any country, to establish
settlements or to e?pIoit and plunder the natural resources
of the occupied territories, as for example, by drilling for
oil in the Sinai, to be a hostile act against Egypt, and we
shall define our policy with regard to such help accordingly.

48. Perhaps none other than Mr. Terence Smith, who
spent several years in Israel as The New York Times
correspondent, could at first hand correctly describe the
Israeli stand. On 5 February he said:

44. The Israeli Government, from time to time, attempts
to deceive the outside world with false statements and by
casting a smoke-screen to try to make us believe that it is

“Israelis realize their image has suffered abroad, but
they do not seem to understand why. The reaction of
some is to insist that the world is out of step with Israel
rather than the other way round. Many Israelis perceive

this Council, should be faced with its responsibilities.
Mr. George Ball, a former American Under-Secretary of
State, hit the point in his article publishedjust a few days
ago in the April issueof Fore&v Affairs, under the title
“How to save Israel in spite of herself‘. The title is
self-explanatory.Mr. Ball did not say: “How to saveEgypt
in spiteof herself’. In that article he said:

this shift in their geopolitical situation, but that perception has not yet led to a revised national policy towards
the territories, negotiations or concessions. The Government is still following the basic outlines of its pre-war
policies, The differences between Rabin’s strategy and
that of former Premier Golda Meir are differences of
nuance and style, not of substance. The post-war realities
have not hit home sufficiently to stimulate a fundamental
reassessment of Israeli policy or the drawing up of a
comprehensive peace plan that could become the backbone of a new negotiating initiative.”

“Time is clearly not working on Israel’sside;she cannot
indefinitely withstand the internal strains and stresses
endemic to a garrisonstate without irreparableharm to
her socialand economicfabric . . .

49. That is the essence of the Israeli position, and I do not
need here to elaborate on it further because it is obvious
now to everyone.

“The uncertain future of an embattled Israel and the
lack of economicsecurity in a garrisonstate have meant
that recently even some Sabrashave been leaving the
country, while last year total emigration exceeded immigration . . . Beleagueredlsrael is no longer the same
land of bright promiseit wasa few years ago; in spite of
strenuousefforts to encourageimmigration, 60 percent of
the Jewspermitted to leave the Soviet Union for Israel
last year never arrived there but moved by way of Vienna
to such Western countries asthe United States,Canada,
and France.”

50. How should the Council deal now with this explosive
situation in the Middle East? How should it handle the
report of the Secretary-General? 1s it conceivable that the
Council, the prime organ responsible for world peace and
security, will allow Israel to continue in its policy of
annexation, occupation, exploitation, plunder and disregard
for basic and fundamental human rights-a policy which
could easily lead the area, if not the world, to war and
destruction-or will the Council shoulder its responsibility
and show firmly to Israel that it will not permit such a
policy to continue unhindered? Should the world accept
the stalemate on the road to peace because of Israeli
procrastination, tactics and manoeuvres or should it press
for progress and movement towards negotiations and
peace?
51. All these questions are now addressed to the Coubl,
which has to act, first of all, to promote the process
towardsthe establishmentof a just andlastingpeacein the
area as envisagedin GeneralAssemblyresolution 31/62.
That just and lasting peaceshouldinclude primarily the
Palestinianpeople.I have no needhere to emphasizeagain
that Egypt is engagedin the questfor’s,just peacewith the
same determination with which if ‘is working for the
liberation of all the occupiedArab land. Secondly, the
Council must showclearly to Israelthat it can no longer
condoneIsrael’sdisregardfor its resolutionsand decisions,
the most recenthavingbeenadoptedon 11 November1976
[1969th meeting].
52. It is alsoof paramountimportance,in our view, that
the Council shouldcall for the prompt conveningof the
PeaceConferenceon the Middle Eastwith the participation
of all the parties. It is a suitablemeansof placingeach
before his responsibility, That is a forum which was
establishedby the United Nations itself through the
Security Council and whoserole has beenemphasizedon
several occasionsby the General Assembly. Since the
Conferenceis underthe auspices
of the United Nations,the
Council should ask the Secretary-Generalto continue his
active role and his contacts with the Co-Chairmenof the
Conferenceand all the partiesfor the prompt conveningof
the Conferencewith a view to achievinga just and lasting
settlement.

54. Therefore, it seemsimperative for the world, and
specially the Security Council, to pushIsrael to peaceand
to the PeaceConferencenot only “to saveIsraelin spite of
herself’, asMr. Ball suggests,but alsoto sparethe areaand
the world the destruction sown by Israel, becausepast
experience has shown that it resorts to conquest and
military adventureswheneverit isfaced with a crisis.
55. The Council should now assert its authority and
shoulderits prime responsibility for peaceand security in
the world. It shouldnot fail the peoplesof the areaand the
world. Egypt is ready for peace-for genuinepeace.Should
the Council fail in this endeavour, a great threat will
confront not only the Middle East but the whole world. I
am optimistic that the Councilwill riseto the challengeand
do its utmost to promote the processof peacein our area.
56. The PRESIDENT: The next speakeris the representative of Jordan. I invite him to take a placeat the Council
table and to makehisstatement.
57. Mr. NUSEIBEH (Jordan): Mr. President,as this is the
first occasion on which I have spoken for Jordan in the
courseof your presidencyof the Council, it givesme great
pleasure to welcome you, both as President and as
PermanentRepresentativeof the United States of America
to the United Nations. Your dedicated and uninhibited
commitment to the causeof human rights and justice is a
sourceof inspiration to all of us andnot leastto our people
as they continue their prolonged and seemingly endless
journey towards a vindication of those samehuman rights
with which God has endowed every people, which the
United Nations has sanctified, but which, alas,our people
have been brutally and totally denied.Is there any people
on the face of this planet, other than the Palestinianpeople,
that is blatantly and unabashedly denied not only the
cherishedhuman rights about which we all talk but even
the right to a home, to a homeland,to a senseof belonging

53. The challengeof peaceis now at Israel’sdoorstep.
Israel has to respondto this challengeand not resort to
tactics and manoeuvres.The world also, asrepresentedin
6

in what has been their ancestral homeland since time
immemorial?

The pivotal dimension which I feel in duty bound to add
and Which
I must reiterate over and over again is indicated
by the fact that time is not standing still and that, while
within the framework of the Security Council and the
United Nations as a whole the situation is stalemated, it is
far from being so in the occupied territories.

58. The mere fact of uprooting and dispersal is ipso facto
not only a denial of elemental human rights in the
conventional sense, but also an act of dehumanization in a
total sense against a victimized segment of the human race
in relation to which the Security Council stands, or should
stand, as an unwavering guardian.

62. There is an unabridgeable dichotomy between what is
happening in, or rather to, the occupied territories and their
people and the quest for the peace which we are striving to
bring about. To put aside procedural and other niceties and
come directly to the point, here is what is happening. One
party to the conflict, namely Israel, has managed between
1948 and 1967 to seize the whole cake. The Arab side, and
in particular the Palestinians, are saying restore to us a slice
of that cake, otherwise we will starve and no one takes
starvation lying down. The Israelis, by playing for time, are
devouring systematically and wilfully that very slice which
the world community is earmarking as a homeland for the
Palestinians. The process of devouring has already assumed
such massive proportions, particularly in the West Bank,
Gaza and Jerusalem, in matters concerning which I am
particularly well versed, that there will be little left but
crumbs-in the quantitative sense, because to us every inch
of territory is hallowed and transcends evaluation.

59. I do not wish to indulge in sermons. We have already
gone far beyond such civilized academic exercises which
Jordan with its abiding and inseparable ties to its Palestinian brethren regards, with deep sadness, as a luxury
which the Palestinians cannot afford.
60. The Secretary-General, whose commendable, objective
and analytical report is the subject of the Council’s debate,
has carried out extensive and intensive exchanges of views
with all the leaders of the countries and peoples .directly
inv;olved. In an understandably frustrating exercise, trying
to resolve the jigsaw puzzle presented by the convening of
the Peace Conference at Geneva, the Secretary-General has
forthrightly alerted the Council to the banal fact that whal
is ostensibly procedural is in fact substantive and that, if
the Conference is not to be bogged down even before it
leaves the ground, there must be changes in attitude on all
sides. The Secretary-General deserves our gratitude for
cutting through the dilly-dallying which has been the
hallmark of decades of sterile obscurantism, of taking cover
behind procedure, semantics, slow fox-trot steps and
what-have-you to evade and delay and justify inaction.

63. A very knowledgeable statesman, who knows the
country and its people inside out and who is not a stranger
either to the Council or to its famed resolution 242 (1967),
agreed with me a mere two weeks ago, having just returned
from a visit there, that in a year or two, and quite apart
from the awesome suffering of the people under occupation, there will indeed be very little left to talk about.
Jerusalem and its environs are already completely encircled
by concrete.

61. The paper on which all Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions are printed has turned yellow with
the passage of time while those who have it in their power
to act are unwilling to put sinews into their resolutions and
the Charter. What could an unsupported Ambassador
Jarring alone do-just to cite one example-but ping-pong
between Middle East capitals, conducting a dialogue of the
deaf? It is comforting that the Secretary-General is fully
aware of the sordid and sterile momentum of the past and
is advising the Council and, in particular, the sponsors and
Co-Chairmen of the proposed Geneva Conference, in SO
many words, to act and act quickly, because, as he says in
the report:

64. The Secretary-General’s reference to the prevailing
mood of moderation should therefore not be understood as
a subjective, temperamental attitude. It is directly and
intimately related to the objective situational premises
within which it has materialized. 11 is only logical that it
cannot persist if the fundamental premises are basically
altered.
65. Every week, my Government, which monitors developments thoroughly in the West Bank, sends to the
Jordanian Mission a thick stack of documents, reports,
statements and decisions pertaining to what is happening in
the occupied territories. I must confess that it is not easy to
read those documents because they are too gruesome,
depicting as they do a process of slow death, territorial,
cultural and national genocide perpetrated without let or
hindrance upon the occupied territories and their people.
The mood of the inhabitants is best described in an article
published in The New York Times Magazine a few weeks
ago by Mr. Sheehan, a very knowledgeable man on the
subject. He cited a dialogue which he said had occurred
between God and a West Banker. The West Banker asked
God when He thought the United States would resolve
some of its more acute problems. God replied that they
should do so in five years. The West Banker then .^
asked
when would the USSR achieve its cherished
II goals,
.. . and
I God
.
gave a more extended but specific timing. ‘I‘he West BanKer .
followed this with a final question: “When will the Israelis

“there is, I believe, an increasing consciousness in the area
that an opportunity now exists to resume negotiations in
a meaningful way and that, if this opportunity is not
seized, there are grave dangers that the situation will
deteriorate once again, with incalculable consequences
not only for the Middle East but for the international
community as a whole” (S/12290 and Con:I, para. 191.
The conclusion reached by the Secretary-General is-and I
believe the Council agrees with me-beyond controversy. I
would add only one salient dimension to the reasoning that
has led to that conclusion, The report states:
“It is vital that we catch the prevailing spirit of
moderation and realism before it evaporates and assist the
parties to channel that spirit into the arduous process of
negotiation.” [Ibid., para. 22-j
7

I

withdraw from our territories? ” God wept and said “Not
in your lifetime nor in mine”.
66. The fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, to whic11 all
of us including Israel are signatories,was specifically
designedto protect the statzlsquo ante in territorieswhich
fall victim to occupation, It is a binding conventionunder
international law as well as under innumerableSecurity
Counciland GeneralAssemblyresolutions.And yet, disdain
of the Conventionhasbeenabundantly moreconspicuous
than observanceor respect,evenin instancesof symbolism
which, to the uninitiated, seeminnocuous,but whichstrike
bitter and deep roots into the whole processof peace-

which I hope to presentto every memberof the Council as
soon as it is procured. Unfortunately we only have one
copy hereat hand.
71. I hope that what 1have saidwill not be construedasa
digression
from the main theme of the Council’sdebateon
the Secretary-General’sreport relative to the early reconvening of the PeaceConference,for that is at the heart of
the whole issue,in the consideredjudgment of the Jordan
Governhent, and indeed, should be no less SO in the
considered
judgementof the Councilitself.

72. Even if we were to assume,perllaps optimistically,
that the so-calledproceduralissuescould be overcomeand
if the GenevaConferencewereto be resumedsometimethis
67. With your permission,Mr. President,I shouldlike to
circulate an advertisementissuedby the IsraelGovernment year, no onehere could prophesyhow long the negotiating
processwould take-one year, two yearsor evenmore. It is
Tourist Office in New York and carriedby TheNew York
anybody’sguess,even though we believethat, if lsraelwere
Times Magazine of 13 March, by the 14 March issueof
Time andheavenknowsby how many other nationally-read in earnestabout achievingpeace,it shouldnot take more
than a month to round it up successfully,and particularly if
publications. We do not, or cannot, keep track of all of
them. As you will clearly see,the whole city of Jerusalem, the partiesto the Conferencewent there guidedby United
both old and new, is dwarfed and cramped,by one Nations resolutionsand mapswhich delineatedthe major
prerequisitesof peace. Otherwise we shall find ourselves
configuration dominatingthe panorama,and parallelto it,
stuck to the wall encompassing
the monumentand almost floating in the uncharted arena of outer space, with a
equal proportionately to it, is the nameIsraelin big capital modestbeginningbut with infinity asthe end.
letters.
73. Mindful of this, and pendingthe achievementof a just
andviable peacewhich I hope will not take us to infinity,
68. Now I do not know whether any amongstus is not
my Governmenturgesthe Security Council, in the strongest
familiar with the monumentI amtalking about. Thereis no
possibleterms, not to abandonthe occupiedterritories and
nameor identification of it in the advertisement.The only
their peopleas a free-for-all grazing ground, and presents
thing in writing describingthe areaI am talking about is:
“And, finally, you’ll feel the spiritualbeautyof Israelwhen the following proposalfor the Council’sconsiderationand,
you enter Jerusalem.A city so ancient,it would still seem we hope, adoption. It is consonantwith the unanimousand
like hometo David and Solomon”.
categoricalresolutionsof the Council over the pastdecade,
at least in its objectives,though not in the instrument for
69. Is this plagiarism?Is it outright distortion or is it
the implementationof those objectives.I proposethat the
sometkingmore ominous?1 can well understandanIsraeli Council shouldset up a three-manmonitoring team from
Government advertisementgiving pride of place to the
amongstmembers,with a smallbut adequatestaff and in
Knessetor even to the WailingWall. But to selectthe first
conjunction with the Secretary-General,to be installed at
Qibla of Islam, the Noble Sanctuary, the Dome of the
what is known as Government House at Jerusalemand
Rock, in the Haram Esh-Sharifsanctuaryas representing which at presentbelongsto and housesthe United Nations
Israel is genocideof an authentic civilization and a new
Truce SupervisionOrganization. The duties of the monitorpeak of distortivemisinformation.
ing team-this has nothing to do with electronic surveillance,all it needsis paperandink-would be to overseethe
70. The Mosqueof the Domeof the Rock hasbeen,for
strict observanceof the fourth Geneva Convention in the
over 1,300years,a pivotal centre of Islamicdevotion. It is
occupiedterritories, and to report monthly to the Council
as magnificent a monumentto the glory of God, as one
on any and all violationsof the integrity andinviolability of
Western writer has -rightly describedit, as can be seen
the territories andthe people.
anywhere in the world. It was built in the reign of the
Umayyad Caliph Abdul Malik ibn Marwan in the seventh
74. In the past, Israel has objected to the presenceof
century A.D. and for sevenyears substantialportions of
United Nations commissionsmainly on the groundsthat
Egypt’s revenues were spent on its construction and
someor all of their memberswereeither hostile to Israelor
embellishment.Generation after generationof craftsmen,
artists and calligraphistspainstakinglyspentcountlessyears did not have diplomatic relationshipswith it. To make it
of skillsand revenueson it from the reignof the Umayyads more palatableto Israel, and to avoid objections to such
through 14 centuries, most recently in the restoration legitimate, modest and indispensablesurveillance and
reporting, the Council could select,in its own wisdomand
undertakenby the Governmentof Jordan,financedby the
discretion,memberswhich maintain such diplomatic relaGovernment of the late King Faisalof SaudiArabia and
tionships
and which could in no way be accusedof being
completed in 1964. I attendedthat ceremonyof complehostile to Israel, I have in mind, for example, the United
tion. They canstealour propertiesbut not our souland our
creative and spiritualheritage.I haverequestedcopiesof an States,the United Kingdom andFrance. It is really none of
niy businessto suggestwhat combination of members
illustrated book by Alistair Duncan entitled The Noble
Qnctuary; portrait of a Holy Placein Arab Jerusalem,4 shouldconstitute the proposedmonitoring commission,nor
am I, in putting forward these suggestions,making any
value judgements,indicating preferencesor casting aspermaking.

8

sions. I am simply emphasizing that, as the occupied
territories have not had the benefit of a custodian or
protecting State-I forget the exact legal terminology-as
should have been the case years ago, as there is no
machinery whatsoever to protect the unprotected, and
since Security Council resolutions have gone unheeded over
the past decade, it has become incumbent upon the Council
to have a direct presence in the occupied territories.
75. It may not be out of order here to quote from the
Israeli newspaper al-Ai,?baa’, an Arabic-language daily, In its
issue of 4 February, it quoted a spokesman for the Israeli
prisons department as saying that, as of January of this
year, the number of prisoners totalled 5,852, including
3,000 imprisoned on security grounds, watched over by
1,600 prison guards-a ratio of one to every three prisoners.
I think it a waste of money to have such a ratio, but that is
not my business. The spokesman added that the number of
prisoners and detainees was increasing and that the space
allotted to each prisoner was 1.2 square metres, while in the
Hebron prison it was a mere nine tenths of a square metre.
The spokesman explained that throughout the world the
average space allotted to a prisoner was 8 to 9 square
metres. No wonder the prisoners in the occupied territories
so frequently go on hunger strikes.
76. If anyone thinks that what I am proposing is not
directly and most profoundly linked with the peace-making
process with which all parties concerned have indicated to
the Secretary-General they are eager to proceed, then I
respectfully and most categorically disagree for the reasons
I outlined earlier in my statement.
77. In his report the Secretary-General has informed the
Council that the most immediate obstacle in the way of
reconvening the Geneva Conference is the question of
Palestinian representation. The Arab States concerned,
including Jordan, have insisted that the Palestine Liberation
Organization is the legitimate spokesman for the Palestinians because the proposed overall settlement-and we
are, I take it, not talking about ad hoc arrangements but
about real peace-will inevitably decide the fate of the
Palestinian people and their offspring for generations to
come. The Israelis insist that they will’have nothing to do
with the Palestinians and that the only place they are
willing to meet them, to quote from a recent statement by

Prime Minister Rabin, is on the battlefield. Now, while
making allowance for Mr. Rabin’s predicament in view of
the forthcoming elections, does not the Council find that
statement to be dangerously war-mongering and ill-advised,
proclaimed as it is on the threshold of what we all look
forward to as a new negotiating effort to achieve a just and
lasting peace?
78. Let us stop sabre rattling and get down to the more
rewarding business of peace making on a viable and just
basis, that of United Nations resolutions. We fully understand that the Israelis are allergic to the Palestinians, but
they should bear in mind that it is the Palestinians who are
now and will continue to be their next-door neighbours,
and that peace means, above all, good neighbourly rclations. Indeed, if I were an Israeli-and 1 am saying this in all
seriousness-I should insist on rather than refuse Palestinian
participation and agreement, in order that peace may be
real and lasting. How would it sound to the Ambassador of
Israel, or to the Security Council for that matter, if I were
to say that the Arabs were willing to negotiate for peace
provided the Israeli negotiator were Mr. Shimon Peres and
not Mr. Rabin, or Mr. Avneri and not Mr. Menachem
Begin? Would not that constitute an unacceptable interference in Israel’s internal affairs? And Israel claims to be
the foremost democracy in the Middle East! The Arab
States have said that the Palestinians, per se, should
represent themselves, and it is the elemental right of all
peoples, including the Palestinians, to choose whomever
they wish to speak on their behalf.
79. As for Jordan, which has abiding ties with its
Palestinian brethren, its relationship with the Palestinians is
an intra-family affair, and the form of linkage between
them will be decided in a family atmosphere by the mutual
consent and agreement of the people on both banks of the
River Jordan, and I am sure both know what is best for
them.
80. My final remark is to reiterate a statement which His
Majesty King Hussein has been making all along in the
aftermath of the 1967 war, because it pertains to the crux
of the issue: Israel can have peace or retain the occupied
territories, but it cannot have both.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

:

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATlONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the world. Consult your bookstore
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

IRS publications
des Nations Unies sont cn vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du monde entier. Informer-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressex-vous
k : Nations Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
ICAK

HOJlY’IlITh

H3AAHUII

OPl-AHU

3AqHII

OKbE~HHEHHhIX

HAIIZIH

SG~~HUR Opraanaauwn
06-ae~nnennbix
Hamif4 MOXHO xyna~a
a KHHH(HLI~ Sarasnnax H arenrcraax
ao acex pafionax
unpa. Haaoawre
cnpaarcw 06 na~annsx
a
aameu KHIIWHOM Maraanne
mui nslun~e no anpecy : Oprarntaaqua
Ob%egwueunhrx
Haqd,
Cwcqm no npoqaxte XfJAaHUfi,
H~KI-Moprc
Hm XeHesa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONRS

DE

LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estin en venta en librerfas y caaas distribuidoras
en todas partes del mundo. ConsuIte a su librero o dirfjase
a: Naciones
Unidas, Seccicin de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

/
Litho

in Unlted

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

in other currencies)

77.700014anuary

1978~2~00~
