Resolutions adopted without referenee to a Main Committee

delegation's credentials, feels that it is not in a position to
make any proposal on the matter [para. 327].
B. ROLE OF TIIE SECRETARY-GENERAL
117. The Special Committee is of the opinion that the
Secretary-General should play an active role in making suggestions with regard to the organization of sessions, it being
understood that the final decision on the recommendations he
makes lies with the General Assembly [para. 331].

C.

SECRETARIAT

118. The Special Committee considers that the question of
the reorganization of the Secretariat, however valid it might
be, does not come within its terms of reference. It is of the
opinion, therefore, that it should not make any recommendation on the matter [para. 333].

D.

GUIDANCE REGARDING GENERAL AssEMBLY PROCEDURE ANO
ASSISTANCE TO PRESIDING OFFICERS

l. Preparation of a manual on procedure

119. Toe Special Committee recommends that the General
Assembly should consider requesting the Secretary-General to
prepare a systematic and comprehensive compilation of the
conclusions which the Assembly may adopt on the basis of
the reports of the Special Committee and of the Joint lnspection Unit, this compilation to form an annex to the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly [para. 339].
2. Repertory of Practice of United Nations Organs

15

with the delegations directly concerned and expediting the
progress of the General Assembly [paras. 347 and 348].
E.

STUDIES OF TifE RULES OF PROCEDURE

126. The Special Committee did not consider that it
should retain the suggestions concerning the insertion in the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly of provisions
similar to those in the rules of procedure of the Economic
and Social Council [para. 352].
127. The Special Committee took note of the proposal
concerning a comparative study of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly and those of the governing bodies of
the specialized agencies and suggests that the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research should consider undertaking such a project [para. 353].
128. Lastly, the Special Committee recommends to the
General Assembly that the Secretariat should be instructed
to undertake a comparative study of the versions of the
General Assembly's rules of procedure in the various official
languages in order to ensure their concordance [para. 354].
F.

SPECIAL TRAINING PROGRAMME

129. The Special Committee, aware of the training problems
facing delegations, particularly as regards newly arrived representatives, suggests that the United Nations Institute for Training
and Research should consider ways of helping to solve these
problems [para. 356].
G.

REGIONAL GROUPS

120. The Special Committee, recognizing the usefulness of
the Repertory of Practice of United Nations Organs, expresses
the hope that it will be brought up to date as quickly as
possible [para. 341].

130. The Special Committee endorses the suggestion that
the names of chairmen of the regional groups for the month
should be published in the Journal of the United Natio,u
and recommends that it should be left to the Secretariat to
decide how often it should be applied [paras. 357 and 358].

3. Preparation of a repertory of practice on the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly
121. The Special Committee did not consider that it should
endorse the proposal to issue a repertory of practice on the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly [para. 344].

2862 (XXVI). Credentials of representatives to
the twenty-sixth session of the General
Assembly

4. Reminders of previous recommendations
122. It was suggested that at the beginning of the session
the President of the General Assembly should remind the
Assembly of, and particularly invite the attention of the
Chairmen of Main Committees to, the recommendations for
improving the methods of work which were specifically
approved in General Assembly resolution 1898 (XVIII). While
there was general agreement on the principie underlying tbat
suggestion, the Special Committee did not feel that it need
make any specific recommendation in that regard [paras. 345
and 346].
123. The Special Committee did not retain the suggestion
that the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Improvement
of the Methods of Work of the General Assembly•3 should
be reissued on account of the financial implications that such
a measure would entail [paras. 345 and 346].

5. Assistance in procedural matters
124. The Special Committee noted that it was not possible
to assign a member of the Office of Legal Affairs continuously
to each of the Main Committees but that legal advice was
always furnished, either orally or in writing, when requested
[para. 348].
125. The Special Committee did not consider that it
should make any recommendation on the proposal that the
President of the General Assembly and the Chairmen of
Main Committees should enlist several assistants under them,
both from the Secretariat and, wherever possible, from the
delegations themselves, to whom they would allocate items
on the agenda for the purpose of closely following them up
43 Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly, Eighteenth Session, Annexes, agenda itero 25, document A/5423.

The General Assembly
Approves the report of the Credentials Comm.ittee,"
except with regard to the credentials of the representatives of South Africa.
2027th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.
2863 (XXVI). Co-operation between the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the request by thirty-six African
Stat_es45 for the holding early in the year 1972, in an
Afncan country member of the Organization of African
Unity, of meetings of the Security Council devoted
solely to the measures to be taken with a view to
implen_ienting the various resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly on decolonization,
the struggle against apartheid and racial discrimination
in Africa,
Taking note of the statement made by the Chairman
of the Organization of African Unity before the
General Assembly on 24 September 1971, 46
Recalling its resolutions 2011 (XX) of I 1 October
1965, 2193 (XXI) of 15 December 1966 and 2505
44 Ibid., Twenty-sixth Session, Annexes, agenda item 3, document A/8625.
45 lbid., agenda ítem 100, documents A/8494 and Add.1.
4 6 !bid., Twenty-sixth Session, Plenary Meetings, 1938th
meetmg, paras. 2-57.

16

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

(XXIV) of 20 November 1969 on co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity,
Noting with satisfaction the increased co-operation
between the Organization of African Unity and the
United Nations, the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system, especially
in their efforts to solve the grave situation in southern
Africa,
l. Takes note with satisfactíon of the report of
the Secretary-General on co-operation between the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity;47
2. Invites the Security Council to consider the
request of the Organization of African Unity concerning the holding of meetings of the Council in an African
capital;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue bis
efforts to intensify co-operation between the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly;
4. Invites the specialized agencies and other organizations concemed within the United Nations system,
particularly the United Nations Development Programme, to continue their co-operation with the
Organization of African Unity;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-seventh session the question of co-operation
between the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity.
2027th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.

2864 (XXVI). Report of the Security Council

The General Assembly
l. Takes note of the report of tbe Security Council
to the General Assembly covering the period from
16 June 1970 to 15 June 1971~8
2. Requests the Secretary-General to present in
bis report to the General Assembly at its twenty-seventh
session, due consideration having been given to the
views of interested Governments, suggestions concerning
ways and means of enhancing the effectiveness of tbe
Security Council in accordance with the principies and
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
2027th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.
2878 (XXVI). Implementatlon of the Declaration on the Grantlng of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples

The General Assembly,
Recalllng the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained
in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
and tbe programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration, contained in its resolution
2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970,
. Recalling ali its previous resolutions concerning the
unplementation of the Declaration, in particular resolution 2708 (XXV) of 14 December 1970,
47 A/8386.
48 Offecial Records

of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 2 (A/8402).

Deeply concerned that eleven years after the adoption of the Declaration many Territories are still under
colonial domination and that millions of dependent
peoples live under conditions of ruthless and undisguised colonialist and racialist repression,
Deeply deploring the continued refusal of the
colonial Powers, especially Portugal and South Africa,
to implement the Declaration and other relevant resolutions on decolonization, particularly those relating to
the Territories under Portuguese domination, Namibia
and Southem Rhodesia,
Strongly deploring the policies of those States which,
in defiance of the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, continue to
co-operate with the Governments of Portugal and
South Africa and with the illegal racist minority régime
in Southem Rhodesia,
Deeply disturbed at the intransigent attitude of
certain administering Powers which, despite the repeated appeals addressed to them by the General Assembly and the Special Committee, refuse to co-operate
with the Special Committee in the discbarge of the
mandate entrusted to it by the General Assembly,
Reiterating its view that racial discrimination in
dependent Territories can be eradicated fully and with
the greatest speed by the faithful and complete implementation of the Declaration,
Noting with satisfaction that the Organization of
African Unity has decided to convene an intemational
conference against colonialism and apartheid, to be
held at Oslo in May and June 1972,
l. Reafjirms its resolutions 1514 (XV) and 2621
(XXV) and ali other resolutions on decolonization,
and calls upon the administering Powers, in accordance with those resolutions, to take ali the necessary
steps to enable the dependent peoples of the Territories
concemed to exercise fully and without further delay
their inalienable right to self-determination and independence;
2. Approves the report of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the lmplementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples covering its work
during 1971,49 including the programme of work
envisaged for 1972;
3. Urges all States, in particular the administering
~owers,_ ~d the spec~alized ª$encies and other organizattons w1thm the Umted Nattons system to give effect
to the relevant provisions of the programme of action
contained in General Assembly resolution 2621
(XXV) and to the recommendations contained in the
report of the Special Committee for the speedy implementation of the Declaration and the relevant United
Nations resolutions;
4. Reaffirms that the continuation of colonialism
in ali its forros and manifestations-including racism
apartheid and activities of foreign economic and othe;
inte~ests which ~xploit colonial peoples, as well as the
wagmg of colomal wars to suppress national liberation
movements in southem Africa-is incompatible with
the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and the Declaration on
49 !bid., Supplement No. 23 (A/8423/Rev.1) and Supplement No. 23A (A/8423/Rev.1/ Add.1 ).
