S/PV.8487

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8487th meeting

Tuesday, 19 March 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Gueguen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alahmad
Mr. Prieto
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Ngundze
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-07711 (E)
*1907711*

S/PV.8487

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by His Excellency Ambassador Dian Triansyah
Djani, Permanent Representative of Indonesia, in his
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
I give the floor to Ambassador Djani.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I am honoured to have the
opportunity, as the new Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), to brief the Security Council on the work of the
Committee since our most recent briefing, in October
2018 (see S/PV.8364). I wish to express my gratitude to
Ambassador Llorenty Solíz and his staff for their solid
chairmanship of the Committee, followed by a smooth
handover to my team.
Since the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004), on
28 April 2004, significant progress has been made
towards its implementation. Nevertheless, in resolution
2325 (2016), the Security Council recognized that the
full and effective implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) is a long-term task that will require continual
efforts at the national, regional and international levels.
To date, 182 countries have submitted initial reports
providing the Committee with information on the
measures they have taken, or plan to take, to comply
with their obligations under the resolution.
In October 2018, two 1540 experts visited the
Republic of Mali in order to support the national
authorities in drafting a first national report on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Additionally,
on behalf of the Committee, I recently sent letters to
non-reporting States seeking their first reports as
well as notes verbales to reporting States requesting
up-to-date information to assist the Committee in its
preparations for the next comprehensive review.
The effectiveness of the practical steps taken
at the national level to implement the resolution is
2/16

19/03/2019

also important. One helpful step in this regard is for
States to develop voluntary national implementation
action plans, as encouraged by paragraph 5 of resolution
2325 (2016). It helps to identify actions to close any
gaps and vulnerabilities in regulations and national
control frameworks, foster interagency cooperation
and identify areas where assistance may be required.
Work on these action plans with Member States, at
their request, will continue this year, including at a
recent workshop hosted by Togo and an upcoming one
in Madagascar.
Exchanges and sharing of information by Member
States constitute one of the Committee’s core activities.
The Member States are in the best position to identify
effective national practices and to share them with
the 1540 Committee and other partners. During
the past few years, an increasing number of States
have undertaken peer reviews. The Committee looks
forward to an opportunity to hear about the results
of their peer review meetings later this year, and will
continue to support States that wish to conduct them,
where appropriate.
The 1540 Committee recognizes the role of the
national points of contact in support of the resolution’s
implementation. One hundred and five Member States
have informed the Committee of their points of contact,
including updated information from Hungary, India
and Turkey. In addition, the Committee has developed
regional training courses for points of contact and, in
cooperation with the African Union, will organize a
training for 1540 points of contact of English-speaking
African States next week.
In facilitating assistance to foster Member States’
capacity to implement their 1540 obligations, the
Committee has a matchmaking role and seeks to match
assistance requests from States with offers from States
or international, regional or subregional organizations.
Pending assistance requests are displayed on the
1540 homepage and date back to 2010. Today, 21
assistance requests are still open. However, assistance
related to specific elements of 1540 implementation
has been provided in the past several months to two
of the requesting countries — namely, Togo and
Zambia — on strategic trade control enforcement, both
in cooperation with the World Customs Organization
and other organizations. The 1540 Committee webpage
also includes lists of States and international, regional
and subregional organizations that have offered
assistance in general. I can also report that in 2018,
19-07711

19/03/2019

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

nine new requests for assistance were submitted to the
Committee by Bahrain, Burundi, Equatorial Guinea,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Iraq, Madagascar, Mali and
Peru. Several requests consisted of invitations to the
Committee and its Group of Experts to visit those States
to discuss assistance on implementation measures.
To date, 47 States and 16 organizations have informed
the Committee about general assistance programmes
that could help facilitate their implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). The Committee stands ready
to add new programmes or updated information on
available assistance to its website and to facilitate this
process, I have sent letters on behalf of the Committee
to Member States and international, regional and
subregional organizations, soliciting their updated
offers of assistance.
The Committee and its Group of Experts have
maintained the momentum of outreach events in the
course of fulfilling the Committee’s programme of
work and will continue to do so with the adoption of this
year’s programme of work on 6 February. In 2018, there
was a total of 51 events in which the Chair, Committee
members and the Group of Experts participated.
A top priority is direct engagement with States
through visits and national roundtables, at their
invitation. In the course of this process, increased use
has been made of the support that can be offered by
regional organizations, including the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs regional centres. For
example, the Committee cooperated with the Regional
Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in
Latin America and the Caribbean during a national
round table on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) in Peru last November, and more recently with
the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament in Africa in Equatorial Guinea and Togo
during awareness-raising and national capacity-building
workshops in December and January, respectively.
We have also intensified our engagement with
international organizations whose mandates are
directly related to resolution 1540 (2004), such as the
International Atomic Energy Agency, the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the Biological
Weapons Convention Implementation Support Unit,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
INTERPOL, the World Customs Organization and
the World Health Organization. The Committee has
encouraged these organizations to highlight obligations

S/PV. 8487

under resolution 1540 (2004) in their model legislation
or guidelines and, in December, during an inception
workshop on the African Union Comprehensive Model
Law on Weapons of Mass Destruction, held in Vienna.
Transparency and outreach are vital to the effective
implementation of the resolution. With that in mind, the
Committee is seeking ways to make better use of its
website. For example, we have continued to publish a
quarterly message from the Chair that goes out to those
of the wider 1540 network who have registered their
interest, including civil society.
A special effort is being made to engage
parliamentarians
through,
for
example,
the
Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU). In this regard, my
predecessor took the opportunity to deliver a video
message in October to the 139th Assembly of the
IPU in Geneva. Active engagement between the State
and relevant sectors of society, including industry,
academia and professional associations, could also
contribute to the full implementation of obligations
under resolution 1540 (2004). Further, an effective
partnership between States and industry is vital to
successful non-proliferation efforts. The Wiesbaden
process conferences foster such a dialogue between
States and industry.
In accordance with paragraph 3 of resolution
1977 (2011), the Security Council, inter alia, decided
to conduct a review of the status of implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) prior to the expiry of the
Committee’s mandate in April 2021. In this regard,
the Committee is mandated to include, if necessary,
recommendations on adjustments to its mandate
and submit to the Security Council a report on the
conclusions of the review. The Committee has begun
its preparatory work for the upcoming comprehensive
review of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
I will conclude my remarks by drawing the
Council’s attention to the work of the Group of Experts
supporting the Committee in its implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). The Group is now operating
with nine experts, including the Coordinator appointed
by the Secretary-General last May. I regret to inform
the Council that the experts’ contracts for 2019 were
issued for only four months, owing to ongoing financial
challenges affecting the United Nations, which is of
serious concern. If this situation is not remedied before
the end of April, the Committee will face serious
challenges in meeting its obligations to the Security

19-077113/16

S/PV.8487

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Council and realizing the activities agreed upon under
its current programme of work.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Djani for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Ambassador Djani for his briefing.
As we have been reminded too many times sitting
in this Council, the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDS) and their means of delivery,
including to terrorists and other non-State actors,
remains a real and current threat. Today’s briefing
reminds us of the critical importance of fully and
effectively implementing resolution 1540 (2004).
We welcome the renewed energy that the Indonesian
chairmanship brings to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). We also applaud the
efforts of the 1540 Group of Experts, the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs and the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs for their steadfast
efforts to support the effective implementation of
the resolution.
The United States has provided more than $4 million
towards the 1540 Trust Fund and hundreds of millions
of dollars and non-proliferation assistance to partner
countries. We will continue to provide support for this
effort and we encourage our international partners to
do the same.
Resolution 1540 (2004) is the only legally binding
instrument requiring United Nations Member States
to adopt controls to prevent WMD proliferation. We
encourage countries to engage the resources of the
1540 Committee. We call on the Committee to expand
its outreach efforts so that countries are better equipped
to identify WMD non-State actor vulnerabilities and
effectively address them.
Looking forward, the Security Council is required
to complete its comprehensive review of implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) by 2020. As we prepare for
this effort, we encourage all States that have not yet
submitted their initial reports to do so without delay.
We encourage those States that have submitted their
initial reports to provide additional information on
further steps taken to implement the resolution since
the Committee’s initial report.
4/16

19/03/2019

We call upon States Members of the United Nations
that have not done so to appoint a national coordinator
or point of contact for the 1540 Committee and to
provide contact information for those designees to the
Committee. That will allow for a direct communication
network to be established between the 1540 (2004)
Committee and the community of relevant policymakers
throughout the Governments of Member States. We
also encourage States in need of assistance in relation
to implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) to submit
their requests to the Committee and to remain in touch
with the Committee as to the status of those requests.
As we look forward to the renewal of the mandate
of the 1540 Committee in 2021, we urge our fellow
Council members to adapt to evolving proliferation
threats that fall within the remit of resolution 1540
(2004). In particular, we should be mindful of emerging
technologies, such as unmanned aerial vehicles, which
could be used as a means of WMD delivery, and
synthetic biology, which is already reconfiguring the
way in which life scientists conduct their research.
The next two years will demonstrate the
effectiveness of resolution 1540 (2004). We should
seize this opportunity to add renewed momentum to
our implementation of the resolution. We call upon
the Secretariat to ensure that the Committee and, in
particular, the Group of Experts have the resources that
they need to recruit and retain the most talented capable
personnel available in pursuit of implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).
I encourage my fellow members of the Council to
join us in making resolution 1540 (2004) as effective as
possible. The stakes are too high for us to do otherwise.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea)
(spoke in Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial
Guinea congratulates Ambassador Djani, Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), on his briefing on the activities and programme
of work of the 1540 Committee for 2019. We express
our support for the success of the aforementioned
programme of work.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is fully
aligned with the pillars that support and promote the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and reaffirms
its commitment to stepping up its cooperation and
to raising awareness of the activities of the 1540
Committee to fulfil its mandate to ensure that Member
States fully implement resolution 1540 (2004). The
19-07711

19/03/2019

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Republic of Equatorial Guinea believes that it is
important to strengthen the non-proliferation system
for nuclear, biological and chemical weapons, as well
as civil nuclear security.
As a country committed to global security and
international non-proliferation instruments, we held our
first workshop in December 2018 in close cooperation
with the 1540 Committee and the United Nations Office
for Disarmament Affairs, represented by its regional
office in Africa, the United Nations Regional Centre
for Peace and Disarmament in Africa, to establish
mechanisms for the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) in the Republic of Equatorial Guinea. We believe
it essential that all countries of the world participate
in reporting on national implementation plans and
encourage the Committee to pursue its negotiations
and educational activities on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).
Africa, my region, is a nuclear-weapon-free zone
thanks to the signing of the Treaty of Pelindaba, which
represents a model of collective action in working
towards a nuclear-weapon-free world and in developing
the most advanced regional treaties on the prohibition
of nuclear weapons. For example, the management of
its uranium resources is a fundamental issue for Africa
because certain companies are increasingly eyeing
Africa’s uranium. We want those reserves, which
were given to us by God, to be used only for peaceful
purposes, as the Treaty of Pelindaba states.
In order to prevent confrontation that could lead
to the destruction of humankind, it is essential that we
continue to progress towards the overriding objective
of nuclear disarmament throughout the planet and in
every corner of the world, including States that possess
weapons of mass destruction as well as those that intend
to possess them. Effective nuclear weapons control
requires solutions that go beyond national borders. The
threat to life on our planet from nuclear weapons poses a
particular problem to the existence of those same States
that possess such weapons as well as countries such
as ours that do not possess them, animals, vegetation
and all humankind. Dealing with each of those threats
requires a concept of international security that is more
focused on love for humankind.
We have seen from the relevant reports that on
28 February of this year the Government of Vietnam
had carefully prepared for the hosting of the second
summit on peace and non-proliferation on the Korean

S/PV. 8487

peninsula between the leaders of the United States of
America, Donald Trump, and the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Kim Jong Un. We would have like
to have heard that the summit was a complete success.
We hope that the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and the United States continue to make more
substantive progress towards denuclearization, peace
and stability on the Korean peninsula based on what has
already been achieved. The position of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea on the issue of the Korean peninsula
is to achieve the peninsula’s denuclearization and to
ensure and safeguard lasting peace and stability in the
region and in the world in general.
We highlight the valuable support of the radiation
and nuclear regulatory bodies to their members, such
as the 1540 (2004) Committee and the International
Atomic Energy Agency, and their work to update and
improve the regulatory framework in each member
State and for regional and international consistency.
My delegation wishes to highlight the readiness of our
Government for technical and scientific exchange with
other States in the context of cooperation, assistance
and a joint review on the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004).
We also wish to say to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) that the dissemination
and implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) in States
Members of the United Nations should not be only
through the adoption of legislation. The Committee
should also support technical aspects, such as assistance
for the detection of nuclear and radioactive material at
the main entry and exit points for goods in countries, in
particular those such as ours.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking the Ambassador of Indonesia for his briefing
and for his work since assuming the Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004).
The 1540 (2004) Committee is an importance
cornerstone of the international non-proliferation
architecture. As such, it is a key part of the rules-based
international system. The Committee plays a vital role
in helping States to prevent the proliferation of nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons to non-State actors,
thereby strengthening our collective efforts to deter and
eradicate the use of such weapons. We need only look at
instances in recent years where chemical weapons have
been used by groups such as Da’esh in Iraq and Syria to

19-077115/16

S/PV.8487

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

realize what is at stake. We cannot stand by and allow
the unconscionable use of such weapons to take place.
The United Kingdom therefore is and will remain a
strong supporter of the work of the Committee. We
are pleased that this year’s programme of work has
been adopted swiftly and see two key priorities for the
Committee’s work this year under the leadership of the
Indonesian Ambassador.
The first priority is the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). With the assistance of the Committee,
all States should work to ensure that their legislation,
national control frameworks and mechanisms for
both internal and international cooperation are up to
date and fit for purpose. It is particularly important
that States with specific circumstances, such as being
nexus points in global supply chains, take extra care
to ensure that they are implementing resolution 1540
(2004) effectively. As the Ambassador of Indonesia
mentioned this morning, developing voluntary
national action plans and assigning national points
of contact are practical steps that all States can take.
We commend such steps to all States Members of the
United Nations today. We also join the United States in
urging all States that have not yet voluntarily reported
their implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) to the
Committee to do so as quickly and as practically as
possible. In an interconnected world, a chain is only
as strong as its weakest link and the responsibility lies
with all of us.
Looking ahead, we recognize that the next
comprehensive review of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) will take place in 2021. The
United Kingdom stands ready to do all it can to make
sure that that process is thorough and effective and that it
leads to practical outcomes in deterring and preventing
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
A second priority should be assistance to States. I
am once again grateful that the Ambassador of Indonesia
highlighted the issue in his remarks this morning. The
effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is
not straightforward, however vital it may be. I welcome
the work already being done by the Committee to
facilitate the provision of assistance to States that have
requested it, including by helping coordinate it with
other States and international organizations that have
the capacity to provide it. The United Kingdom stands
ready to provide legal and regulatory expertise, as
well as broader support, to States looking to meet their
obligations and strengthen their national frameworks. In
6/16

19/03/2019

that regard, the work of Working Group II, coordinated
by France, is particularly important, and I want to take
this opportunity to thank France, as well as Peru, Côte
d’Ivoire and the United States, coordinating the other
Working Groups, for their diligent efforts. I would also
like to take this opportunity to recognize the vital work
being done by the Group of Experts, coordinated by
Mr. Raphaël Prenat. The United Kingdom notes with
concern the financial situation that Ambassador Djani
highlighted and will be following the issue very closely.
The work of the 1540 Committee focuses on
preventing the use of weapons of mass destruction
by non-State actors. However, I should not conclude
without also touching briefly, as my colleague from
Equatorial Guinea did, on the use of weapons of mass
destruction by State actors, because when we see
States using chemical weapons in flagrant breach of
international law, there are proliferation consequences.
The use of such weapons by an organization as craven
as Da’esh is unconscionable, as is Government use of
chemical weapons against its own people, as in the case
of Syria, or against another State, as happened on the
streets of Salisbury in the United Kingdom, just over a
year ago.
The rules-based international order has been
essential to the security and safety of the international
community for more than 70 years. If we are to continue
to enjoy that security and safety, it must remain our
collective duty to uphold that international order and
prevent the heinous use of such weapons, whoever
uses them.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Ambassador Djani for
his briefing on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). We commend him for
the efforts he has made since assuming the chairmanship
of the Committee to effectively implement resolution
1540 (2004) and for his dynamism. We appreciate his
delegation and that of the United Kingdom for using
their good offices in order to ensure the timely adoption
of the Committee’s programme of work.
We would first like to highlight the primary role of
resolution 1540 (2004) in preventing the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and their access by
non-State actors, including terrorists. The threat
they pose today to international peace and security
is real and worrisome. As proof of that, we have the
final report of the Organization for the Prohibition of
19-07711

19/03/2019

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Chemical Weapons Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian
Arab Republic, which confirmed the use of toxic
chemicals as weapons containing molecular chlorine
in the attacks in the city of Douma in April 2018,
which left many injured and resulted in the deaths of
43 people, including women and children. That is in
addition to the list of other cases involving the use of
chemical weapons in Syria and Iraq, including those
confirmed by the Joint Investigation Mechanism of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
of the use of mustard gas on several occasions by the
terrorists of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
Another worrying matter is nuclear proliferation
on the Korean peninsula. Of course, we commend the
political and diplomatic progress that has been made.
However, there is evidence that nuclear facilities and
ballistic missiles remain in operation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and continue to be
developed. Efforts continue to disperse storage and test
sites around the country. The situation highlights the
importance of implementing resolution 1540 (2004)
and should be considered a priority. Efforts by the
international community to eradicate the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and prevent their use by
non-State and State actors alike must be strengthened.
The Dominican Republic is committed to its
obligations under international instruments that call
for disarmament, non-proliferation and refraining
from giving support to non-State actors seeking to
develop, acquire, transfer or use any type of weapons
of mass destruction and their means of delivery. In that
regard, as part of our commitment to implementing
resolution 1540 (2004), together with Panama, we
agreed to conduct a peer review to share experiences
and good practices in its implementation. The topics to
be evaluated are reviews of national and international
legislation, strategic trade, safe transport and risk
management in chemical, biological, radiological or
nuclear and explosive emergencies. The assessments
will be conducted in the Dominican Republic from
26 to 29 March and in Panama from 9 to 12 April.
Our national action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) is one of the measures we are
taking to comply with our commitments. It was prepared
in collaboration with the United Nations Regional
Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in
Latin America and the Caribbean (UNLIREC) and
presented to the Committee in 2015 ahead of the second
comprehensive review of the status of the resolution’s

S/PV. 8487

implementation. In that regard, we would like to
highlight the work of UNLIREC, the Organization of
American States Inter-American Committee against
Terrorism, the Committee’s Group of Experts, States
and other regional and international organizations in
providing assistance to our country and others and in
fostering cooperation for the effective implementation of
the resolution’s obligations. Cooperation and assistance
are key to meeting those obligations and should be
strengthened in order to better align the needs of the
recipient State and the assistance offered. Incidentally,
we deplore the fact that the professionals who make
up the Group of Experts are having problems with
bureaucratic procedures, which we hope can become
more flexible and enable the situation to improve,
since it is the Experts who ensure that the Committee
functions well and honours its own commitments.
In conclusion, we welcome the progress made in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and related
subsequent resolutions — as is the case with Mali,
which is preparing its first implementation report — as
well as in the various activities that the Committee has
undertaken to meet its objectives. We must continue
to work unrelentingly to universalize this important
resolution, which is the cornerstone of the regime for
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Ambassador Djani, Permanent
Representative of Indonesia, for his briefing on the work
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004). We would like to thank Ambassador Djani
and his team for their conscientious stewardship of
this subsidiary body of the Security Council. We look
forward to productive cooperation in the future and
will fully support him in his endeavours.
Resolution 1540 (2004) is rightly considered a
cornerstone of the global non-proliferation architecture.
The Security Council’s adoption of it by consensus in
2004 was the result of a joint initiative of Russia and the
United States aimed at establishing a robust legal and
law-enforcement bulwark to prevent weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs) from falling into the hands of
non-State actors, including terrorists. That means that
for the past 15 years we have been able to work together
to identify a problem that is now manifest in extremely
serious forms.
The particular value of resolution 1540 (2004)
consists in the fact that it is a mechanism for

19-077117/16

S/PV.8487

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

cooperation, not coercion or the imposition of socalled solutions. Its adoption launched an era of
cooperation in the collective work of countering one
of the world’s most serious threats to global stability.
The responsibility for implementing the resolution lies
with States. International and regional organizations,
industry, business, academic and scientific circles and
other sectors of civil society play a very important
but secondary role in helping States to implement
specific provisions. Resolution 2325 (2016), adopted in
accordance with the results of the 2016 review process,
helped to further strengthen the 1540 Committee’s
non-proliferation mandate, facilitating the exchange of
best practices for its implementation and improving the
effectiveness of assistance to States in need of it, while
taking their specific requirements into account.
We believe firmly that the goal established by
resolution 1977 (2011) of conducting comprehensive
reviews of the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) should be a priority for the Committee. In order
to prepare properly for the process it is important
first of all to ensure that States, international and
regional organizations, business and academic circles
develop recommendations and proposals that in the
event of a consensus-based adoption will underpin the
Committee’s new mandate for the period following
25 April 2021. In that regard we believe the Committee
could hold an open meeting to which all interested
stakeholders would be invited. Brainstorming would
help to identify additional directions for cooperation.
We want to point out that the approach to assessing the
operations of the Committee and its Groups of Experts
should be a professional one guided by the principle
of “first do no harm”. Surrounding the Committee
with additional bureaucratic structures, limiting the
continuity of experts’ contracts or artificially promoting
radical but unconsidered proposals could lead to
additional bureaucratization and create obstacles rather
than enhancing the effectiveness and efficiency of this
important body’s activity.
Combating the proliferation of WMDs is one of
Russia’s military and political priorities. Like any other
difficult issue, what it needs is concerted, coordinated
effort on the part of all States, without exception. We
need engagement and cooperation, not confrontation.
We are interested in reaching common positions
with our partners with the purpose of advancing
the non-proliferation agenda as quickly as possible,
especially considering that the problems in this area
8/16

19/03/2019

continue to worsen. In the light of the continued activity
in the Middle East of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and other terrorist groups, which have acquired
the technology for producing chemical weapons use
and are making active use of it, the significance of
collective efforts to prevent the terrifying problem of
chemical terrorism is only increasing. We should act
quickly, especially given the fact that as the situation
in Syria is resolved, the terrorists, including those with
practical experience in the area of chemical weapons,
will try to seek refuge in third countries and continue
to ply their destructive trade there.
For our part, we intend to continue participating
actively in the Committee’s work. We look forward
to constructive and productive cooperation with all
partners in the interests of ensuring the fullest possible
implementation of the provisions of resolution 1540
(2004) in order to prevent weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery from falling into the hands
of non-State actors.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes today’s meeting to consider
the report of activities of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), on non-proliferation.
We commend Ambassador Djani, Permanent
Representative of Indonesia, for his excellent briefing.
We wish him every success in the conduct of his mission
and pledge him our support.
Scientific and technological progress has
contributed to the development and proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, which represent a serious
threat to international peace and security. My delegation
is seriously concerned about that continued threat and
the risk of non-State actors acquiring such weapons. In
that context, we welcome the significant progress that
has been made in countering non-proliferation since the
adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) and the subsequent
resolutions that go to make up its regime. In that
regard, we commend the outstanding work of the 1540
Committee and its Group of Experts in assisting States
to fulfil their obligations under the relevant Security
Council resolutions. We welcome the fact that 182 States
have submitted their first reports to date. However, we
believe that there are still immense challenges in this
area. Continued national, regional and international
efforts are therefore essential to preventing non-State
actors, particularly terrorist groups, from developing,
possessing, manufacturing, acquiring, transporting,
19-07711

19/03/2019

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

transferring or using weapons of mass destruction in
all their nuclear, chemical and biological forms.
Côte d’Ivoire continues to believe that combating
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
is a long-term task that requires an integrated and
coordinated approach at the regional level from all
stakeholders, including Member States, international
and regional organizations, the private sector and civil
society. In particular, States should work together to
identify best practices for preventing the diversion of
chemical agents. It is also vital to harmonize national
legal frameworks for the effective implementation of
measures on a global scale to prevent the proliferation of
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and establish
effective national controls for related materials. That
means strengthening collaboration on border control,
on the surveillance of financial flows and Internet
networks and on legal assistance, as well as adapting
the means for combating evolving threats.
In addition, we should emphasize the importance
of capacity-building for Member States in order to help
them implement their obligations. In that regard, my
delegation welcomes the regional capacity-building
workshops and concrete measures aimed at facilitating
the implementation of the relevant resolutions on
non-proliferation. We welcome the adoption of
voluntary national action plans and the forthcoming
joint holding of a meeting with the African Union to
strengthen the capacities of points of contact.
We must also work to gradually eliminate weapons
of mass destruction. In that context, we should give the
Secretary-General’s disarmament programme more
consideration. We also believe that the Committee should
continue to work to strengthen its cooperation with
international, regional and subregional organizations
and to promote the exchange of information and best
practices. In that connection, my country welcomes
the enriching experiences led by States participating in
peer reviews, which is a good example of cooperation
among countries in implementing measures to
combat proliferation.
My delegation would like to reiterate its full
support for the work of the 1540 Committee and
urges it to continue its rigorous and effective work by
calling on States to ensure the effective implementation
of international legal standards relating to the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
strict compliance with them. We believe that the Group

S/PV. 8487

of Experts entrusted with assisting the Committee
has a key role to play and therefore fully endorse the
concern expressed by Ambassador Djani about its
members’ administrative situation, with a view to
finding an appropriate and speedy solution. We also
attach great importance to the strategic review of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) scheduled
for 2021.
In conclusion, my country, which has ratified
virtually all the relevant international legal
instruments on the subject, in particular the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction, would like to reiterate its
willingness to cooperate with all parties to support
the actions of the 1540 Committee and to strengthen
the non-proliferation regime with a view to achieving
peace throughout the world.
Mr. Prieto (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We want
to thank Ambassador Dian Triansyah Djani for his
briefing on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). We commend him
and his team for their work and express our strong
support for promoting the full implementation by all
States of resolution 1540 (2004).
Peru would like to reiterate its resolute commitment
to efforts to achieve general and complete disarmament
and the non-proliferation of nuclear, biological and
chemical weapons and their means of delivery, which
pose a threat to international peace and security. We
are particularly concerned about their link to the
terrorist threat and the risk that non-State actors might
acquire, develop or use such weapons and their means
of delivery or engage in their trafficking.
Peru believes it is essential that the international
community remain united in responding effectively to
the serious challenges facing non-proliferation regimes.
In that regard, it is urgent and indispensable to address
the challenge posed by the nuclear and ballistic missile
programme of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. Peru supports and implements the sanctions
regime imposed against that country, and hopes that the
dialogue established with the North Korean Government
will pave the way for the complete, verifiable and
irreversible denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
We also want to stress the importance of maintaining
the Security Council’s steadfast and united commitment

19-077119/16

S/PV.8487

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

to the case of the unacceptable use of chemical weapons
in Syria, with a view to fully investigating the facts
and ensuring appropriate accountability through the
mechanism for the attribution of responsibilities.
We are equally concerned that the inappropriate
use of scientific innovations may lead to proliferation
activities, in particular through the illegal transfer of
technology and illicit financial transactions. In that
regard, we wish to emphasize the importance of the
implementation, by all States, of measures to fulfil all
their obligations, especially those related to national
and export controls. It is necessary for all States to
have effective national controls, in accordance with
resolution 2325 (2016). In that regard, in order to
implement the measures set out in resolution 1540
(2004), last November Peru organized a round table
that brought together national authorities to discuss
aligning our national legislation in the area of biological
weapons. We are grateful for the support we received
from the Committee and its Group of Experts.
Finally, we underscore the importance of the
Committee’s work, especially the work it is carrying
through its programme of work to promote the full
implementation of resolution 2325 (2016), which will
serve as the basis for its next comprehensive review
in 2021, in accordance with paragraph 3 of resolution
1977 (2011).
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank Ambassador Dian Triansyah Djani,
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), for his briefing.
The Committee has recently done a great deal of
effective work in facilitating the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and in enhancing capacitybuilding and technical assistance. Its successful
adoption of this year’s programme of work has resulted
in a preliminary scheduling of meetings for the year,
while initial preparations for a comprehensive review in
2021 have been initiated. China commends the efforts
of the Chair of the Committee and his team.
In recent years, thanks to long-term joint efforts
of all parties, the international non-proliferation
consensus has steadily grown, its mechanism has
gradually improved and cooperation has further
developed. At the same time, the global security
landscape remains complex and grave. In a globalizing
world with technological advances, the risk that
non-State actors, in particular terrorists, might gain
10/16

19/03/2019

access to weapons of mass destruction and related
materials and technologies still exists. Under the new
circumstances, the international community should
continue to enhance cooperation and further strengthen
global governance in the area of non-proliferation.
First, we must safeguard multilateralism and
foster an enabling security environment. All countries
should embrace the concept of shared, comprehensive,
collaborative and sustainable security; foster a security
environment of justice and fairness that is built and
shared by all; build an international and regional
environment that is safe for all; seek common security,
while taking into account the legitimate concerns of all
States in the area of security; and eradicate the breeding
grounds of terrorism and extremism, as well as the
drivings force of proliferation, thereby fundamentally
removing the threats of proliferation.
Secondly, the international community should
uphold international rules and consolidate the
international non-proliferation regime. It has adopted
the Charter of the United Nations as its guiding principle
in ensuring international non-proliferation and used
as its legal basis the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, the Biological Weapons
Convention, the Chemical Weapons Convention and
the implementation of the relevant Council resolutions,
such as resolution 1540 (2004). All parties and countries
should effectively uphold the authority, universality
and effectiveness of the international non-proliferation
regime and prevent non-State actors, especially
terrorists, from acquiring weapons of mass destruction
and related materials and technologies.
Thirdly, we must strengthen State responsibility
and promote pragmatic cooperation. The primary
responsibility for non-proliferation should be borne
by Governments. We must respect and support
countries in formulating non-proliferation policies
in accordance with their national conditions and
improve non-proliferation laws and regulations. All
countries should enhance pragmatic non-proliferation
cooperation on the basis of equality and mutual respect,
focus on meeting the international assistance needs of
of developing countries in the field of non-proliferation
and help developing countries strengthen their capacitybuilding.
Fourthly, it is necessary to strictly abide by the
mandate of the resolution 1540 (2004) and strengthen
the full and effective implementation of the resolution.
19-07711

19/03/2019

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The 1540 Committee should adhere to the principle of
consensus and ensure the primacy of Member States in
non-proliferation efforts. We should balance the various
efforts and effectively enhance the ability of States to
implement the resolution. At the same time, we need to
strengthen planning and facilitate the work on the 2021
comprehensive review in an orderly manner.
China is firmly opposed to the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery.
China has consistently and strictly implemented its
international non-proliferation obligations, committed
to the political solution of non-proliferation hotspot
issues and made positive contributions to that end.
China is ready to further its cooperation with the
Committee and will continue to work with all other
countries to make a positive contribution to improving
the international non-proliferation regime, enhancing
global non-proliferation governance and building
lasting peace and security for all.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Ambassador Dian Triansyah Djani for his remarks
and welcome him as the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). I assure him of my delegation’s full support in
steering the work of that important Committee. Poland
very much appreciates the objective and creative
approach that Indonesia has adopted since the very
beginning of its tenure in the Council.
This year, under Indonesia’s leadership, the
Committee has started preparatory work for the
upcoming comprehensive review of the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), which will be completed
in 2021. The comprehensive review will have two
major objectives: first, to analyse the implementation
of the resolution, and, secondly, to evaluate the process
with a view to improving its effectiveness, analyse the
work of the Committee and recommend any necessary
changes. We should remember that, based on resolution
2325 (2016), recommendations should take into account
the evolving nature of risks of proliferation and rapid
advances in science, technology and commerce
in the context of non-proliferation. We encourage
non-reporting States to collaborate with the Committee
and its Group of Experts with the aim of drafting their
initial reports.
One hundred and eighty-two countries have
submitted at least their initial reports on the
implementation of the resolution 1540 (2004) to the

S/PV. 8487

Committee. This is a good record, and it proves that
the issue of non-proliferation remains among the main
priorities of the international community. However,
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004) are not a
one-time task. We call on all States to fully implement
that document by taking national and international
measures aimed at strengthening their capacities,
including by the establishment of national action plans,
improving border management and law enforcement,
international judicial cooperation, countering terrorist
narratives and engaging communities.
As an example of Poland’s serious engagement in
building capacities and awareness in that regard, let
me briefly inform Council members that, in May this
year, we will organize, together with the United States,
a three-day workshop on the Proliferation Security
Initiative (PSI). The programming of that event will
include discussion of elements of proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors. We
have invited countries from the broader region, the
European Union Eastern Partnership, members and all
PSI Operational Experts Group countries.
As a country that, together with Croatia, organized
the first peer review under resolution 1540 (2004), we
commend those States that have conducted similar
exercises. We welcome the most recent initiative of the
Dominican Republic and Panama to organize a peer
review this year.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to express Poland’s appreciation for the professional and
active work of the Group of Experts, whose expertise
and knowledge provide valuable feedback for use in the
decisions to be made by the Committee.
Mr. Alahmad (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like, at the outset, to welcome Ambassador Dian
Triansyah Djani as the new Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004,) on preventing non-State actors and terrorist
groups from developing, acquiring, manufacturing,
possessing, transporting or using all types of weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs), whether nuclear, chemical
or biological. I also thank him for his informative
briefing on the work of the Committee. I wish him and
his team at the Permanent Mission of Indonesia every
success. I would like also to thank the Committee’s
Group of Experts and the relevant secretariat for their
tremendous and tangible efforts in supporting the work
of the Committee.

19-0771111/16

S/PV.8487

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

We welcome the adoption of the 2019 programme of
work of the 1540 Committee. The programme of work
is a road map for Member States to develop strategies
and national legislation for preventing non-State
actors from possessing weapons of mass destruction.
That would allow us to achieve the objective of a
future free from those lethal weapons. We hope that
this meeting will serve to further convince Member
States of the need to enhance the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) in an optimal way in order to
reach the full implementation of its provisions and
achieve universality.
In that regard, I would like to note that the 2019
programme of work of the 1540 Committee is the most
comprehensive one to date. It highlights the sectors
that require more attention given the new threats of
proliferation, as well as national plans along with
country and regional visits by the Committee and
its Group of Experts. The programme of work also
addresses the special circumstances of States as they
implement non-proliferation measures. It enhances as
well the role of civil society in fighting the proliferation
of all forms of WMDs.
We all seek to develop and improve the performance
of the 1540 Committee and its four working
groups — on implementation, assistance, cooperation
and transparency — as well as to operationalize its
mechanisms at the national, regional and international
levels. The Committee has become an integral part of
international efforts to achieve non-proliferation owing
to its great importance to maintaining international
peace and security. We should all redouble our efforts
in our collective work to enhance the non-proliferation
regime and make it as effective as possible.
The State of Kuwait has on more than one occasion
expressed its concern about the challenges faced by
the non-proliferation regime in the world today. The
proliferation of WMDs and the threat of non-State
actors acquiring them are quite worrisome issues,
especially amid the increase in terrorist threats,
conflicts and instability in our contemporary world.
It is possible that non-State actors could come to
possess, develop, use and traffic in nuclear, chemical
or biological weapons. The consequences of that would
be grave and difficult to predict. Hence our main task
should be to appropriately assess the evolving nature of
the threat of proliferation and the rapid advancement of
science and technology, as well as to take precautionary
and proactive measures.
12/16

19/03/2019

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that the
State of Kuwait is committed to the position of the
League of Arab States calling for making the world
free of nuclear weapons and other WMDs including the
Middle East region. We are keen to improve the work
and performance of the Committee. In that regard, we
are preparing for the visit by the Committee’s Group
of Experts to the State of Kuwait in the next few
months so as to benefit from their expertise and best
practices with a view to submitting our next, updated
voluntary report.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, we welcome
Ambassador Dian Triansyah Djani of Indonesia as
the new Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and
thank him for his very informative and comprehensive
the briefing.
The risk of non-State actors, particularly terrorists,
using weapons of mass destruction continues to be a
huge threat for global security. Resolution 1540 (2004)
therefore remains a central pillar of the multilateral
non-proliferation architecture, as an important tool
for preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction to non-State actors. This is an issue that
needs our continued attention and cooperation.
We welcome the progress made in the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) since its adoption, in 2004. As
we heard this morning, 182 countries have submitted
initial reports on the implementation of the resolution,
which is good news, but no reason for complacency.
To guarantee the full and effective implementation
of the resolution, it is of the utmost importance to
provide assistance to States requiring such support.
The process of matching requests for such assistance
with offers from States or international, regional or
subregional organizations remains absolutely vital and
needs constant updating and refining. We particularly
welcome the intensified cooperation of the Committee
and the Group of Experts with the regional centres of
the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs,
as well as with such international organizations as the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the
World Customs Organization and the International
Atomic Energy Agency. We appreciate the support
those entities can offer in the implementation process.
We also welcome the speedy adoption of this
year’s programme of work and support the goals of the
19-07711

19/03/2019

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Indonesian Chair for the upcoming 2021 comprehensive
review, especially as regards building and strengthening
partnerships. We look forward to working closely with
the Committee and the Group of Experts to that end.
I would like to make one last point, concerning the
administrative status of the members of the Group of
Experts. The work of the Group of Experts is obviously
crucial to the success of the Committee’s work, and we
are concerned about the financial difficulties that have
been reported. We urge that the financial difficulties
in paying the experts be solved as quickly as possible.
Before I conclude, I would like to say a few more
words on the Wiesbaden process, which was mentioned
by the Chair in his briefing. Since 2012, Germany
has been active in promoting intensified cooperation
between States and industry through the biannual
global Wiesbaden conferences. Those conferences
have proved to be very fruitful in providing a platform
for exchange among regulators, industry, international
organizations and academia. Since 2016, those global
conferences have been complemented by regional
Wiesbaden conferences, which so far have taken place
in South Korea, Mexico and India, usefully bringing
in regional specificities. This year, we are planning to
hold another regional conference, in southern Africa.
The Wiesbaden process helps to raise awareness and
promotes exchanges of information, effective practices
and fosters private sector engagement, which is vital to
successful non-proliferation in a globalized world. The
concerns, feedback and concrete proposals of industry
representatives, as well as supporting industry-industry
cooperation, have proven very helpful in identifying
measures to prevent non-State actors from obtaining or
using weapons of mass destruction.
Mr. Ngundze (South Africa): At the outset, let me
join others in congratulating Ambassador Djani in his
capacity as the new Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). We welcome the
fact that we have the coordinator of the Non-Aligned
Movement Working Group on Disarmament leading
the Committee, and I want to assure Ambassador Djani
of my delegation’s support and cooperation. Likewise,
we thank Ambassador Djani for his comprehensive
briefing on the work of the Committee over the past
three months.
Indeed, resolution 1540 (2004) is still one of the
most critical instruments in preventing non-State actors
from developing, acquiring, manufacturing, possessing,

S/PV. 8487

transporting, transferring or using nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons and their means of delivery. South
Africa expresses grave concerns about the catastrophic
consequences of the use or threat of use of weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs), particularly by non-State
actors. South Africa reaffirms that no cause could ever
justify the use of WMDs anywhere, by anyone or under
any circumstances.
In that context, since the dawn of our democracy
in 1994, South Africa has remained steadfast in its
commitment to multilateralism in addressing peace
and security challenges facing the global community,
including the horizontal and vertical proliferation
of WMDs and their means of delivery. South Africa
wishes to reiterate its view that given the existential
threats I have described, the only guarantee that WMDs
will never be used by anyone is their total elimination.
As regards the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), South Africa welcomes the significant progress
made towards its effective implementation, and we
renew our commitment to working with other members
of the Council to address the challenges that remain,
not least in terms of national implementation and
assistance. Furthermore, in dealing with the challenges
of WMDs, it is imperative that no unwarranted
restrictions be imposed on the inalienable right of
Member States, particularly developing countries, to
use any related materials, equipment and technologies
for peaceful purposes. In that context, the opportunities
provided by nuclear technologies, for example, in the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, particularly in the areas of food security,
public health technologies and clean energy, cannot
be overlooked.
South Africa has, over the years, strengthened
its implementation capability through comprehensive
national legislation focusing on WMDs and their
means of delivery, which included the establishment
of the Council for the Non-Proliferation of Weapons
of Mass Destruction, the role of which is to coordinate
the national implementation of our international WMD
obligations and regulations and monitor compliance
across all stakeholders. The Council has also played
an invaluable role in assisting countries in our region
and beyond in strengthening their national controls,
legislation and capacities over sensitive items that may
contribute to the development of WMDs.

19-0771113/16

S/PV.8487

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

South Africa’s experience with the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) has demonstrated that
the challenges of WMD proliferation can be
overcome by strengthening national legislation and
implementation capabilities, including export controls;
strengthening international cooperation with other
related international organizations and agencies; and
strengthening cooperation with regional organizations,
such as the African Union, as they play a critical role in
the implementation and coordination of resolution 1540
(2004).
Finally, financial and technical assistance is
critically needed to ensure that developing countries
are able to fully implement the resolution, especially on
the continent, where greatest attention is still devoted to
issues of poverty, unemployment and underdevelopment.
In conclusion, the challenges and threats posed
by WMD proliferation and the possible use of them
by non-State actors require the increased cooperation
of the international community. Equally important
is the strengthening and increased capacity of the
relevant multilateral institutions and instruments.
Non-proliferation is not an ultimate goal in itself,
but only a means towards a world free of WMDs and
their means of delivery. Selective and discriminatory
practices will therefore not serve our collective interest
in strengthening peace and security. What is needed is a
balanced implementation of the various legally binding
international instruments, including those covered by
resolution 1540 (2004).
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium would like to begin by warmly thanking His
Excellency Mr. Dian Djani, Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), for his
very comprehensive briefing.
Belgium notes with satisfaction that substantial
progress has been made in the global implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) since its adoption almost
15 years ago. We welcome the efforts of the Chair of
the Committee to encourage the 11 remaining States
to submit a national report. We also thank the Group
of Experts of the 1540 Committee for contributing to
drafting such reports, at the request of Member States.
As the Chair indicated, the full implementation of
the resolution is a long-term endeavour and a work
in progress.
The terrorist threat has not diminished. Terrorist
groups and individuals adapting continuously new
14/16

19/03/2019

realities on the ground and seem to be persistently
reinventing themselves. The end of Da’esh as a terrorist
organization with a territorial base does not mean the
end of the threat it poses. Indeed, Da’esh continues to
indoctrinate individuals and groups around the world.
In that context, the risk of terrorist groups acquiring
weapons of mass destruction remains a major concern
and we must not lower our guard. To address that
threat, it is important to remind Member States of their
responsibilities in the process. Member States should
take all necessary measures to put in place national
legislation and controls to prevent non-State actors from
acquiring nuclear, chemical or biological weapons, or
the equipment necessary for their production.
With regard to guidance and assistance, as has
already been mentioned, the 1540 Committee plays a key
role in matching supply and demand and in providing
support throughout the process. We therefore highlight
the important role that can be played concurrently by
international and regional organizations, civil society
and industry in the comprehensive implementation
of the relevant resolutions. We warmly welcome the
engagement and increased cooperation of the 1540
chairmanship with such organizations so that they can
provide recommendations and strengthen the capacities
of States Members making such requests.
I would also like to draw attention to the important
support of international export control regimes in
meeting the goals of resolution 1540 (2004). Belgium is
a member of all such regimes and calls on non-member
States either to join or to adhere unilaterally to
their principles.
While terrorists seem to be constantly adapting
to new realities and able to exploit scientific and
technological advances, as well as open borders and
international trade, let us remain vigilant. Let us
continue to pay particular attention to developments
in all those areas and the resilience of terrorist
organizations, and pursue our efforts to achieve the
comprehensive implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). We extend to the Committee our full support
and cooperation in that crucial area.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): In accordance with the
recommendation yesterday for all members of the
Security Council to speak briefly (see S/PV.8486), I
shall speak briefly in my national capacity.
First, with regard to the process of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), almost
19-07711

19/03/2019

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

15 years since its adoption, there are still States that
have yet to submit their final report. We therefore
encourage non-reporting States to submit their
initial report. Indonesia submitted its first report in
October 2004 and updated it in November 2018. We
also note the importance of providing assistance to
some Member States in fully implementing resolution
1540 (2004). Indonesia will work with the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and its
Group of Experts to identify areas in which we can
provide assistance.
Secondly, with regard to the Committee’s 2019
programme of work, we are pleased that it was adopted
early last month, which demonstrated the support
of the members of the Committee and their renewed
vigour and energy. We thank them for that. We also
welcome the identified activities, including those on
the margins of the General Assembly, to achieve wider
engagement on the part of Member States. We hope that
those activities can be planned carefully and in a timely
manner in order to be executed effectively and achieve
their objectives.
Thirdly, concerning the upcoming comprehensive
review, it is due by April 2021. Although it will not
coincide with Indonesia’s membership of the Council,
its preparation is required starting now. Indonesia
feels that the review is crucial to evaluating the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and serving
as the basis of discussion for the renewal of the mandate
of the 1540 Committee. We are ready to engage in the
preparations for the comprehensive review.
Let me conclude by recalling that it is always
imperative for us all to differentiate between the
existence of the 1540 regime and all existing treaties
related to the prohibition of weapons of mass
destruction. Both should work together in order to
address the current challenges. Lastly, I would be remiss
were I not to express Indonesia’s anticipation of closer
collaboration and its appreciation to the wise Chairs of
the Committee and Working Groups and members of
the Committee, as well as the Group of Experts, for
their excellent work thus far. We are looking forward to
a productive year ahead.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
I join others in commending Indonesia, through
Ambassador Djani and his team, in leading the

S/PV. 8487

Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). He can count on France’s support over the next
two years within the important framework of preparing
the comprehensive review of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).
The resolution is a pillar of the non-proliferation
architecture that underpins our entire collective
security system. Through its adoption in 2004, the
Security Council made a priority of the threat of the
proliferation and use of weapons of mass destruction,
particularly by non-State actors. Fifteen years later, as
2018 unfortunately demonstrated, the non-proliferation
regime continues to be put to the test. Other speakers
have already described in detail the threats facing it,
including the acknowledged risk of the use of chemical
weapons by any actor and the persistence of the illegal
nuclear and ballistic-missile programme in North Korea.
France is particularly concerned about the new
trend involving the proliferation of missiles, their
components and associated technologies to non-State
actors in the Middle East. Clearly, that poses a threat
to regional security and beyond and must stop. The
illicit transfer to non-State actors of missile production
capabilities enabling the delivery of weapons of mass
destruction is a matter of great concern. That is why the
raison d’être of the 1540 Committee is more relevant
now than ever.
The 1540 Committee is the architect of the action
taken by all States that contribute to the shared work
of meaningfully combating proliferation. I join others
in paying tribute to the Group of Experts that supports
it and whose analytical and awareness-raising work
remains essential. Accordingly, in order to contain
proliferation, we must ramp up our efforts now more
than ever. In that regard, I will focus on two main lines
of action.
First, at the national level, every one of our
countries must strive to coordinate meaningful efforts
to implement resolution 1540 (2004). We must ensure
the security of sensitive material and equipment in our
countries and strengthen export controls, in particular
with regard to the risks involving the use of emerging
technologies. I would also refer to the prevention and
suppression of proliferation financing. France enjoys
a solid and unique national legal framework in that
regard. My country is also particularly involved in
preventing the threat of terrorists acquiring sensitive
nuclear and radioactive materials. We support the work

19-0771115/16

S/PV.8487

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

of the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism
and the Group of Seven Global Partnership against the
Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction,
which we currently chair.
Secondly, as we are more effective together, we
must not focus our non-proliferation efforts in isolation.
We must give priority to strengthening cooperation
and assistance. France, which is coordinating the
Working Group on Assistance, attaches particular
importance to strengthening the regional dimension
of ensuring alignment between the needs and the
proposed assistance. The holding of regional seminars
is a successful format upon which we must build.
We welcome the work of the other actors mentioned,
including the European Union, but we must also do
more by focusing on dynamic and interactive exercises,
such as tabletop exercises, so as to enable participants
to learn concrete lessons and take them on board.
Lastly, in order to be effective, we must also consider
the scope of the challenges facing us by strengthening
synergies with other forums facing the same issues
outside the United Nations — such as the International

16/16

19/03/2019

Atomic Energy Agency, the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the World Customs
Organization and export control regimes — and the
various internal agencies of which the United Nations
is comprised, in particular the committees dealing
with terrorism.
At a time when the challenges to our security are
constantly on the rise, we must remain fully mobilized
to preserve and strengthen the non-proliferation regime.
Resolution 1540 (2004), the focus of today’s meeting,
makes a difference as it establishes both a legally
binding framework and concrete follow-up framework
to ensure the implementation of the obligations which
are incumbent upon all. France will remain fully
committed to fully supporting and contributing to the
work of the 1540 Committee.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

19-07711
