S/2019/498

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 June 2019
Original: English

Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 2448 (2018), the Security Council extended the mandate of the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINUSCA) until 15 November 2019 and requested me to report
on its implementation on a quarterly basis. The present report provides an update on
major developments in the Central African Republic since my report of 15 February
(S/2019/147).

II. Political situation
2.
The early stages of implementing the Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, signed in Bangui on 6 February
between the Government of the Central African Republic and the 14 main armed
groups dominated the reporting period. While there the security situation improved
in some areas, the humanitarian situation remained dire and ther e were isolated
incidents of egregious violence. Segments of society publicly criticized the Political
Agreement, pointing to concessions to signatory armed groups that continued to
perpetrate violence and other exactions against civilians.
Peace process
3.
While some progress was made in the implementation of the Political
Agreement, a lack of adherence to its security provisions presented challenges. On
25 February, the President, Faustin Archange Touadera, appointed his former Chief
of Staff, Firmin Ngrebada, as Prime Minister. On 3 March, the President and Prime
Minister formed a 36-member Government, which included 8 ministerial posts for
representatives of armed groups and 3 for opposition political parties. Many armed
groups alleged that the Government lacked inclusivity and called upon the guarantors
and facilitators of the Agreement to intervene pursuant to its article 34. The African
Union invited the Government and armed group representatives for consultations in
Addis Ababa from 18 to 20 March under the auspices of its Commissioner for Peace
and Security of the African Union, Smail Chergui, with the support of my Special
Representative and Head of MINUSCA, Mankeur Ndiaye, which resulted in a
consensus on the allocation of ministerial and other government posts.

19-09074 (E)

180619

*1909074*

S/2019/498

4.
On 22 March, President Touadera issued a decree forming a 39 -member
Government, including 35 ministers and 4 deputy ministers. A total of 25 posts were
allocated to persons aligned with the presidential majority, 13 to members of nin e
armed groups and 1 to the political opposition. Seven women received ministerial
positions, as did 12 Muslims.
5.
Armed group leaders were also appointed to key advisory posts in the
Presidency, the Prime Minister’s Cabinet and in prefectures and subprefectures. On
24 March, President Touadera issued a decree appointing, among others, Ali Darassa
of the Unité pour la paix en Centrafrique, Bi Sidi Souleymane (also known as Sidiki)
of Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation and Mahamat Alkatim of the Mouvement
patriotique pour la Centrafrique as advisers to the Prime Minister on the temporary
mixed security units foreseen under the Political Agreement.
6.
Throughout March, the national youth council protested against the inclusion of
armed groups in the Government while many university graduates remain
unemployed. On 26 March, the Ministry of Youth suspended all youth council
activities after its members had assaulted the Minister. On 2 April, a civil society
group demanded that the decrees appointing Mr. Darassa, Mr. Alkatim and Sidiki be
revoked given that they were either subject to international sanctions or were foreign
mercenaries. The group’s spokesperson was arrested on 18 April for instigating hate
and disturbing public order, a move highly criticized by the media and civil society.
He was released on 21 April.
7.
On 18 February, President Touadera established by decree the national and
prefectural level monitoring and implementation mechanisms of the Political
Agreement. To date, with MINUSCA support, 11 of 17 prefectural implementation
committees are functioning, comprising local authorities, women ’s associations, civil
society and armed group representatives to serve as dispute resolution, conflict
prevention and de-escalation mechanisms and to evaluate the implementation of the
Agreement. Ten technical security committees are functioning, with two prefectures
having an additional or subordinate committee to assist in monitoring.
8.
On 29 March, President Touadera issued decrees establishing the lega l
framework of the Unités spéciales mixtes de sécurité. These units will bring together
members of the national defence and security forces with eligible armed group
members who have disarmed and demobilized. They are intended to contribute to
security for transhumance corridors and mining sites. The operational concept
foresees the first phase of training and deployment beginning in June in Bouar and
Bambari before scaling up and moving to other prefectures in the centre and east of
the country. Effective deployment, however, will likely face significant logistic
challenges. In order to prepare for their rapid deployment, MINUSCA continues to
support the deployment of the defence and security forces to new areas. The African
Union, as a guarantor of the Political Agreement, is planning to deploy military
observers, with the assistance of the European Union, to monitor the units.
9.
The Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission Central African Republic
configuration visited Bangui from 13 to 15 February, with my Assistant SecretariesGeneral for Africa and for Peacebuilding Support, and members of the Commission
to mobilize support for implementing the Political Agreement, following which the
Peacebuilding Fund approved $14.8 million in support.
10. From 14 to 17 April, the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, my Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations and the European Union
Managing Director for Africa conducted a joint visit to the Central African Republic
to galvanize international support for the Political Agreement. The delegation met
representatives of the Government and civil society in Bangui and travelled with the
Prime Minister and diplomatic community to Bambari for the launch of the local
2/21

19-09074

S/2019/498

implementation and technical security committees for Ouaka prefecture and to
Bangassou for the launch of a peace caravan promoting the free movement of people
and goods between Bangassou and Bangui. They stressed the importance of having
all parties respect the cessation of hostilities and expe dite the establishment of the
Unités spéciales mixtes de sécurité as a confidence-building tool in the context of the
Agreement, and the need for tangible socioeconomic and other peace dividends for
the population, who should be engaged as stakeholders in the peace process.
11. On 17 April, the Government convened the International Support Group on the
Central African Republic in Bangui to mobilize international support for the
implementation of the Political Agreement, during which it presented 11 priorit ies,
including the cessation of hostilities, the operationalization of the monitoring and
implementation mechanisms, the establishment of the Unités spéciales mixtes de
sécurité and the disarmament and demobilization of armed groups. President
Touadera reaffirmed his commitment to the Agreement and urged armed groups to
adhere to their commitments. The International Support Group demanded an
immediate end to armed group violence against civilians. It called upon them to
participate constructively in implementing the Agreement, including by nominating
representatives for the implementation mechanisms and submitting lists of
combatants for disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and reintegration and for
the mixed security units. It also called upon the Gove rnment to create the conditions
for the voluntary, safe and dignified return of displaced persons and to improve the
participation of civil society, in particular women, in the implementation of the
Agreement. To facilitate coordinated international support, the Government was
encouraged to develop an implementation road map with a clear timetable.
12. The executive follow-up committee responsible for providing strategic direction
and oversight of the implementation of the Political Agreement held its first meeting
in Bangui, on 15 May, co-chaired by the Prime Minister and the Special Envoy of the
African Union for the Central African Republic and included the participation of the
President and my Special Representative, in addition to representatives of civ il
society and international partners. Two of the five armed groups in the committee
participated, specifically Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation and the Ngaissona wing
of the anti-balaka. Discussions focused on the status of implementing the Agreement
and ceasefire violations. It was agreed that a coordinated countrywide awareness raising campaign about the Agreement would be undertaken, with the involvement of
political parties, civil society, religious actors and armed groups. The second meeting
of the committee, joined by all armed group representatives, was held on 29 May,
during which members discussed continuing violations to the security provisions of
the Agreement and the need to advance the operationalization of the provisions on
transitional justice.
Political developments
13. On 29 April, the Prime Minister presented a government programme to the
National Assembly, which focused on peace, security and justice, economic recovery,
politics and good governance, social cohesion and humanitari an action. He also
highlighted measures taken by the government to implement the Political Agreement.
14. The National Assembly opened its first ordinary session on 1 March, focusing
on legislation related to the implementation of the Political Agreement, including
proposed bills on decentralization and a revised electoral code. On 7 March, the
Assembly elected its 14-member executive bureau, which will serve for one year.
Members of President Touadera’s governing coalition were elected to most core and
leadership positions. Only three women were elected, which does not conform with
the law on parity mandating a minimum 35 per cent representation of women in State
and private institutions for a transitional period of 10 years.
19-09074

3/21

S/2019/498

15. On 23 April, the National Assembly unanimously adopted the electoral code,
which significant, in that it establishes the legal framework for the presidential,
legislative, regional and municipal elections to be held in 2020 and 2021. Some
members of the Government and civil society criticized the bill for failing to ensure
the adequate representation of women in accordance with the law on parity. On
5 June, the Constitutional Court decided that the gender parity law was applicable to
the electoral code and returned it to the National Assembly, stipulating that the code
could not be promulgated until it complied with the Court ’s decisions.
16. The Government and the national elections authority endorsed the initial budget
estimate and timeline for the elections, with MINUSCA and Unit ed Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) support. On 5 April, the Prime Minister launched
resource mobilization efforts. Of the estimated $49 million required to fund the
elections, excluding operational and logistical support, the European Union pledged
$17 million, in addition to $3.5 million to promote women’s participation. The
Government earmarked $856,000 in 2019 for electoral preparations. During the
period, UNDP launched the process of establishing a basket fund for the elections.
The Government and international partners expressed concern about the limited scope
of the electoral support mandate of MINUSCA.
Local dialogue and reconciliation
17. During the reporting period, the Government established peace and
reconciliation committees in Bangassou, Bossangoa, Bouar, Kaga Bandoro, Bria,
Bambari and Paoua, with MINUSCA support. There are a total of 26 committees,
which advance local peace processes and will support the national reconciliation
campaign foreseen under the Political Agreement.
18. On 20 March, the Gambo and Pombolo communities in the Mbomou prefecture
signed a local reconciliation agreement following five months of dialogue facilitated
by MINUSCA. The signing ceremony marked the first meeting between the
communities since recurrent reprisal killings between the Unité pour la paix en
Centrafrique and anti-balaka associated militias in 2017. The signatories committed
themselves to promoting peaceful dialogue and free movement and to report any
violations to the Mbomou prefectural implementation committee.
19. On 23 March, representatives of Christian and Muslim communities of the
Castor and Yakite neighbourhoods in Bangui’s third district signed a reconciliation
agreement, committing themselves to ceasing all hostilities, forbidding the ca rrying
of firearms by civilians and supporting the voluntary, safe and dignified return of
displaced persons. The agreement followed several months of reconciliation efforts
led by women and youth leaders, with MINUSCA support, in response to cyclical
violence persisting since 2014. The process facilitated freedom of movement, a
gradual return of displaced persons and prevented security incidents from escalating.
The Bearex, Bibale and Fatima communities in the third district subsequently
launched similar processes.
20. On 2 March, the Unité pour la paix en Centrafrique and anti-balaka in Alindao
reached a local reconciliation agreement, with MINUSCA support. The Mission
facilitated the deployment of 60 Central African armed forces to the area to bolster
security and enhanced its own military and civilian presence.
21. The national committee on the prevention of genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity and discrimination organized peace forums in Bangui, Bambari,
Bangassou, Bossangoa, Berberati and Mobaye in March, supported by the Office of
the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide. The forums were aimed at raising
the awareness of local stakeholders against hate speech or incitement to violence.

4/21

19-09074

S/2019/498

III. Security situation
22. While the military confrontations that characterized the peak of the
transhumance period in late 2018 subsided during the reporting period, armed groups
signatory to the Political Agreement continued activities that violated its provisions,
specifically, violence against civilians, illegal taxation and obstruction of the
deployment of State institutions and security forces. Some armed groups attempted
to obtain further concessions in the peace process through violent means. Anti-balaka
factions, Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation, the Front démocratique du peuple
centrafricain, the Front populaire pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique, the
Mouvement patriotique pour la Centrafrique and the Unité pour la paix en
Centrafrique perpetrated the most egregious violations. Armed criminals continued to
pose a threat, while State security forces were involved in illegal taxation in several
prefectures.
23. In the west, the Front démocratique du peuple centrafricain blocked the
principal trade route from Bangui to Douala, Cameroon, on 3 March, in protest
against the composition of the new Government. Although the Front had lifted the
blockade on 26 March, it refused to return 11 government -owned vehicles that it had
confiscated. Following extensive negotiations, on 5 April, MI NUSCA conducted an
operation to retrieve the vehicles, during which it came under fire from the Front.
MINUSCA returned fire, killing five Front fighters and recovering the vehicles. Since
the operation, the Front has continued to attack joint MINUSCA and Central African
armed forces patrols, civilian trucks and humanitarian convoys along this road,
although MINUSCA was able to ensure the continued flow of commercial and civilian
traffic.
24. Elsewhere in the west, Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation violently targeted
State institutions, in addition to protesting against the composition of the Government
and attacking police checkpoints and stations in the Ouham-Pendé and
Nana-Mambéré prefectures. On 19 March, Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation
assassinated the mayor of Koundé, triggering the displacement of civilians.
25. On 21 May, Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation fighters killed 42 persons,
mostly civilians, in several villages near Paoua, purportedly in reprisal for the killing
of 1 Fulani and cattle theft on 15 May. The Government and the international
community strongly condemned the attacks and demanded that Retour, réclamation
et réhabilitation leader Sidiki hand over the perpetrators. Following political
engagement by the guarantors and facilitators of the Political Agreement, as well as
military pressure from MINUSCA, on 24 May, Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation
issued a communiqué in which it confirmed the involvement of its combatants, three
of whom were handed over to the Government on 23 May for judicial action. Retour,
réclamation et réhabilitation publicly condemned the attack, reiterated its
commitment to peace and reconciliation and expressed its condolences to the
bereaved. It also withdrew from its bases in Bohong, Bokaya and Letele; some
combatants remained in civilian clothes.
26. The security situation in Ouaka and Basse Kotto prefectures remained unstable
owing to the reinforcements, movements and violent action by the Unité pour la paix
en Centrafrique and non-signatory anti-balaka factions, although improvements were
noted in Alindao and Bambari. The Front populaire pour la renaissance de la
Centrafrique and the Mouvement patriotique pour la Centrafrique continued to
reinforce positions and occupy schools around Bakala in Ouaka prefecture that had
begun in mid-December 2018, contributing to tensions over control of the local
mining site. Non-signatory local anti-balaka combatants maintained their presence
west of Bakala and frequently perpetrated criminal acts, including a ttacks on

19-09074

5/21

S/2019/498

commercial trucks. MINUSCA deployed to Bakala, resulting in improved local
security.
27. In Haute-Kotto, Vakaga and Bamingui-Bangoran prefectures, the Front
populaire pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique continued to illegally detain civilians.
In Birao, the Front closed the gendarmerie station on 3 March, which recently
reopened. On 18 May, following initial resistance by the Front, 108 Central African
armed forces were deployed from Dékoa to Kaga Bandoro. (State security forces were
last present in Kaga Bandoro five years ago.) The deployment generated resistance
among some factions of the Front, revealing fractures within the group.
28. In Bria, the situation remained tense owing to violent acts against civilians, the
illegal taxation of humanitarian aid, Front populaire pour la renaissance de la
Centrafrique opposition to State authority and the arrival of some 150 anti -balaka in
April. In February and March, the Front detained 46 people at checkpoints between
Bria and Ippy, and in Bria at least 7 were reportedly executed. On 9 March, the Front
kidnapped four international staff of a MINUSCA contractor in Bria; they were
released on 9 March following MINUSCA intervention. On 9 May, residents of a
camp for internally displaced persons attacked and injured two peacekeepers during
a MINUSCA operation on 9 May to remove anti-balaka from the camp.
29. In the northwest, in Batangafo, criminality increased between Bouca and Lady,
and Markounda and Boguila. On 2 April, the Front populaire pour la renaissance de
la Centrafrique and the Mouvement patriotique pour la Centrafrique murdered a
civilian on the Batangafo to Bouca road, following which anti -balaka fighters
forcefully closed the market in Batangafo. Since February, unidentified individuals
have carried out several armed assaults and robberies on the road linking Boguila and
Bodjomo, impeding the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
30. In the southwest, the Government of South Sudan closed its border with the
Central African Republic on 20 February after killings on the Obo-Bambouti road,
negatively affecting cross-border trade and humanitarian access. The prefect of
Haut-Mbomou engaged his counterpart in South Sudan, with support from
MINUSCA, and the border reopened on 18 April.
31. Bangui remained relatively stable, notwithstanding demonstrations protesting
against the composition of the Government and by civil servants over payment
arrears. On 1 June, criminal gang leader Animeri Matar, alias “Force”, who was at the
helm of criminal activity in the PK5 neighbourhood, died in Bangui from natural
causes. Overall security in PK5 has improved since February, given the lack of
significant intercommunal violence due to successful reconciliation efforts.

IV. Regional engagement
32. Efforts were made to strengthen support from countries of the subregion and the
Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS) as guarantors of the
Political Agreement and to strengthen bilateral relations between the Central African
Republic and its neighbours. From 2 to 5 April, the Secretary-General of ECCAS and
my Special Representative for Central Africa and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa conducted a joint mission to the Central African
Republic to galvanize regional support for the Agreement, including the
re-establishment of bilateral mixed commissions.
33. After an initial meeting held in Gore, Chad, on 4 March, Chadian and Central
African authorities met in Paoua on 6 April to discuss joint border and transhumance
management. They agreed to partially reopen the border in Bembere, closed since
2015, and to create mechanisms to improve security collaboration and reduce
6/21

19-09074

S/2019/498

transhumance-related violence, including by accelerating the deployment of Central
African armed and internal security forces and judicial system officials to the border.
34. The twelfth session of the Cameroon-Central African Republic mixed
commission on cooperation was held in Bangui on 6 and 7 May. The last such meeting
had been held in 2010. Discussions focused on cross-border security and cooperation
in areas such as trade, cultural exchanges and technology.

V. Humanitarian situation
35. The dire humanitarian situation did not improve during the reporting period.
Humanitarian access continued to be impeded by several factors, including poor
infrastructure, insecurity and obstruction by parties. Some 2.9 million people, of
whom half are children, were in need of humanitarian assistance and protection, while
2.1 million people faced food insecurity. One child in three suffered from severe
malnutrition and half the population lacked access to safe drinking water.
36. One quarter of the Central African population is displaced. As at 30 April, there
were nearly 612,000 internally displaced persons and close to 5 93,000 refugees
registered in neighbouring countries. Conditions for sustainable returns, even when
facilitated by the Government or the international community, remained precarious
owing to security and protection challenges, including disputes over land and property
and lack of access to basic services and legal support. Even in relatively stable areas,
protection concerns represent a major obstacle to durable solutions. Many returnees
find their homes looted, destroyed or occupied. In this context, force d displacement
will continue as long as its root causes are not addressed and if the resilience of
affected communities is not strengthened.
37. Insecurity, armed group fragmentation, a weak State presence and poor
infrastructure posed severe access challenges for civilians and humanitarian workers.
Areas of acute need were inaccessible, in particular in the south-east. Custom
clearance delays, the closure of the border with South Sudan and the blockage of
supply routes by armed groups hampered the timely supply of life-saving items.
38. Three humanitarian workers were killed in 2019. A total of 90 incidents
affecting humanitarian workers, premises and assets have been recorded to date in
2019. The Central African Republic is ranked as one of the most dange rous countries
for humanitarian workers.
39. Protection of civilians and accountability to the affected populations are at the
core of the 2019 humanitarian response plan, which requires $430.7 million to
provide critical assistance to 1.7 million extremely vulnerable people. As at 1 June, it
was 28.6 per cent funded, far short of requirements, given that humanitarian
assistance is the primary social safety net for the population.

VI. Protection of civilians
40. MINUSCA continued efforts to advance the protection of civilians, in line with
Security Council resolution 2448 (2018), my Action for Peacekeeping agenda, the
Mission’s political strategy and the recommendations of Brigadier General (Ret ired)
Amoussou. Through its protection working group, MINUSCA coordinated
information-sharing, analysis and response to protection threats.
41. The Political Agreement provided an additional political tool to advance the
MINUSCA protection mandate and strengthen preventive efforts. The follow-up and
monitoring mechanisms provide platforms for local dialogue, conflict resolution and
19-09074

7/21

S/2019/498

prevention. These complement the integrated approach of MINUSCA to protect
civilians, combining physical protection with prevention, dialogue and local peace
processes. MINUSCA military operations reduced threats posed by armed groups to
civilians in several areas, including in the Basse Kotto, Nana -Mambéré and Ouaka
prefectures.
42. MINUSCA continued to deploy, on a rotational basis, civilian surge teams to
Alindao and Batangafo, where the Mission does not have a permanent civilian
presence, to improve outreach and early warning and to facilitate community -based
prevention strategies. MINUSCA deployed joint protection teams to as sess protection
threats in areas near Bangassou, Bria, Ndélé and Paoua.
43. MINUSCA has 78 community liaison assistants deployed in all 16 prefectures
across 38 military bases, who collaborate with the Mission force and Central African
armed and internal security forces to facilitate rapid responses to threats to civilians.
The Mission’s community alert network, which is an early warning and prevention
mechanism, facilitated information collection on potential protection threats through
a network of 2,267 civilian focal points.
44. Two training-of-trainer exercises were conducted for MINUSCA personnel to
improve efforts to protect civilians, promote understanding of the Mission ’s
protection mandate and raise awareness of the obligations of uniformed person nel.
The Mission also established a community outreach project through its field offices
to raise public awareness of the protection mandate.

VII. Extension of State authority and the rule of law
Extension of State authority
45. The Government continued to face challenges in extending its authority beyond
the capital owing to a lack of infrastructure, financial challenges and insecurity. was
Armed groups continued to obstruct the deployment of State institutions and
personnel, in violation of the Political Agreement.
46. In February, a national mapping of civil servants led by the Office of the Prime
Minister, with MINUSCA and UNDP support, revealed that 3,418 civil servants had
been active outside Bangui between September 2018 and January 2019, of whom
72 per cent worked for the Ministries of Health and Education. The government target
is to deploy 6,500 State agents by 2021. MINUSCA and UNDP continued to support
the Government in developing and implementing deployment plans for civil servants,
including by strengthening an electronic platform to facilitate the tracking of civil
servants and conducting inspection missions. The Government continued to settle
civil servant salary backlogs dating back to 2002.
47. While there continued to be inadequate investment in essential State services,
projects to rehabilitate State infrastructure in the context of the national recovery and
peacebuilding plan accelerated with the completion of 6 prefectural offices,
23 subprefectural offices and 4 mayoral offices. MINUSCA is implementing 31 quick
impact projects that are, among other things, rehabilitating gendarmeries in Baoro
and Damara, the mayor’s office in Besson and the third district commissariat and the
Boeing district police posts in Bangui.
Security sector reform
48. The Government, with MINUSCA support, is conducting a nationwide
awareness-raising campaign on the military justice code and advocacy action to
increase adherence among uniformed personnel to legal norms and human rights

8/21

19-09074

S/2019/498

standards. MINUSCA, with the African Security Sector Network, trained civil society
organizations on security sector reform to increase civil society awareness and
oversight.
National armed and internal security forces
49. There was no significant change in the deployment of Central African armed
forces during the reporting period. As at 1 June, 1,438 of 7,087 had been deployed in
16 locations outside Bangui. A total 1,071 forces trained by the European Union
Military Training Mission and Russian military experts and de ployed in seven
locations work alongside MINUSCA. As at 1 June, 1,024 of 3,686 internal security
forces had been deployed outside Bangui: 735 gendarmes, including 25 women, and
316 police officers, including 13 women.
50. Some Central African armed forces units outside Bangui have experienced
logistical challenges. In Obo, Haut-Mbomou prefecture, delays in rotation of more
than nine months resulted in, among other things, demonstrations, strikes and illegal
taxation. Joint operations with MINUSCA in Nana-Mambéré, Ouham-Pendé and
Mbomou prefectures offset in part operational challenges. MINUSCA provided
logistical support, including in casualty evacuation and fuel supply, as well as initial
support to establish weapons and ammunition storage kits in Bambari and Bangassou.
51. The Government, with MINUSCA support, continued to monitor, investigate
and sanction misconduct within the Central African armed and internal security
forces, resulting in disciplinary action against several Central African security
personnel due to misconduct in Bangassou and Obo.
52. The selection of 1,023 new Central African armed forces recruits, following the
launch of a nationwide recruitment campaign in November 2018, was completed on
27 May with MINUSCA assistance. The training of the new recruits began on 6 June.
Preparations for the 2019 recruitment process of 1,000 police and gendarmerie
officers are ongoing, with MINUSCA support.
53. On 16 April, the European Union Military Training Mission completed the
training of the fifth battalion of Central African armed forces, bringing the total
number of trained troops to 3,900, including those who received operational,
educational and specialized training. On 3 May, a number of Central African armed
forces, part of a special forces unit, graduated from specialist training given by
Russian trainers.
54. During the reporting period, the Mine Action Service supported the
rehabilitation of nine weapons and ammunition storage facilities for the gendarmerie
on the road linking Bangui and Douala and provided specialized training to 138
personnel on weapons and ammunition storage management.
Disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and reintegration
55. Modest progress was made during the reporting period in implementing the
national disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and reintegration programme. As
at 1 June, the signatory armed groups had, in accordance with the Political Agreement,
submitted lists of eligible members, but those lists were incomplete. The national
executive unit of the programme supported by MINUSCA resumed its disarmament
and demobilization operations in Paoua on 28 May.
56. The Government appointed anti-balaka leader Maxime Mokom to the new
position of minister in charge of the national disarmament, demobilizat ion,
repatriation and reintegration programme. Meetings of the consultative follow -up
committee of the programme were held in April and May.

19-09074

9/21

S/2019/498

57. MINUSCA, with the International Organization for Migration and the United
Nations Office for Project Services, continued to implement community violence
reduction programmes in eight locations. A total of 7,509 beneficiaries, including
1,853 women, participated, and 226 weapons of war, 5,622 artisanal weapons, 167
unexploded ordnance and 14,124 rounds of small arms ammunition were collected.
In April, the Government endorsed the national community violence reduction
strategy.
Justice and the rule of law
58. National justice and rule of law capacity remained limited. A total of 18 of 27
first instance and appellate courts were operating during the reporting period,
including 16 outside Bangui.
59. The Special Criminal Court, with support from MINUSCA and UNDP, initiated
its first investigations, evaluated and strengthened its Registry and enhanced its
capacity to protect victims and witnesses. The Court also conducted a nationwide
campaign to raise the awareness of the population about its mandate and progress
since its establishment.
60. From 1 February to 1 June, MINUSCA arrested 65 individuals suspected of
committing crimes, including murder, kidnapping, armed robbery, torture, looting and
illegal detention, using its urgent temporary measures.
61. On 15 March, 150 new civilian prison officers began training in Bangui, which
will bring the total to 250 officers. As part of the demilitarization of the prison service,
responsibility for prisoner health services was transferred from the defence to justice
ministry. The population at the Ngaragba prison in Bangui reached 1,069, more than
quadruple its 260-person capacity, posing serious security, health and other risks.
Detention facilities rehabilitated by MINUSCA in Bangassou and Paoua reopened in
March.

VIII. Human rights and the fight against impunity
62. Human rights abuses and violations of international humanitarian law decreased
further during the first three months of the reporting period owing to the lack of major
armed confrontations since the end of the transhumance period and the beginning of
the rainy season, coupled with the signing of the Political Agreement. From
6 February to 1 June, MINUSCA recorded 315 violations of international human
rights law and breaches of international humanitarian law affecting at least
566 victims. Those figures represent a 26.9 per cent decrease in the number of
incidents and a 35 per cent decrease in the number of victims compared with the
previous reporting period. Signatory armed groups, namely, Retour, réclamation et
réhabilitation, the Front populaire pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique, the Unité
pour la paix en Centrafrique and anti-balaka, continued to commit grave human rights
abuses and breaches of international humanitarian law, including violence against
civilians and civilian infrastructure, restrictions on the freedom of movement and
illegal detention. Transhumance movements continued to represent a major source of
conflict-related violations of human rights.
Transitional justice
63. On 22 March, the Government, with MINUSCA support, organized a workshop
for 100 representatives of civil society organizations, State institutions, victims’
associations and political parties to facilitate popular consultations on the legislative
framework of the truth, justice, reparations and reconciliation commission. Pursuant

10/21

19-09074

S/2019/498

to the Political Agreement, the inclusive commission, comprising representatives of
signatory armed groups and national authorities, responsible for proposing
recommendations to the truth, justice, reparations and reconciliation commission, was
established pursuant to a presidential decree on 8 February and held its inaugural
meeting on 28 May.
64. The National Human Rights Commission, with MINUSCA support, developed
its standard operating procedures, communication strategy and resource mobilization
plan amounting to $7,306,000.
Conflict-related sexual violence
65. Conflict-related sexual violence perpetrated by armed groups continued to be
reported, with most violations attributed to ex-Séléka groups in the Ouham Pendé and
Nana Grébizi prefectures. Widespread rape was reported in the Kaga Ba ndoro
subprefecture and along transhumance corridors, areas often inaccessible to
investigation teams.
66. From 1 February to 1 June, MINUSCA recorded 68 cases of conflict -related
sexual violence. A victims’ association in Bangui referred 14 of those cases, of which
11 dated back to 2013. During the reporting period, MINUSCA recorded judicial
investigations of 62 cases of conflict-related sexual violence affecting 153 victims.
Women’s organizations with small scale-projects supported by MINUSCA partnered
with the Mission in monitoring sexual- and gender-based violence and raising the
awareness of communities in reporting violations. MINUSCA organized eight
awareness-raising events for 1,221 persons, including 559 women, in Bangassou,
Birao, Bossangoa, Bouar, Grevai, Kaga-Bandoro, Markounda, Obo, Ouanda and
Paoua.
67. The Mission selected two partner organizations in Bangui to provide temporary
physical protection for victims. On 26 March, MINUSCA trained Mouvement
patriotique pour la Centrafrique, Front populaire pour la renaissance de la
Centrafrique and anti-balaka combatants in Batangafo, Ouham prefecture, on respect
for international human rights law and the prevention of conflict -related sexual
violence.
Children and armed conflict
68. In accordance with the Political Agreement, signatory ex-Séléka groups in Kaga
Bandoro presented lists of identified associated children to the national task force on
monitoring and reporting. In March, 101 children (45 boys and 56 girls) were
separated from the Front populaire pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique (34), the
Mouvement patriotique pour la Centrafrique (35) and Séléka rénové pour la paix et
la justice (32) and handed to partners of the United Nations Children ’s Fund
(UNICEF). In addition, 72 self-demobilized children from anti-balaka associated
militias (38 boys and 34 girls) in Kémo prefecture were placed in reintegration
programmes.

IX. Economic situation
69. The macroeconomic situation continued to be negatively affected by insecurity,
limited infrastructure and rising oil prices. That notwithstanding, the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) estimated that economic growth was 4 per cent in 2018 and
was projected to increase to 4.5 per cent in 2019. An IMF delegation in May urged
the Government to eliminate taxes and fees with no economic justification in order to

19-09074

11/21

S/2019/498

facilitate private sector development and to undertake measures aimed at improving
public expenditure management to promote transparency and good governance.
70. Economic performance in the first quarter of 2019 was affected by the forced
closure of the primary supply route linking Bangui and Douala. Inflation increased
from 1.9 per cent in February to 2.1 per cent in March; food prices were also affected.
There was a decrease of some 50 per cent in public revenue in March, estimated at
$8.52 million of the $17 million figure recorded in March 2018.
71. The implementation of the national recovery and peacebuilding plan accelerated
with the disbursement of $1.58 billion as at 1 June, bringing t he financial delivery
rate to 60.8 per cent, an increase of 7 per cent since 31 December 2018. Efforts were
made to strengthen strategic coordination between the plan and the implementation
of the Political Agreement.

X. United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic
Military component
72. As at 1 June, the strength of the MINUSCA military component stood at 11,595
of an authorized strength of 11,650 personnel. It comprises 11 infantry battalions,
2 high-readiness battalions, 1 special forces company, 1 quick reaction force company
and enabling units, specifically 1 military police company, 5 engineering companies,
1 heavy transport company, 3 level II hospitals, 1 level I plus forward surgery module
and 3 helicopter units, including 1 attack helicopter unit. There are 309 staff officers
and 172 military observers. Women represent 3.4 per cent of the military component.
73. The attack helicopter unit, which became operational again at the end of
February, conducted numerous missions, such as supporting robust operations,
facilitating flexible and mobile posture and providing air support and intelligence
reconnaissance. Recent operations confirmed the requirement for mechanized
companies for improved force protection.
Police component
74. As at 1 June, the strength of the MINUSCA police component stood at 2,045 of
a total authorized strength of 2,080, including 368 individual police officers and 1,677
personnel deployed within 10 formed police units and 2 police support units. Two
police support units and six formed police units are operating in Bangui under the
joint task force. Formed police units are deployed to Bambari, Bouar, Bria and Kaga
Bandoro. Women represent 9.28 per cent of the police compo nent.
Civilian component
75. As at 1 June, 1,367 civilian personnel, including 195 United Nations Volunteers,
were serving with MINUSCA, representing 90 per cent of 1,524 authorized positions.
A total of 26 per cent of civilian personnel are women.
Status-of-forces agreement
76. During the reporting period, there were no notable violations of the status -offorces agreement, owing to closer cooperation and exchanges between the
Government and MINUSCA.

12/21

19-09074

S/2019/498

Safety and security of United Nations personnel
77. From 1 February to 1 June, 86 incidents involving the United Nations were
recorded, including 23 attacks by armed groups and criminal gangs targeting
personnel, premises, equipment and convoys. Seven incidents of death threats and
harassment of United Nations civilian personnel attributed to armed and criminal
groups were reported, in addition to three incidents in which United Nations
personnel were detained by internal security forces. A total of 33 civilian and military
personnel were injured, 8 in hostile attacks by armed groups and 25 in traffic
accidents. Two military personnel were struck and killed by lightning and two military
personnel and one civilian perished owing to illness. In addition, the United Nations
system was targeted in 14 other cases, but the consequences were of minor impact.
Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
78. From 1 February to 1 June, 9 allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse
involving MINUSCA personnel were reported, bringing to 10 the total allegations
recorded in 2019. Four of the allegations relate to incidents that allegedly occurred in
2019 and six from previous years. Eight of the new allegations involving personnel
from military contingents have been referred to the troop -contributing countries
concerned for investigation, while one allegation involving a member of the police is
being investigated by the United Nations. Six paternity and child support claims are
associated with the new allegations.
79. MINUSCA continued efforts to implement my zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse by strengthening its prevention strategy, including
comprehensive training and awareness-raising campaigns. The Mission strengthened
early warning and reporting mechanisms at the community level with the expansion
and capacity-building of community-based complaints mechanisms and through
various outreach efforts. MINUSCA finalized the implementation of its
comprehensive sexual exploitation and abuse risk management framework. The
Mission and the United Nations country team coordinated efforts to address sexual
exploitation and abuse through quarterly task force meetings and the use of the
incident reporting form designed by the Office of the Special Coordinator on
Improving the United Nations Response to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse to ensure
consistency in information collection and reporting by United Nations entities.
80. MINUSCA, UNICEF, the United Nations Population Fund and partners
continued to refer identified victims of sexual exploitation and abuse for assistance
and to monitor their situation and needs. The International Rescue Committee is
implementing a project funded by the trust fund in support of victims of sexual
exploitation and abuse, established in 2016 and aimed at pr oviding medical and
psychosocial assistance, as well as awareness-raising, within communities.
Support considerations
81. MINUSCA improved its environmental performance and reduced its
environmental footprint by acquiring incinerators for solid waste management. The
Mission supported Bangui municipality in addressing subsurface oxidation at the
Kolongo landfill. MINUSCA continued to increase its use of renewable energy by
installing photovoltaic systems and conducting awareness-raising campaigns to
reduce emissions. It also continued to improve its water consumption and wastewater
management by using recycled water and installing 39 of 41 planned wastewater
treatment facilities.

19-09074

13/21

S/2019/498

Performance optimization
82. MINUSCA continued to implement various pilot initiatives to improve its
performance and enhance its effectiveness, in line with my Action for Peacekeeping
initiative and the recommendations of Brigadier General (Retired) Amoussou on the
protection of civilians and of Lieutenant General (Retired) dos Santos Cruz to reduce
peacekeeper fatalities and other reviews. For example, following investigations into
violence against civilians in Alindao in November 2018, measures are under way with
the troop-contributing country concerned to improve performa nce and enhance the
protection capacity of MINUSCA in the area. Some of these troops are being reduced
to generate another helicopter unit and quick reaction force. In addition, the Mission
closed two temporary operating bases in the east and centre of the country, while two
were opened in the west. More frequent patrols were undertaken in areas where
temporary operating bases were closed. The average joint monthly patrols with the
Central African armed forces increased by more than 60 per cent during the r eporting
period.
83. MINUSCA completed 20 per cent of the first pilot phase of the comprehensive
performance assessment system and trained 160 staff. MINUSCA conducted a
Mission-wide stress test in March to build on previous tabletop exercises to enhance
effectiveness for medical and casualty evacuation and crisis management. It continues
to pilot the “UNITE Aware” platform to support decision-making, operational
coordination and crisis management.
Financial aspects
84. The General Assembly, by its resolution 72/290, appropriated the amount of
$930.2 million for the maintenance of MINUSCA for the period from 1 July 2018 to
30 June 2019. As at 31 May 2019, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special
Account to MINUSCA amounted to $123.5 million. The total outstanding assessed
contributions for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to
$1,539.7 million. Reimbursement of troop and formed police costs has been made for
the period up to 31 January 2019, while reimbursement of the costs of contingent owned equipment has been made for the period up to 31 December 2018, in
accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

XI. Observations
85. With the signing of the Political Agreement between the Government and
14 armed groups, the Central African Republic has a historic opportunity, which I call
upon Central Africans to collectively seize, in a spirit of national ownership and
national pride. For far too long, the country has been crippled by p ersistent and
pervasive violence, undermining the growth of its institutions, devastating and
dividing communities and inhibiting the legitimate aspirations of generations of its
citizens. The road towards overcoming this history will be long and often bes et by
setbacks. Nevertheless, only by fully committing themselves to implementing the
Agreement may the people of the Central African Republic stay on a path towards
durable peace.
86. I therefore welcome the tentative but important progress made in the in itial four
months since the Political Agreement was signed. I remain, however, deeply
concerned by persistent violence committed by armed groups. In signing the
Agreement, they committed themselves to immediately renouncing violence as a
means of making any political, social or economic claim. I strongly condemn attacks
against civilians, peacekeepers and humanitarian workers, some of which may
constitute war crimes. There is no justification for such attacks, holding the economy
14/21

19-09074

S/2019/498

of the country hostage, obstructing the deployment of State officials, illegally taxing
civilians or destroying or occupying civilian infrastructure. I am deeply saddened by
the massacre of dozens of unarmed civilians in villages near Paoua in May. I welcome
efforts by the authorities, with MINUSCA support, to swiftly investigate those attacks
and prosecute alleged perpetrators.
87. Such acts cannot be tolerated by the international community, especially in the
aftermath of the Political Agreement and the establishment of an inclusiv e
Government. I appeal to other guarantors and facilitators of the Agreement, including
neighbouring countries, to use their influence to enhance adherence by armed groups
to their commitments. Continued political dialogue, proactive, timely engagement of
the African Union as a guarantor and robust measures to protect civilians and sanction
and bring to justice those responsible for such grave violations are necessary. The
United Nations, including MINUSCA, will spare no effort to support the national
authorities in protecting civilians and implementing the Agreement.
88. President Touadera has demonstrated commendable leadership through his
steadfast commitment to dialogue and his political will to seek compromise in pursuit
of peace, while an impatient public grows more vocal in its criticism of authorities
for making concessions to armed groups without clear reciprocity and in the face of
continued abuses against the population. I welcome the proactive and timely action
of the Government to adhere to its commitments under the Political Agreement,
including establishing various follow-up and monitoring mechanisms at the national
and prefectural levels. They provide essential platforms inclusive of civil society to
prevent conflict, de-escalate tension and build trust among former enemies, thereby
enabling a more protective environment for the population, State officials and
humanitarian workers. I encourage the Government to continue to demonstrate that it
can serve the people by working together constructively, with a view to ending
violence, neglect, marginalization and isolation affecting too many communities,
especially outside Bangui.
89. I commend the signatory armed groups for nominating representatives to the
national follow-up mechanisms and several of the prefectural bodies. I call upon them
to participate fully in these mechanisms, especially at the prefectural level, where the
need to reduce violence is most urgent. I also call upon the signatory armed groups
to submit, in accordance with the Political Agreement, the remaining lists of their
combatants eligible for the national disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and
reintegration programme, which should include members who will integrate into the
mixed security units. Progress in deploying these units and in the programme is most
urgent to reduce violence and increase confidence among communities and among
the national security forces and armed groups. The contribution of partners, including
guarantors and facilitators of the Agreement, are essential for the Agreement’s
follow-up and security mechanisms to fulfil their envisaged roles. I urge all partners
to consider enhancing their generous support.
90. I welcome efforts being made to expedite the implementation of the Unités
spéciales mixtes de sécurité to send a strong signal about the positive impact of the
Political Agreement, including for security along transhumance corridors and at
mining sites. I note the Government’s approach that all elements in those units should
be subject to disarmament and demobilization and human rights vetting. I welcome
the important support already committed by partners to accelerate their formation,
deployment and subsequent scale-up and adjustment, as appropriate. It will be
important to continue efforts to move forward with the national disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration programme, which provides armed
group members with socioeconomic benefits or opportunities to integrate into the
national defence and security forces.

19-09074

15/21

S/2019/498

91. The people of the Central African Republic are not bystanders to the peace
process and should be engaged as full stakeholders in its implementation. The
credibility of the Political Agreement rests on its full national ownership. Every effort
must be made to enhance popular understanding of the Agreement and to seek
feedback on its implementation from all segments of society. I welcome the priority
placed by the Government and its partners on conducting a nationwide awareness raising campaign, involving civil society and armed groups, notwithstanding practical
challenges in a vast country with weak communications and road infrastructure.
92. I also welcome plans to reinforce local peace and reconciliation committees as
part of broader nationwide reconciliation efforts. Progress in local peace processes
provides essential foundations for the success of the Political Agreement by helping
to overcome intercommunal tensions. The Gambo and Pombolo communities in
Mbomou prefecture and the Yakite and Castor communities in Ba ngui are to be
congratulated for choosing to take destiny in their own hands, working together to
turn the page from cyclical conflict that has endured for far too long. I also welcome
the role of women as essential agents of peace. Other communities shoul d benefit
from these positive examples by initiating their own reconciliation efforts, which the
United Nations will support. I am hopeful that such local peace processes can also
help to contain the activities of non-signatory armed groups and militias.
93. Sustaining peace in the country will require rapid and significant investment to
rectify socioeconomic deprivation and the physical isolation of inaccessible
communities. The absence of road networks and other critical infrastructure has a
serious impact on the ability of the State to deliver basic social services, of
humanitarian actors to deliver critical assistance and of MINUSCA to protect
civilians. There is a need for a transformation of the relationship between State and
society, which can be achieved only by building public trust that the State and its
institutions exist in service of the citizenry. Tangible peace dividends must therefore
be realized as soon as possible. It is my strong view that mending the frayed social
fabric must begin with efforts to end the historic marginalization of large segments of
society, including by expediting infrastructure and other development projects,
prioritizing the most remote and conflict-affected areas. The Political Agreement puts
significant emphasis on recovery and development programmes, alongside political
reforms and security measures. I therefore welcome ongoing efforts to strategically
align the implementation of the Agreement with the national recovery and
peacebuilding plan, which must be accelerated. I urge partners to continue their active
engagement and support.
94. I remain alarmed by the humanitarian situation. The persistence of acute needs
is a human tragedy. It hinders the prospects for sustainable peace, given that people
whose most basic needs are unmet are often limited in their capacity to build peace
in their communities and are more easily exploited or manipulated. I am also deeply
concerned by the high number of displaced Central Africans and by the limited
progress made in improving the conditions for their return in safety and dignity. I
appeal to partners to urgently contribute to the humanitarian response plan.
95. The people of the Central African Republic have long recognized that peace
cannot exist in the absence of justice and reconciliation. I am therefore encouraged
by the launch of popular consultations on the future truth, justice, reparations and
reconciliation commission, as called for at the Bangui Forum on National
Reconciliation, which will ensure that its work is aligned with the aspirations and
needs of the victims of armed conflict. I also welcome the launch of the inclusive
commission. At the same time, Central Africans demand and deserve an end to
impunity, not only for the atrocities of the past, but also for the dai ly crimes that
continue to affect their lives, livelihoods and communities, trapping them in a cycle
of poverty and fear. Continued efforts are required to bolster the work of the national
16/21

19-09074

S/2019/498

justice sector and the Special Criminal Court, which are central to restoring the rule
of law, an essential foundation for the societal and institutional trust required for
sustainable peace.
96. I welcome the recruitment under way for establishing a defence and security
sector that is fully national in character and well suited to provide security and uphold
the rule of law. I call for a similar approach for improving the representativeness of
the civil service, as called for under the Political Agreement. I commend the
Government for its efforts to deploy national defence and security forces outside
Bangui and into conflict-affected areas. National forces, including those working
alongside MINUSCA, have demonstrated their effectiveness and professionalism in
many operations. I also commend the Government for taking discip linary action
against units that fail in their core obligation to protect the human rights of all Central
Africans. I also appreciate the coordinated and sustained support provided by all
partners, whose continued engagement is essential for helping the na tional defence
and security forces to develop the capacity needed to deploy and sustain operations
throughout the country.
97. I would encourage the National Assembly to expedite the political reforms
envisaged under the Political Agreement, including laws on decentralization, on the
status of former Heads of State and on political parties. The new legislation could
help to positively transform the political dispensation of the country, notwithstanding
challenges in implementation. The decentralization legislation provides an
unprecedented opportunity to enhance the provision of basic services and
development. Given that the State will need to develop new forms of localized
governance and representation for the first time in its history, the process will req uire
constant dialogue and considerable support from partners. The legislation is
nevertheless essential for achieving the objectives of the political representation and
self-determination of communities and for conducting regional and local elections.
98. Voter registration for the presidential and legislative elections to be conducted
in late 2020 and early 2021 will begin in six months. Those elections will mark a
major milestone. I commend the national authorities for initiating their preparations.
I encourage all stakeholders to engage in the political process in a transparent manner,
with a focus on dialogue. I would stress the importance of an inclusive electoral
process as an essential part of the political process, a driver of the extension of Stat e
authority and the effective operationalization of security arrangements of the Political
Agreement, all of which are inherent requirements of free, fair and peaceful elections.
Conducting the elections will represent a major challenge, requiring consider able
support. I welcome the commitments already made by partners and appeal for
additional assistance, including in the context of the forthcoming UNDP basket fund.
Taking into account the concerns of the national authorities and many partners, I
intend to provide recommendations on the scope of the MINUSCA electoral mandate
in my next report.
99. I welcome the holding of the first joint commission between the Central African
Republic and Cameroon since 2010 and encourage the Central African Republic and
other neighbouring countries to do the same.
100. In conclusion, I would like to welcome my new Special Representative for the
Central African Republic and Head of MINUSCA, Mankeur Ndiaye, who assumed
his responsibilities in March, and express my sincere appreciation to Parfait OnangaAnyanga, who served admirably as my Special Representative for nearly four years.
I am profoundly grateful to all United Nations civilian and uniformed personnel for
their commitment to peace and stability in the Central African Republic. My
appreciation also goes to the troop- and police-contributing countries, donor
countries, regional and multilateral organizations, and non-governmental
19-09074

17/21

S/2019/498

organizations, and to my Special Representative for Central Africa and Head of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, François Louncény Fall. I wish to
pay special tribute to the essential role played by the African Union and ECCAS as
guarantors of the Political Agreement, as well as the continuous support of the
facilitators, which has brought an invaluable opportunity for improving the lives of
the people of the Central African Republic.

18/21

19-09074

S/2019/498

Annex I
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic: military and police strength as at
1 June 2019
Military component
Military
observers

Staff
officers

Troops

Total

Formed police
units

Civilian police

Bangladesh

11

18

998

1027

–

–

Benin

3

5

–

8

–

26

Bhutan

2

2

–

4

–

–

Bolivia (Plurinational State of)

3

2

–

5

–

–

Brazil

4

6

–

10

–

–

Burkina Faso

1

2

–

3

–

26

Burundi

9

12

740

761

–

–

Cambodia

6

6

200

212

–

–

Cameroon

3

6

740

749

279

26

Colombia

2

–

–

2

–

–

Congo

5

11

–

16

138

3

Côte d’Ivoire

–

3

–

3

–

46

Czechia

3

3

–

6

–

–

Djibouti

–

–

–

–

–

5

Egypt

9

19

988

1 016

139

7

France

–

9

–

9

–

7

Gabon

–

3

450

453

–

–

Gambia

3

3

–

6

–

7

Ghana

5

11

–

16

–

–

Guatemala

2

2

–

4

–

–

Guinea

–

–

–

–

–

16

Hungary

1

1

–

2

–

–

Indonesia

6

8

200

214

17

6

Jordan

3

7

–

10

127

17

Kenya

8

7

–

15

–

–

Madagascar

–

–

–

–

–

1

Mali

–

–

–

–

–

31

Mauritania

10

8

739

757

280

–

Mexico

–

1

–

1

–

–

Morocco

2

12

750

764

–

–

Nepal

4

12

720

736

–

–

Niger

3

6

–

9

–

24

Nigeria

–

2

–

2

–

–

Oman

–

–

–

–

–

–

Pakistan

12

27

1 213

1 252

–

–

Paraguay

2

1

–

3

–

–

Peru

8

7

205

220

–

–

Country

19-09074

Police component

19/21

S/2019/498
Military component
Military
observers

Staff
officers

Philippines

2

–

Portugal

–

6

Republic of Moldova

3

2

Romania

–

–

Rwanda

11

Senegal
Serbia

Total

Formed police
units

Civilian police

–

2

–

–

178

184

–

2

–

5

–

–

–

–

–

4

19

1 359

1 389

418

26

–

12

100

112

279

23

2

3

72

77

–

–

Sierra Leone

2

1

–

3

–

–

Spain

–

–

–

–

–

5

Sri Lanka

6

2

110

118

–

–

Sweden

–

–

–

–

–

6

Togo

4

7

–

11

–

8

Tunisia

1

–

–

1

–

46

United Republic of Tanzania

–

7

443

450

–

–

United States of America

–

7

–

7

–

–

Uruguay

–

3

–

3

–

–

Viet Nam

1

4

–

5

–

–

Zambia

8

14

909

931

–

–

Zimbabwe

2

–

–

2

–

–

Total

172

309

11 114

11 595

1 677

368

Country

20/21

Police component

Troops

19-09074

Map
19-09074

Annex II

S/2019/498

21/21
