S/2016/579

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 June 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraphs 50 and 52 of Security
Council resolution 2277 (2016). It covers major developments in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo since my report of 9 March 2016 (S/2016/233); progress in
the implementation of the mandate of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO); and an update on
the ways in which MONUSCO will be best prepared to address security risks and to
monitor and report on human rights violations and abuses in the context of the
elections scheduled for November 2016. It concludes with observations on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the way forward.

II. Major developments
A.

Political situation
2.
The national dialogue proposed by the President, Joseph Kabila, to overcome
the electoral impasse and defuse political tensions did not gain traction during the
reporting period. The ruling Majorité présidentielle coalition continued to express
support for the initiative, while the political opposition and part s of civil society
maintained scepticism regarding the initiative, which they viewed as an attempt by
the ruling coalition to prolong the President’s stay in power beyond the
constitutionally limited term that will end in December 2016.
3.
On 6 April, the Chairperson of the African Union Commission appointed the
former Prime Minister of Togo, Edem Kodjo, as the Facilitator for the national
dialogue in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and called upon all stakeholders
to extend to him their full cooperation. Mr. Kodjo pursued his consultations with
stakeholders in Kinshasa and established a working group comprising members of
civil society to begin preparations for the dialogue and the establishment of a
preparatory committee. In a letter dated 11 April addressed to the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission, the Dynamique de l’opposition and the Groupe des sept
(G7) opposition platforms, which had rejected consultations with the Facilitator,
proposed the establishment of a panel of representatives of the African Union, the

16-10673 (E)

300616

*1610673*

S/2016/579

United Nations, the European Union, the International Organization of la
Francophonie and the United States of America to facilitate the dialogue among
political stakeholders.
4.
Throughout the period under review, my Special Representative for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Maman Sidikou, continued his engagement with
political stakeholders across the spectrum to encourage them to participate in the
political dialogue process. On 17 May, in a letter addressed to the African Union,
the Secretariat reiterated its support for the efforts of Mr. Kodjo and proposed an
exchange between the African Union and the United Nations to mobilize
international support for the facilitation. The Facilitator, my Special Representative
and my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region, Said Djinnit, travelled to Addis
Ababa on 1 June for consultations with the African Union Commission with regard
to the national dialogue. In a joint communiqué issued on 6 June, the African Union,
the European Union, the International Organization of la Francophonie and the
United Nations reiterated the importance of political dialogue and their support for
the African Union Facilitator, and announced the establishment of a support group
for the facilitation. The support group would include representatives of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the Southern African
Development Community (SADC).
5.
At the initiative of the leader of the Union pour la démocratie et le progrès
social (UDPS), Etienne Tshisekedi, the main opposition parties and civil society
organizations met in Genval, Belgium, on 8 and 9 June to reach a common position
in the light of the electoral impasse and to prevent what they termed a
“constitutional coup d’état” by the President. On 10 June, the Alternance pour la
République, the Dynamique de l’opposition, G7, the Majorité présidentielle
populaire, UDPS and several civil society organizations signed a letter of
commitment in which they underscored the need to respect the Constitution and to
hold elections within the constitutional time frame. The meeting rejected the
holding of a referendum to approve a new constitution following a call from a
senior member of the Majorité présidentielle coalition for the removal of the term
limit. It also denounced the Government for approving the registration of dissident
wings of political parties under the same name and called for the release of political
detainees. With regard to the dialogue, the meeting stated its opposition to the
national dialogue under the terms of the President’s ordinance of 28 November
2015, and called instead for political dialogue to be held in accordance with
resolution 2277 (2016) by the international facilitator with the support of a panel
comprising representatives of the United Nations, the African Union, the European
Union, the International Organization of la Francophonie and the United States.
Following a meeting with Mr. Kodjo held in Brussels on 17 June, Mr. Tshisekedi
reiterated the opposition’s stand with regard to the dialogue, in keeping with the
outcome of the Genval meeting.
6.
At a press conference on 10 June, the Secretary-General of the Majorité
présidentielle and Speaker of the National Assembly, Aubin Minaku, rejected the
outcome of the meeting in Genval, arguing that the opposition was preparing a coup
d’état and warning against any initiative that would amount to the toppling of the
democratically elected institutions. He called upon the African Union Facilitator to
proceed with his efforts to establish the preparatory committee in anticipation of the
holding of the national dialogue, while encouraging the National Independent
Electoral Commission to continue with preparations for the revision of the voter

2/17

16-10673

S/2016/579

register. In a communiqué issued on 14 June, the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region summit of Heads of State and Government com mended the
Government for the preparations for political dialogue aimed at creating a
conducive climate for the next elections and urged all Congolese political actors to
participate and extend support to the international facilitator appointed by the
African Union.
7.
There were a number of other developments during the period under review,
which contributed to heightening political tensions and deepening divisions between
the Government and the opposition. On 18 April, 286 members of the National
Assembly from the Majorité présidentielle and the opposition, including
12 representatives of UDPS, submitted a request for the Constitutional Court to
interpret articles 70, 103, 105 and 197 of the Constitution. On 11 May, the
Constitutional Court ruled that the Constitution provided for the President and
Members of Parliament to remain in office until the assumption of duties of the new
office holders.
8.
The ruling of the Constitutional Court exacerbated the polarization of the
political class in the country. The Deputy Secretary-General of the President’s Parti
du peuple pour la reconstruction et la démocratie, Ramazani Shadari, characterized
the ruling as a victory for the people and the stability of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, while the political opposition rejected the ruling. On 14 May, G7, the
Dynamique de l’opposition and the Front citoyen opposition platforms issued a joint
statement indicating that the ruling violated the Constitution, and announced the
undertaking of “large-scale actions to salvage the nation”, including demonstrations
on 26 May.
9.
Tensions rose in Lubumbashi following the arrest on 24 April of four
collaborators of the former Governor of Katanga, Moïse Katumbi, including a
United States citizen accused by the judiciary of b eing a mercenary, and the
Government’s announcement on 4 May to open a judicial inquiry into the alleged
presence of foreign mercenaries at the service of Mr. Katumbi. Both Mr. Katumbi
and the Government of the United States rejected the allegations. On th e same day,
G7 announced that Mr. Katumbi would run for President as the candidate of the
Alternance pour la République and G7 opposition groups.
10. On 7 May, Mr. Katumbi received a summons to appear before the Director of
Public Prosecutions in Lubumbashi on 9 May. Suspected agents of the national
intelligence services reportedly conducted a search of Mr. Katumbi ’s farm outside
Lubumbashi. Mr. Katumbi appeared before the Director of Public Prosecutions on
9 May, with crowds gathering outside the building. The MONUSCO leadership
engaged with the provincial government authorities and representatives of political
parties to advocate for restraint. Hearings continued on 11 and 13 May; the national
police was deployed to manage the crowd. On 13 May, while entering the court
building, Mr. Katumbi was exposed to tear gas fired by the national police to
disperse demonstrators. He and two of his close collaborators were injured during
clashes between the police and demonstrators. Twenty-nine demonstrators were
arrested and five injured by the police on 9, 11 and 13 May in the context of the
hearings.
11. On 19 May, the Court indicted Mr. Katumbi on charges of undermining
national security, and the Director of Public Prosecutions in Lubumbashi issued an
arrest warrant. On 20 May, Mr. Katumbi left the country with the permission of the

16-10673

3/17

S/2016/579

Congolese authorities to receive medical treatment abroad. The foreign citizen
allegedly serving as a mercenary was handed over to the Embassy of the United
States in Kinshasa on 7 June, and subsequently left the country. The case remains
pending before the court. In a separate lawsuit, on 22 June, a district court in
Lubumbashi sentenced Mr. Katumbi in absentia to three years in prison and the
payment of a fine of $1 million for forgery.
12. At the initiative of the opposition parties, including the Dynamique de
l’opposition, the Front citoyen, G7 and UDPS, demonstrations were held on 26 May
in several cities across the Democratic Republic of the Congo to protest against the
ruling of 11 May of the Constitutional Court and to call for the holding of
presidential elections within constitutional timelines. The protests were also
directed against the continued violence and human rights violations against civilians
perpetrated by the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) and affiliated groups in the Beni
area, in North Kivu. My Special Representative proactively engaged senior
government officials and representatives of political parties ahead of the
demonstrations and issued a communiqué on 25 May in which he called upon all
parties to refrain from violence.
13. Violent clashes between the police and demonstrators were reported in a
number of locations, including Beni, Goma and Mbandaka, where local authorities
had banned the demonstrations. At least 2 civilians were killed and 23 injured.
According to the national police, 14 police officers were injured during the
demonstrations. Before and during the demonstrations of 26 May,
101 demonstrators were arrested, 9 of whom, including 2 minors, remain i n
detention. One police officer was reportedly arrested, tried and sentenced to 10
years in prison for violation of orders and firing live ammunition during
demonstrations in Mbandaka.
14. Following an increase in reported violations of human rights and f undamental
freedoms relating to the electoral process, concerns continued to be voiced about
diminishing political space. Calls for demonstrations were preceded by arrests of
individuals affiliated with the opposition and intimidation by the Agence nationa le
de renseignement (ANR) and the national police. On 22 April, in Lubumbashi, nine
members of the Union nationale des fédéralistes du Congo (UNAFEC), a member
party of G7, received sentences of between 5 and 10 years in prison for rebellion
and robbery. Six of them, including the President of UNAFEC, were requested to
pay a fine of $10,000 for destruction of property. During the same trial, two
members of UNAFEC were acquitted and a minor was referred to the juvenile court.
On 24 April, in Lubumbashi, the police dispersed a G7 rally and arbitrarily arrested
at least 35 collaborators of Mr. Katumbi and supporters of G7; security forces
subsequently released all except four persons, who were transferred to ANR in
Kinshasa. There were also reports of ANR officers disrupting a meeting of the
Mouvement social pour le renouveau (MSR), a member party of the G7 platform, in
Lubumbashi on 14 March. On 21 May, 27 individuals were arrested and
subsequently released during a peaceful demonstration held by Dynamique Cong o,
an opposition party, in solidarity with the victims of violence committed by ADF in
Beni.
15. Divisions within the opposition parties and the registration of some of the
dissident wings of the G7 political opposition parties also exacerbated tensions. On
26 April, in Lubumbashi, Haut-Katanga, the headquarters of the Union nationale des

4/17

16-10673

S/2016/579

démocrates fédéralistes, a member of G7, was vandalized and set on fire by
unidentified individuals. There were also reports of violent altercations on the same
day between rival factions of MSR in an attempt to take control of the offices of the
party in several cities. On 4 May, in Bukavu, South Kivu, the Office of the
Prosecutor ordered the faction of the party that had decided to remain with the
Majorité présidentielle to occupy the Bukavu office of MSR.
16. On 21 June, in The Hague, the International Criminal Court sentenced Jean Pierre Bemba, the former leader of the Mouvement de libération du Congo (MLC)
and former Vice-President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to 18 years in
prison for his command responsibility for crimes against humanity and war crimes
committed by MLC troops in the Central African Republic between October 2002
and March 2003.

B.

Electoral developments
17. On 12 March, provincial assemblies elected bureaux in the 21 new provinces.
The Majorité présidentielle controls the assemblies in 18 provinces and the
opposition party MLC in three provinces (Nord-Ubangi, Sud-Ubangi and Tshuapa).
Gubernatorial elections were held on 26 March, in which the provincial assemblies
elected governors in the new provinces to replace the special commissioners who
had been appointed by the President on 29 October 2015. In 15 of the 21 provinces,
the elections confirmed the former special commissioners or the deputies in their
posts. Overall, 16 elected governors are affiliated with the Majorité présidentielle
and 5 are either independent or affiliated with the opposition, namely, the Alliance
des travaillistes pour le développement and the Alliance pour le renouveau du
Congo.
18. The National Independent Electoral Commission focused its efforts on
preparations for updating the voter register and launched the administrative and
procurement process for the biometric kits, voter cards and supplies needed for the
revision of the register. Progress was also made in completing the legislative
framework for voter registration. On 3 June, the National Assembly passed
amendments to the law on voter registration, which is now under examination by the
Senate.
19. During the period under review, the Government disbursed $20 million to the
National Independent Electoral Commission for preparations for the elections. The
multi-partner basket fund for the Projet d’appui au cycle électoral au Congo,
managed by the United Nations Development Programme, remained funded at only
around 6 per cent of the estimated budget of $123.3 million to support the electoral
process, with donors having conditioned any further commitment of resources on
certain clarifications with regard to the process.
20. From 24 April to 10 May, I deployed an electoral advisory mission to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to assess issues surrounding the electoral process
and to formulate recommendations for United Nations support for voter registration.
The advisory mission proposed, for consideration by national stakeholders, three
possible options for the revision of the voter register. The options are: (a) to use the
existing voter register; (b) to conduct a partial update of the voter register to inc lude
youth who had reached the age of 18 years since 2011 (around 8.5 million), the
diaspora (around 4.5 million) and non-registered or omitted voters in 2011

16-10673

5/17

S/2016/579

(around 4 million), which would take nine and a half months, followed by elections
three and a half months later; and (c) to carry out a full update of the voter register
within a time frame of ten and a half months, followed by elections three and a half
months later.

C.

Security situation
21. Civilians in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo continued to suffer
from armed violence, in particular in the Beni area, in spite of efforts by the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC) and MONUSCO to
address the threat. During the period under review, presumed ADF elements and
other affiliated armed groups killed 76 civilians, abducted at least 30 others and
staged 9 ambushes against FARDC. On 3 and 6 May, suspected ADF elements
attacked two villages in the Eringeti area and killed 36 civilians and wounded 17,
including children and pregnant women. The assailants also abducted 17 civilians
and looted and destroyed property. Attacks against FARDC positions continued,
while a direct attack on MONUSCO occurred on 24 March at Semili ki, which was
repelled by the peacekeepers at the base. According to Congolese civil society, more
than 1,000 people have been killed in the Beni area since October 2014. The
Congolese authorities responded to the incidents by relocating the FARDC
Operation Sukola I command from the town of Beni to Eringeti, while temporarily
moving the provincial security committee from Goma to Beni. With the support of
MONUSCO, Congolese military justice authorities were deployed to the area from
13 to 22 May to expedite criminal judicial proceedings.
22. The FARDC-led Operation Sukola II, against the Forces démocratiques pour la
libération du Rwanda (FDLR) and allied elements, continued in Rutshuru territory,
North Kivu, with new offensives launched by FARDC, with support from
MONUSCO, targeting the FDLR leadership. Nevertheless, FDLR remained active
in the province; there were continued reports of attacks against civilians,
kidnappings for ransom and clashes with Mayi-Mayi groups, resulting in significant
displacement of the population. On 15 April, a biometric registration centre for
Rwandan refugees jointly operated by the National Commission for Refugees and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) was
attacked and looted by suspected FDLR elements.
23. Some progress was made against FDLR; the Congolese authorities arrested
and referred to justice two high-profile FDLR members. On 20 March, Ladislas
Ntaganzwa, a senior member of FDLR, who faces charges of genocide and other
crimes against humanity, was transferred, with support from MONUSCO, to the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. On 28 April, in Goma,
the Congolese authorities arrested “General” Leopold Mujyambere, the chief of
staff of the Forces démocratiques pour la libération du Rwanda-Forces combattantes
Abacunguzi (FDLR-FOCA). At the same time, an apparent split in the leadership of
FDLR-FOCA was reported when “Colonel” Wilson Irategeka, the group’s SecondVice-President, was suspended on 23 May after accusations of “treason” for
allegedly being involved in the arrest of “General” Mujyambere. “Colonel”
Irategeka and his followers reportedly established a new movement, the National
Council for Renewal and Democracy.

6/17

16-10673

S/2016/579

24. Also in North Kivu, attacks against civilians by the Nduma défense du Congorenouveau, the Union des patriotes pour la défense des innocents and various other
Mayi-Mayi groups continued in Lubero, Rutshuru and Walikale territories. In
Lubero and Walikale territories, a coalition of local Mayi -Mayi groups of the
Nduma défense du Congo-renouveau and the Union des patriotes pour la défense
des innocents was reportedly involved in the killing of civilians perceived to be
supporting FDLR in the context of ongoing intercommunal tensions between Nande
and Hutu communities. A large number of members of the Hutu community remain
internally displaced in Buleusa, in Walikale territory. On 16 June, in Buleusa,
MONUSCO troops engaged Mayi-Mayi elements who had been trying to impede
the distribution of food by humanitarians to internally displaced persons, resulting
in the death of nine Mayi-Mayi elements.
25. In South Kivu, FARDC continued operations against Mayi -Mayi Raiya
Mutomboki and other Mayi-Mayi groups in Fizi, Mwenga, Shabunda and Uvira
territories. The situation remained volatile in the Ruzizi Plains and in some parts of
Kabare, Kalehe, Mwenga and Shabunda territories, where the presence and
activities of armed groups continued to be a destabilizing factor.
26. In Ituri province, elements of the Forces de résistance patriotique de l’Ituri
(FRPI) continued to attack civilians and loot villages. Around 41 attacks against
civilians and FARDC were registered in April, especially in Gety and Aveba and
surrounding areas. There was a significant increase in violations from previous
reporting periods. FARDC operations against FRPI continued with support from
MONUSCO, including through “Operation Torche”, aimed at dismantling FRPI
camps. Elsewhere in Ituri, Mayi-Mayi elements carried out frequent attacks,
including an attack on 19 April on an FARDC position near Biakatu (south of
Mambasa), during which MONUSCO supported FARDC in regaining control of the
situation.
27. In Bas-Uélé and Haut-Uélé, since April, there has been a surge in the activity
of the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), owing mainly to the infiltration of suspected
LRA elements from South Sudan and the Central African Republic fleeing the
pressure of military operations within the framework of the African Union Regional
Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army. LRA
elements and poachers carried out a series of ambushes around Garamba National
Park, resulting in the killing of at least five FARDC personnel. On 23 April, during
an exchange of fire with poachers, three park rangers were killed and the Director of
the National Park was seriously wounded. In response, FARDC sent reinforcements
to the area.
28. In Tanganyika province, Mayi-Mayi Kata Katanga continued to destabilize
parts of Manono, Mitwaba and Pweto territories, where the armed group reportedly
killed six civilians in four separate incidents during the reporting period. In March,
following a series of reconciliation meetings supported by MONUSCO between the
Batwa and Luba groups, there was a significant reduction in tensions and the return
of more than 650 families to their homes in the Sange area, in Kasenga territory.

D.

Protection of civilians and neutralization of armed groups
29. MONUSCO pursued efforts to protect civilians in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where 70 per cent of the human rights violations committed

16-10673

7/17

S/2016/579

during the period under review were registered. MONUSCO carried out day and
night patrols and joint assessment missions, as well as targeted visits of joint
protection teams to areas of concern in Bas-Uélé, Haut-Uélé, Ituri, North Kivu and
South Kivu provinces. MONUSCO reinforced its civilian capacity in its Beni office
with a view to strengthening its protection response in this particularly volatile area.
MONUSCO continued to support State institutions with protection responsibilities,
including through awareness-raising and advocacy with local authorities, and
intercommunal dialogue initiatives to reduce community support for armed groups
while supporting judicial processes against the leaders of armed groups.
30. The community alert networks transmitted 225 early warning alerts per month
on average, which represented a 25 per cent increase from the previous reporting
period. Most of the alerts resulted in a response by FARDC, the national police,
other local authorities or MONUSCO.
31. The Mine Action Service of the United Nations continued to support the
efforts of MONUSCO to protect civilians, including through the destruction of
2,162 explosive remnants of war, 33 weapons and 11,274 rounds of small arms
ammunition. The Mine Action Service also expanded its support to the national
police by providing infrastructure for safe weapons storage, technical advice and
training in Bukavu and Bunia.
32. In North Kivu, MONUSCO continued to support the FARDC-led Operation
Sukola I in Beni territory, in compliance with the United Nations human rights due
diligence policy, and to maintain military pressure on ADF in the triangle between
Bilimani, Madina and Sesele. The objective of the operations was to destroy four
ADF camps and deny the armed group freedom of movement in the “triangle” area.
After weeks of joint planning, FARDC redeployed several battalions into the Beni
area, assisted by MONUSCO through air transport. On 14 May, FARDC and
MONUSCO launched a coordinated operation against ADF. By 21 May, after seven
days of combat, a total of five ADF camps had been destroyed by FARDC. Overall,
24 ADF elements had been killed and four others captured, including one child
associated with ADF. Some elements of ADF managed to escape from the “triangle”
area and fled northwards. Further operations are being planned to consolidate the
gains. MONUSCO troops, including special forces and the Force Intervention
Brigade, were directly engaged in this coordinated operation. In addition to
providing tactical support to FARDC, MONUSCO provided artillery fire support,
facilitated front-line medical evacuations and provided logistical support relating to
food, water and ammunition.
33. During the period under review, FARDC and MONUSCO resumed
cooperation in operations against FDLR in North Kivu. On 23 May, jointly planned
military operations against FDLR resumed in North Kivu as part of Operation
Sukola II, targeting the FDLR leadership. Within the broader framework of this
operation, the coordinated FARDC-MONUSCO Operation Nyamulgira was
launched on 24 May. As at 27 May, FARDC had captured eight FDLR elements,
who were transferred to Goma with the support of MONUSCO.

8/17

16-10673

S/2016/579

E.

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration/disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and reintegration
34. The implementation of Phase III of the Programme national de désarmement,
démobilisation et reintegration is progressing. Ninety-five Congolese combatants
entered the programme during the period under review and 93 foreign combatants
were repatriated, while 50 weapons with 501 rounds of ammunition were collected.
In addition, 4,575 ex-combatants in the Kamina (Haut Lomami) and Kitona (Kongo
Central) camps completed vocational training and are awaiting reintegration.
However, the Government has suspended their planned return, originally envisaged
for April, owing to incomplete community preparations and the volatile security
situation in many of the return destinations.
35. A total of 612 ex-combatants were reportedly transferred from the Kamina and
Kitona camps to the Rwampara (Bunia) camp for military training and subsequent
integration into FARDC, and 18 ex-combatants allegedly deserted the Rwampara
camp.
36. On 15 June, clashes erupted between ex-combatants in the Kamina camp and
FARDC amid protests against the delayed reinsertion. The incident reportedly
resulted in the death of at least 10 ex-combatants and 3 FARDC soldiers.
37. MONUSCO continued to provide food, medicine and fuel to support
1,322 FDLR combatants and their dependants in transit camps at Kanyabayonga
(North Kivu) and Walungu (South Kivu), as well as in the Government -run camp at
Kisangani (Tshopo). From 23 to 26 May, my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes
Region led a visit to North Kivu by the guarantors of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework (the African Union, the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region, SADC and the United Nations). The guar antors encouraged the
FDLR combatants in the Kanyabayonga camp to return to Rwanda without
preconditions; assured them of the international community’s commitment to
supporting a safe and dignified process; and indicated that there was no prospect of
their relocation to a third country.

F.

Consolidation of State authority and stabilization
38. MONUSCO continued to assist the Government in the implementation of
stabilization initiatives through the Stabilization Coherence Trust Fund, funded by
the Netherlands, Norway, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund. On 31 March, the first contract was
allocated in Kitchanga (North Kivu) under the democratic dialogue pillar of the
International Security and Stabilization Support Strategy. On 6 April, the Trust Fund
agreed to allocate $17 million for projects responding to the objectives of the
provincial stabilization strategies and action plans in Ituri, North Kivu and South
Kivu provinces. MONUSCO also provided advisory services to bilateral and
multilateral donors to ensure that stabilization projects not funded through the Trust
Fund were aligned with the Strategy.
39. In the midterm review of pilot programmes of the International Security and
Stabilization Support Strategy in Mambasa (Ituri) and Kalehe (South Kivu), funded
by Norway and the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund within the framework of the
Strategy, progress in implementation was noted. The programme in Kalehe led to

16-10673

9/17

S/2016/579

the resolution of 60 land conflicts; the provision of training to 30 police officers and
45 civil servants; the construction of three police stations; and the rehabilitation of
roads. In Mambasa territory, recent achievements included improved access to
justice: 24 of 128 cases of sexual and gender-based violence were referred to the
judiciary for prosecution, while 34 vulnerable people benefited from legal aid in
accessing the military and civilian justice systems. Moreover, 31 long -lasting
judicial cases were finalized with the support of mobile courts. In areas in which the
programmes are being implemented, communities have reported decreased reliance
on armed groups for protection and improved collaboration with local authorities to
address impunity.
40. In May, MONUSCO launched jointly with the Ministry of the Interior a
capacity- and confidence-building project for security actors and local communities
in Ituri, North Kivu, South Kivu and Tanganyika provinces. MONUSCO also
partnered with provincial authorities in North Kivu, South Kivu and Tshopo to
provide training to 318 representatives of local authorities, including customary
chiefs, civil servants and members of civil society, on decentralized governance,
planning and budgeting to improve local governance, and accountab ility.

G.

Human rights situation
41. MONUSCO continued to document the deteriorating human rights situation in
the country. The Mission registered 1,153 allegations of human rights violations
during the period under review. Most of the alleged violations (712) were
committed in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. Armed groups accounted
for 38 per cent and State actors for 62 per cent of the alleged violations.
MONUSCO documented an increasing trend of allegations of violations of
fundamental rights and freedoms. More precisely, there was an increase in
allegations of violations of the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and freedom
of speech. These violations concern mainly the political and civil rights and other
fundamental freedoms that the Government has an obligation to protect under the
Constitution and relevant international instruments it has ratified.
42. Congolese military justice authorities prioritized 17 cases of international
crimes committed by FARDC, FDLR, FRPI and other armed groups in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, for investigation and prosecution, with support
from MONUSCO and the United Nations Development Programme. The case
against Mayi-Mayi Simba elements accused of crimes against humanity and war
crimes was closed in April with one conviction, carrying a six-year prison term, and
nine acquittals.
43. MONUSCO followed up on the situation of arbitrarily detained persons and
supported the relocation of women detainees in Butembo prison to a newly
constructed section funded by MONUSCO. The Mission also provided logistical
support to the Gety and Mambasa prisons in Ituri province, continued to advocate
for the improvement of prisoner health care and implemented food security
programmes for detainees.

10/17

16-10673

S/2016/579

H.

Sexual violence
44. Thirty-eight persons, including 32 minors, were reported to be victims of
conflict-related sexual violence. Armed groups were reportedly responsible for
68 per cent of those abuses and State actors for 32 per cent. FARDC was allegedly
responsible for 24 per cent of the violations, while FDLR and FRPI were reportedly
responsible for 21 per cent and 18 per cent, respectively. MONUSCO assisted
FARDC with the review of training materials on sexual violence. The Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict provided advisory and
technical support to the military justice authorities.

I.

Child protection
45. MONUSCO documented 589 cases of grave violations of children’s rights.
This is a significant increase from the previous reporting period, during which
214 cases were documented. A total of 495 children (420 boys and 75 girls) were
separated or escaped from armed groups. This indicates a considerable increase
from the previous reporting period, owing to enhanced milit ary operations against
armed groups in North Kivu and effective information-sharing among child
protection partners in the field. The main armed groups recruiting children were
FDLR-FOCA (146), Mayi-Mayi Nyatura (97), the Forces populaires pour la
démocratie/Mayi-Mayi Bokande (42), the Forces démocratiques pour la libération
du Rwanda-Ralliement pour l’unité et la démocratie (36), Mayi-Mayi Raiya
Mutomboki (35), FRPI (22), the Union des patriotes congolais pour la paix du
Général Lafontaine (20) and the Alliance des patriotes pour un Congo libre et
souverain (19). Thirty-four children formerly associated with armed groups were
released from FARDC detention. On 5 April, a joint technical working group
comprising representatives of the Government, MONUSCO and the United Nations
Children’s Fund validated the standard operating procedures on age assessment,
drafted in August 2015, to help FARDC to establish a procedure to identify children
countrywide and thus prevent underage recruitment.

J.

Humanitarian situation
46. The humanitarian situation remains dire in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, with 7.5 million people in need of humanitarian assistance across the
country. Some 1.8 million persons are internally displaced, primarily as a result of
activity by armed groups and military operations against these groups in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. This protracted situation puts a strain on host
communities. There are also some 398,000 refugees and asylum seekers in the
country, including approximately 245,000 from Rwanda; 113,000 from the Central
African Republic; 26,000 from Burundi; and 13,000 from South Sudan.
47. Humanitarian access in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo has become
increasingly difficult owing to growing insecurity. Several ambushes of vehicles of
non-governmental organizations were reported, as well as kidnappings by armed
groups, including suspected FDLR, Mayi-Mayi Nyatura and other criminal
elements. Since my previous report, 2 humanitarian workers have been killed and
12 others abducted and subsequently released in Ituri, North Kivu and South Kivu
provinces.

16-10673

11/17

S/2016/579

48. The dismantlement of sites for internally displaced persons in North Kivu by
the Government resulted in the further displacement of some 45,000 persons. The
humanitarian community and MONUSCO continued to advocate for respect by the
Government of its international obligations, including with regard to securing areas
in which populations were displaced and ensuring that the closure of sites did not
increase the vulnerability of internally displaced persons.
49. At the initiative of UNHCR, the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of
internally displaced persons visited the Democratic Republic of the Congo from
20 to 27 April and made recommendations with regard to addressing the challenges
of protection and assistance, including the search for durable solutions for internally
displaced persons before the closure of sites.
50. The Humanitarian Response Plan of $690 million remained funded at only
13.2 per cent, amounting to a total of $91 million, thus constraining the
humanitarian response.

K.

Economic situation
51. The prevailing international context of falling prices of primary commodity
exports led to the degradation of the domestic macroeconomic framework. On
20 April, the Government instructed the Banque centrale du Congo to suspend sine
die repayment of value-added taxes difference to companies operating in the
country. On 9 May, the Government announced that the growth rate for 2016 was
expected to decline from 9 per cent to 6.6 per cent, while the annual inflation rate
was evaluated at 1.5 per cent. The scarcity of foreign reserves plunged one of the
largest commercial banks in the country, the Banque internationale pour l ’Afrique
au Congo, into a liquidity crisis, precipitating the provision of a Government bailout
envelope evaluated at $60 million. The Banque centrale du Congo placed the
Banque internationale pour l’Afrique au Congo under interim management on
30 May, tasked with preparing a recovery plan within 180 days.
52. A draft amendment to the 2016 Finance Law was adopted by the National
Assembly and the Senate on 1 and 11 June, respectively. The rectified law, the draft
of which remains to be finalized prior to promulgation, reduced gov ernment revenue
to $7.1 billion against an initial $9.1 billion, with expenditure cuts of 22 per cent.
Security institutions, including the armed forces and the police, are subject to a
30 per cent reduction in bonuses paid to combat troops and commanding officers. In
addition, some environmental and infrastructure projects were placed on hold.

L.

Regional developments
53. My Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region, the guarantors of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework and representatives of the National Oversight
Mechanism undertook efforts to advance the implementation of the Nairobi
Declarations, particularly with regard to the repatriation of ex -Mouvement du
23 mars (M23) elements.
54. On 12 April, the National Oversight Mechanism called for sanctions against
the ex-M23 leadership and an independent assessment of the implementation of
regional commitments by all signatories to the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. From 23 to 28 April, representatives of the guarantors of the

12/17

16-10673

S/2016/579

Framework held consultative meetings in Uganda, Rwanda and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo with the national authorities of those countries, the ex -M23
and international partners on ways to accelerate the implementation of the Nairobi
Declarations. From 27 to 28 May, in Kinshasa, representatives of the Government
and the ex-M23 met for the first time since the signing of the Nairobi Declarations,
in 2013, to review progress made in the implementation of the Declarations. It was
decided that a technical meeting would be convened to address contentious issues
relating to the implementation of the Declarations. Prior to the meeting, the
representatives of the guarantors of the Framework visited Goma, Beni, Eringeti,
Kanyabayonga and Nyamilima in North Kivu from 23 to 26 May to assess progress
in the neutralization of armed groups.
55. On 30 May, the ex-M23 faction led by Bishop Jean-Marie Runiga, the
previous President of the ex-M23, was registered in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo as a political party under the name Alliance pour le salut du peuple. In a
communiqué issued on 2 June in Kampala, the President of the ex -M23, Bertrand
Bisimwa, stated that the leadership of the ex-M23 had not taken any decision to
transform the movement into a political party.
56. On 13 May, the Technical Support Committee of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework met in Lusaka to review progress in the implementation of
the Framework. The Committee commended preliminary efforts by the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to establish a commission on national reconciliation. It also
requested my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region to convene a regional meeting on the return
of refugees, in coordination with UNHCR.
57. In its communiqué of 14 June, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region summit of Heads of State and Government commended the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo for the efforts towards
neutralizing ADF, FDLR and other local negative forces, and encouraged continued
joint military operations between MONUSCO and FARDC. It also welcomed the
report on the mission of the guarantors on the implementation of the Nairobi
Declarations, recommended continued and sustained engageme nt with the
Government and the ex-M23 and pledged support to the agreement reached among
the Presidents of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Uganda and the
United Republic of Tanzania to formulate a joint follow -up mechanism to address
the growing threat posed by ADF.

III. Deployment of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and implementation of its mandate
A.

Strategic dialogue and development of an exit strategy for
the Mission
58. Following a series of high-level discussions between the MONUSCO
leadership and the Government, an agreement was reached to establish a working
group of the strategic dialogue to take forward discussions on an exit strategy for
the Mission. The key goal of the discussions is to develop jointly agreed criteria to
measure progress on the ground, with a view to identifying the minimum conditions

16-10673

13/17

S/2016/579

for the eventual transition of the mandated responsibilities of the Mission to the
Government or other partners. The working group made some progress towards this
goal, including preliminary agreement on some of the conditions that would guide
further development of the strategy in line with resolution 2277 (2016).

B.

Transformation of the force
59. The MONUSCO force continued efforts to better deliver on the mandate of
protection of civilians and neutralization of armed groups. Progress was made in the
implementation of the transformation of the force, including through temporary,
targeted and timely deployments in high-risk areas.
60. Capability development remains a critical requirement for the transformation
of the MONUSCO force, with the establishment of rapidly deployable battalions
located in Ituri, North Kivu and South Kivu. The first rapidly deployable battalion
deployed in South Kivu is operational, although some equipment has yet to be
delivered. So far, it has facilitated access for civilian staff to Kalongo and
Kamitunga (South Kivu), thus enhancing liaison with communities and reporting.
The enhanced rapid response capacity will be further complemented through the
establishment of another two such battalions, projected for February 2017 and
January 2018.

C.

Preparations for the elections
61. Pursuant to paragraph 52 of resolution 2277 (2016), M ONUSCO reviewed its
plans to address security risks and to monitor and report on human rights violations
and abuses in the context of the elections. As indicated in paragraph 4 above, my
Special Representative used his good offices to promote dialogue amon g all
Congolese stakeholders, which remains the most important avenue for reducing the
likelihood of violence. MONUSCO also updated its risk analysis, which included an
assessment of possible triggers of violence. Particular focus was placed on
identifying strategies to enhance civilian monitoring and reporting on human rights
with a view to ensuring early warning, particularly in areas identified as being at
high risk of unrest and violence in the context of the elections, including areas in
which there is no MONUSCO presence. MONUSCO is reviewing its deployment of
military and police personnel to ensure adequate deployment on the basis of its
updated risk analysis. In order to ensure the protection of United Nations personnel,
MONUSCO commenced planning to deploy a helicopter to Kinshasa and to
reinforce capabilities in Kisangani and Lubumbashi, including a potential increase
in armoured personnel carriers and evacuation plans for remote sites.
62. MONUSCO is developing contingency plans in the event of widespread
violence in the context of the electoral process. The contingency plans envisage the
possible activation of inter-mission cooperation mechanisms. Similarly, the
Mission’s operability in conflict-affected areas would be affected should any
significant diversion of resources and assets be required in the context of election related violence.
63. The Mission identified gaps in its presence and capacity to monitor and report
on human rights violations and political space throughout the electoral period in
Kasai, Haut-Lomami, Lualaba, Sankuru, South Ubangi and North Ubangi provinces,
all of which are assessed to be at high risk of election-related violence. On the basis
of this risk assessment, the electoral advisory mission to the Democratic Republic of

14/17

16-10673

S/2016/579

the Congo recommended the establishment of joint human rights and political
monitoring and reporting teams to five additional locations. The Mission has made
preliminary efforts to create multidisciplinary monitoring and reporting teams and
to enhance overall cooperation with national security institutions. In addition,
MONUSCO is proceeding with the creation of three mobile teams in Kinshasa,
Goma and Lubumbashi, available for short-term deployments of up to two weeks to
potential hotspots to monitor and report on political and human rights issues in the
context of elections. The Mission placed additional focus on reinforcing the
capacity of State actors and civil society in the field of human rights, raised
awareness among the Congolese security forces and conducted monitoring and
reporting on human rights violations in the electoral context.
64. MONUSCO continued efforts to train Congolese national police personnel on
public order management, with a particular focus on prevention through non -lethal
crowd control measures, bringing the total number of personnel trained since July
2015 to 3,499. MONUSCO police also intensified patrols, including in Lubumbashi,
to mitigate political tensions.
65. The existing seven formed police units of MONUSCO will contin ue to provide
advice and logistical support to the national police. The Mission is currently
developing scenarios and specific triggers, which, if realized, could necessitate the
deployment of two additional formed police units in Kisangani and Lubumbashi
through possible inter-mission cooperation arrangements.
66. MONUSCO will assist Congolese authorities in the preparations for voter
registration, which will require additional resources.

IV. Safety and security of United Nations personnel
67. MONUSCO assessed that its support for FARDC-led operations against armed
groups had not led to any discernible increase in threats to United Nations personnel
and installations. Fifty-one security-related incidents involving United Nations
personnel were reported in the country, of which 44 were hazard- and safety-related.

V. Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
68. MONUSCO continued its efforts to enforce my zero -tolerance policy on
sexual exploitation and abuse through robust preventive measures and enhanced
coordination of assistance to victims. MONUSCO carried out 57 training sessions
and 5 assessment missions in Ituri and North Kivu provinces and conducted
outreach activities to instruct all personnel on their obligations. The Special
Coordinator on Improving the United Nations Response to Sexual Exploitation and
Abuse, Jane Holl Lute, visited the Democratic Republic of the Congo from 13 to
16 April and met with government officials, the international community, United
Nations personnel and local communities in Sake and other high -risk areas in North
Kivu. She sought, among other things, to encourage enhanced commitment by
United Nations personnel to the zero-tolerance policy against sexual exploitation
and abuse.
69. MONUSCO continued to work through established mechanisms, such as the
dedicated task force and immediate response teams, and collaborated with
specialized agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system and other
relevant partners to deliver assistance to victims of sexual abuse and exploitation.

16-10673

15/17

S/2016/579

Community-based complaint mechanisms are now operational in Beni, Bunia,
Goma, Kalemie, Kavumu, Sake and Uvira.
70. Six possible cases of sexual abuse and exploitation were identified during the
period under review. Furthermore, 12 of the 18 allegations associated with the six
cases involve the military and refer to the sexual exploitation of minors. All cases
were referred to the concerned Member States for appropriate action.

VI. Observations
71. I am concerned about rising political tensions in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo ahead of the constitutionally envisaged presidential and legislative
elections. Delays in the electoral process, a debate around the respect for the
Constitution and increasing restrictions on democratic space are fuelling political
polarization and public discontent. I underline once again the crucial importance of
holding credible political dialogue with all relevant Congolese stakeholders, leading
to a consensus that would allow for free, fair, transparent and credible elections to
be held in accordance with the framework of the Constitution of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, thus preserving peace and stability in the country and
deepening the democratic process and the rule of law. Inclusive and credible
dialogue among the stakeholders concerned remains the only viable avenue to
address expected delays in the presidential and legislative elections if they are not
held in November and to prevent political instability and violence.
72. A lot is at stake in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where the
international community has invested heavily both in terms of political capital and
resources to sustain the hard-won peace in the country. The current political
uncertainty has the potential to lead to a serious crisis that would not only
compound the pain of the Congolese people, who have already suffered far too
much, but also destabilize the subregion. I am concerned that in the absence of a
credible and meaningful political dialogue among Congolese stakeholders, tensions
could degenerate into a severe crisis, with a high risk of relapse into violence and
instability, that would not only reverse the hard -won gains but also require a
response beyond the capacity of MONUSCO. As the Mission is stepping up efforts
to prevent violence and protect civilians while planning for contingencies, I can
only re-emphasize that the most effective prevention of violence is an inclusive and
credible dialogue process. I call upon the international community to actively
engage in promoting dialogue and preventing a relapse into violence.
73. It is the primary responsibility of the Government and all concerned
Congolese stakeholders to maintain peace and stability in the Democratic Repu blic
of the Congo and to strengthen democracy and the rule of law. I therefore urge all
Congolese political stakeholders to engage in good faith in an inclusive and credible
dialogue process and to reach consensus on a way forward that will lead to free an d
fair elections in accordance with the framework of the Constitution of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I reaffirm my full support for the facilitation
efforts led by Edem Kodjo on behalf of the African Union, and I welcome the
agreement to set up a support group for the facilitation, which also includes
representatives of the United Nations, the African Union, the European Union, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and SADC. My Special
Representative for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and my Special Envoy for
the Great Lakes Region will continue to actively support the efforts of the
Facilitator. I call upon all Congolese actors to extend their full cooperation to the

16/17

16-10673

S/2016/579

Facilitator, recalling that he is acting within the framework of the relevant
instruments of Security Council resolution 2277 (2016) and the African Union.
74. I deplore the loss of life and injuries during demonstrations in Bandundu,
Butembo, Goma and Kinshasa, and I note with concern the arbitrary arrests, acts of
intimidation and repression in other cities. Limitations to freedom of expression and
peaceful assembly fuel tension and violence. I urge the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to respect freedom of expression, assembly and
information as fundamental rights that are essential to the conduct of free and fair
elections.
75. I am outraged by the continued atrocities carried out in the Beni area, and I
condemn in the strongest terms the criminal and senseless acts of violence by
suspected ADF and affiliated groups in the Eringeti area, resulting in the killing of
civilians. I also note with grave concern allegations of human rights abuses
committed by armed groups operating in Ituri, North Kivu and South Kivu. More
needs to be done to identify and bring to justice the perpetrators of these crimes and
those who support them. The United Nations remains committed to taking all
necessary actions in line with its mandate to protect civilians and neutralize armed
groups in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
76. I am encouraged by the resumption of active military cooperation between
FARDC and MONUSCO in operations against ADF and FDLR in North Kivu, with
a view to addressing the threat posed by armed groups to the civilian population in
the eastern part of the country. This is an important step in the right direction. As
coordinated operations against armed groups gather pace, I once again underline the
importance of strong support for the implementation of the national plan for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of former combatants along with
effective measures to extend State authority. Without a fully funded national
programme, there is a renewed risk of former combatants taking up arms and
returning to armed groups or resorting to crime. To provide people with alternative
livelihoods and options other than violence is paramount to prevent them from
taking up weapons again. As indicated in my previous report, it is important that the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of combatants be accorded the
necessary political and financial commitment, with a view to avoiding a situation
whereby former combatants return to their previous violent and illegal activities.
77. In the same spirit of cooperation and partnership, I encour age the Government
to continue to work with the Mission on the joint development of a conditions -based
joint exit strategy for MONUSCO, in accordance with resolution 2277 (2016).
78. I am grateful to my Special Representative for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Head of MONUSCO, Maman Sidikou, for his tireless efforts in carrying
out the Mission’s mandate. I am deeply appreciative of the work carried out by the
civilian and uniformed men and women of MONUSCO and the United Nations
country team in a demanding environment. I am also grateful to my Special Envoy
for the Great Lakes Region, Said Djinnit, for his engagement in the subregion in
coordination with MONUSCO. I thank the troop- and police-contributing countries,
regional organizations and international partners for their continued efforts in
support of the Congolese people and authorities in their pursuit of peace and
stability.

16-10673

17/17
