General Assemhly-Twenty-sixth Sessfon

28
ARTICLE XXV

Any State Party to this Convention may propose amendments to this Convention. Amendments shall enter into force
for each State Party to the Convention accepting the amendments upon their acceptance by a majority of the States Parties
to the Convention and thereafter for each remaining State
Party to the Convention on the date of acceptance by it.
ARTICLE

XXVI

Ten years after the entry into force of this Convention, the
question of the review of this Convention shall be included
in the provisional agenda of the United Nations General
Assembly in arder to consider, in the light of past application
of the Convention, whether it requires revision. However, at
any time after the Convention has been in force for five
years, and at the request of one third of the States Parties
to the Convention, and with the concurrence of the majority
of the States Parties, a conference of the States Parties shall
be convened to review this Convention.
ARTICLE XXVII

Any State Party to this Convention may give notice of its
withdrawal from the Convention one year after its entry into
force by written notification to the Depositary Governments.
Such withdrawal shall take effect one year from the date of
receipt of this notification.
ARTICLE XXVIII

~is Convention, of which the Chinese, English, French,
Russrnn and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited in the archives of the Depositary Governments. Duly
certifit:d copies of this Convention shall be transmitted by the
Depos1tary Governments to the Governments of the signatory
and acceding States.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, duly authorized, have
signed this Convention.
DONE in triplicate, at the cities of London, Moscow and
Washington, this
.... day of . . . .
. . , one thousand
nine hundred and .............. .

2778 (XXVI). Convening of the Working Group
on Remote Sensing of the Earth by Satellites

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2733 C (XXV) of 16 December 1970 in which it requested the Scientific and
Technical Sub-Committee of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, as authorized by the
Committee, to determine at what time and in what
specific frame of reference a working group on earth
resources surveying, with special reference to satellites,
should be convened,
W elcoming the decision of the Sub-Committee at its
eighth session to establish and convene a Working
Group on Remate Sensing of the Earth by Satellites,
Sharing the view expressed by the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space in the report on its
fourteenth session that the potential benefits from
technological developments in remote sensing of the
~arth from space platf?rms could be extremely meanmgful for the econorruc development of all countries
especially the developing countries, and for the preser~
vation of the global environment, 5
Noting that the Working Group on Remote Sensing
of the Earth by Satellites held a first organizational
meeting in connexion with the fourteenth session of
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,
11 lbid., para. 10.

Looking forward to the early initiation of the substantive work of the Working Group, keeping in mind
that experiments to test the feasibility of remote sensing
of the earth from space platforms are scheduled to
begin early in 1972,
Expressing confidence that in discharging its responsibility the Working Group would seek to promote the
optimum utilization of this space application far the
benefit of individual States and of the international
community,
1. Requests Member States to submit information
on their national and co-operative international
activities in this field, as well as comments and working papers, through the Secretary-General to the Working Group on Remate Sensing of the Earth by Satellites;
2. Endorses the request of the Scientific and Technic~l Sub-Committee that the Working Group solicit the
v~e~s of appr~riate United Nations bodies and speciahzed agencies, and other relevant international
organizations;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Working Group with his comments on this subject and
to submit working papers on matters falling within the
terms of reference of the Group;
4. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space and its Scientific and Technical SubCommittee to bring about the early initiation of the
Working Group's substantive work and to keep the
General Assembly informed in a comprehensive fashion
on the progress of its work.
1998th plenmy meeting,
29 November 1971.
2779 (XXVI). Preparation of an international
treaty concerning the Moon

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2222 (XXI) of 19 December 1966 stressing the importance of intemational cooperatio~ in the field of activities in the peaceful
exploratlon and use of outer space, including the Moon
and other celestial bodies, and the importance of
developing the rule of law in this new area of human
endeavour,
Reaffirming the common interest of all mankind in
furthering the peaceful exploration and use of outer
space for t~e benefit º! all States and for the development of fnendly relat1ons and mutual understanding
among them,
Taking into account the advances made in recent
years _in the exploration of outer space, including those
resultmg from extensive lunar research programmes
on the basis of modero science and technology,
Bearing in mind the interest of all mankind in the
exploration and utilization of the Moon exclusively
for peaceful purposes and in preventing the Moon from
becoming a scene of international conflict
Prompted by the consideration that the' Moon as the
only natural _satellite of the earth, has an important
~ole to play m the conquest of outer space and that
1t should be used with due regard to the interests of
present and future generations,
f!esiring. to further the elaboration of specific rules
of mternat10nal law to govern the activities of States
on the Moon on the basis of the Charter of the
United ~~t_ions and the !reaty on Principles Goveming
the Act1v1tles of States m the Exploration and Use of

29

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial
Bodies, as a means of further developing a sound legal
basis for such activities,
Considering that special rules should also govem
activities in the use of all natural resources and substances of the Moon and other celestial bodies,
1. Takes note of the draft treaty conceming the
Moon submitted to the General Assembly by the delegation of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics;6
2. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space and its Legal Sub-Committee to consider,
as a matter of priority, the question of the elaboration
of a draft intemational treaty conceming the Moon in
accordance with the recom.mendations contained in
paragraph 38 of the report of the Com.mittee7 and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its twentyseventh session.
1998th plenary meeting,
29 November 1971.
2825 (XXVI). General and complete disarmament
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2661 B (XXV) of 7 December 1970,
Noting with appreciation the report of the lnternational Atomic Energy Agency, 8
Noting with satisfaction the success of the Intemational Atomic Energy Agency in drawing up detailed
guidelines for the structure and content of agreements
between the Agency and States required in connexion
with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons,
N oting that the procedures embodied in such agreements are applicable to all stages of the nuclear fuel
cycle and are to be concentrated on those stages involving the production, processing, use or storage of
nuclear material from which nuclear weapons or other
nuclear explosive devices could readily be made,
Noting from the report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency that detailed safeguards procedures with
respect to nuclear enrichment plants, including those
employing new techniques of uranium enrichment, have
still to be elaborated and applied,
1. Expresses its confidence in the ability of the
Intemational Atomic Energy Agency to meet, without
delay, the obligations likely to be placed upon it in
respect of the application of safeguards to nuclear
material in ali types of civil nuclear facilities, including uranium enrichment plants;
2. Requests the lntemational Atomic Energy
Agency to include in its annual report to the General
Assembly full information on the progress of its work
on the application of safeguards in connexion with
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, including safeguards on nuclear material in
uranium enrichment plants using both existing and new
techniques.
2022nd plenary meeting,
16 December 1971.
6 !bid., Twenty-sixth Session, Annexes, agenda ítem 92,
document A/8391, annex.
1 !bid., Twenty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/8420).
8 International Atomic Energy Agency, Annual Report,
1 July 1970-30 ]une 1971 (Vienna, July 1971); transmitted
to the members of the General Assembly by a note of the
Secretary-General (A/83 84).

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1722 (XVI) of 20 December 1961 and 2602 E (XXIV) of 16 December 1969,
Further recalling its resolution 2661 C (XXV) of
7 December 1970, in which it urged the Conference
of the Committee on Disarmament to make more
intensive efforts to bring about a f aster pace towards
the achievement of disarmament measures, expressed
its appreciation of the important and constructive
documents and views submitted at the Conference oí
the Committee on Disarmament, and recommended to
the Conference that it take into account in its further
work and its negotiations the comprehensive programme
of disarmament9 as well as other documents presented
on the same subject,
Considering that it has declared the decade of the
l 970s as the Disarmament Decade,
Taking into account the proposals, suggestions and
views put forward in the General Assembly and in the
Conference of the Committee on Disarmament,
l. Reaffirms the responsibility of the United Nations
in the fundamental goal of the attainment of general
and complete disarmament;
2. Urges the Conference of the Com.mittee on Disarmament, at its next session, to resume its efforts on
the question of general and complete disarmament along
the lines set forth in General Assembly resolution
2661 C (XXV);
3. Requests the Conference of •the Committee on
Disarmament to report to the General Assembly at its
twenty-seventh session on the results of these efforts.
2022nd plenary meeting,
16 December 1971.

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1149 (XII) of 14 November 1957 on collective action to inform and enlighten
the peoples of the world as to the dangers of the
armaments race, and particularly as to the destructive
effects of modern weapons,
Recalling its resolution 2602 E (XXIV) of 16 December 1969, in which it declared the decade of the
l 970s as a Disarmament Decade and requested the
Secretary-General and Governments to publicize the
Decade by all appropriate means at their disposal,
Recalling its resolution 2661 C (XXV) of 7 December 1970 which dealt, inter alia, with the comprehensive program.me of disarmament, 10
Considering that public opinion should be adequately
informed about the problems of the arms race and of
disarmament so that it might bring its influence to
bear on the strengthening of disarmament efforts,
1. Afjirms the value of holding conferences of experts and scientists from various countries on the
problems of the arms race and disarmament;
2. Expresses its support for the practice of requesting the Secretary-General to prepare, with the assistance
of consultant experts, authoritative reports on concrete
questions relating to the arms race and disarmament;
9 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth
Session, Annexes, agenda items 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 93 and 94,
document A/8191.
10 !bid.
