United Nations

S/PV.6319

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6319th meeting
Monday, 24 May 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Salam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Lebanon)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Silajdžić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Heller
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Rugunda
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Anderson

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 14 May 2010 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2010/235)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-37267 (E)

*1037267*

S/PV.6319

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

the consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda.
If I hear any objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Serrano.
There being no objection it is so decided.

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 14 May 2010 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2010/235)
The President (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I
should like to acknowledge the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Haris Silajdžić, Chairman of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina. On behalf of
the Security Council, I extend a warm welcome to
Mr. Silajdžić.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Croatia and
Serbia, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.

I invite Mr. Serrano to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I should like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to document S/2010/235, containing a
letter dated 14 May 2010 from the Secretary-General
transmitting the thirty-seventh report of the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by His Excellency Mr. Valentin Inzko, to
whom I now give the floor.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Vilović
(Croatia) and Mr. Starčević (Serbia) took seats at
the Council table.

Mr. Inzko: These are special days for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as it is celebrating 18 years of
membership of the United Nations. But they are also
special days for my home country of Austria, as it was
presiding over the Security Council in the month of
May exactly 18 years ago. On 20 May 1992, the then
Permanent Representative of Austria, Mr. Peter
Hohenfellner, as President of the Security Council,
proposed to this body the adoption of a decision
recommending to the General Assembly that Bosnia
Herzegovina be admitted to the United Nations.

The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

At the same meeting, the Council unanimously
adopted resolution 755 (1992), which endorsed that
recommendation. Also at that meeting, the Council
President prophetically stated that “All the members of
the Council are confident that Bosnia and Herzegovina
will make a significant contribution to the work of the
Organization” (S/PV.3079, p. 4).

There being no objection, it is so decided.

It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Inzko to take a seat at the Council
table.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, in which he requests to be invited, in his
capacity as acting head of the delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in

2

Upon that historic recommendation, 18 years ago,
Bosnia Herzegovina was admitted as a Member of the
United Nations by virtue of General Assembly
resolution 46/237, adopted without a vote on 22 May
1992. I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate
Bosnia Herzegovina wholeheartedly. I am very glad
that, as predicted 18 years ago, Bosnia and
Herzegovina is indeed making a significant

10-37267

S/PV.6319

contribution to the work of the Organization as a nonpermanent member of the Security Council.

Western Balkans is a much better neighbourhood now
than it was two or three years ago.

I am also very pleased to see President Silajdžić
sitting in the Security Council Chamber today, as it
was he who, 18 years ago as Minister for Foreign
Affairs,
worked
tirelessly
for
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina’s recognition and membership in the
United Nations. He did so then without having an
office, a mission or even a fax connection. He has
witnessed the tremendous progress of his country from
war and admission to the Organization to its election to
the Security Council.

In the spirit of regional reconciliation, leaders
and parliamentarians in Croatia and Serbia have
addressed the tragedy of the 1990s in an honest and
decent way. Let me here refer to President Tadić’s
efforts and to the Serbia Parliament’s declaration on
the Srebrenica genocide, and to the admission by
Croatia of its role in the atrocities of the 1990s. This is
creating space for a new and constructive dialogue that
will benefit people throughout the Western Balkans.

We should keep that achievement of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s foreign policy at the forefront of our
thinking as we deal in detail with the challenges that
the country still faces. The country is facing problems
that urgently need to be solved, but the fact is that it
has come a long way. We should use that progress as an
incentive to complete the work that still remains ahead.
Membership of the Security Council is the
greatest and most visible reflection of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s new standing in the international
community. In addition, this year, the country has
substantially completed the road map that may make it
possible for Bosnian citizens to travel to countries in
the European Schengen area without first having to
apply for a visa. The European Union (EU)
recommendation in that regard is still pending, but it
could come as early as next week.
Furthermore, last month, at its summit in Estonia,
NATO agreed to a membership action plan for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, on the condition that the issue of
State ownership of military real estate is resolved. That
success came as Bosnia and Herzegovina had already
decided to accelerate the destruction of unsafe weapons
and explosives left over from the war and to deploy
troops to the NATO-led mission in Afghanistan.
Those three examples show how Bosnia and
Herzegovina can concretely move forward, to the
benefit of its citizens and the counties of the region.
I believe that an additional factor which
strengthened Bosnia and Herzegovina’s progress
during the reporting period — and one that has
received far too little attention — is the recent and
much hoped-for improvement in regional cooperation,
and consequently in the prospects for regional
reconciliation, that is now evident. Put simply, the

10-37267

It should be mentioned in this context that
Turkey’s role in this process has also been
constructive, as was illustrated by the signature of the
Istanbul Declaration on improving relations between
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia. In the same spirit,
leaders of the region and the wider international
community will gather on 11 July for the fifteenth
commemoration of the atrocities in Srebrenica.
President Silajdžić will be travelling today or
tomorrow for an historic, unprecedented visit to
Belgrade to strengthen this new sense of
neighbourhood.
Similarly,
in
a
gesture
of
reconciliation, over the coming weekend President
Josipović of Croatia will visit places where atrocities
were committed in central and northern Bosnia in a
gesture of reconciliation. These represent major steps
forward, and we must seize the possibilities that they
open up.
The informal EU/Western Balkans summit, which
should gather some 40 delegations in Sarajevo on
2 June, can additionally boost this trend towards
regional
reconciliation
and
forward-looking
cooperation. The coming and recent visits to Bosnia
and Herzegovina by senior politicians and officials of
the EU, the United States and elsewhere reflect not
only international interest in the country, but also some
concern over its inability to take advantage of the
possibilities that are now open to it. As I pointed out
when I spoke to the Council in November (see
S/PV.6222), Bosnia and Herzegovina remains afflicted
by a lack of a basic and fundamental consensus about
what sort of country it should be or could be —
whether a more centralized or a very decentralized
State — and how to achieve either option.
The leadership of Republika Srpska has, for
example, led the way in undermining State-level
institutions and by threatening to hold an entity

3

S/PV.6319

referendum that would seek to repudiate the authority
of the High Representative and decisions under
Dayton. Any entity referendum challenging the
authority of the Dayton Accords or the High
Representative under annex X, or impinging upon the
constitutional responsibilities of the State, would be
unlawful and endanger the entity itself, as the entities
derive their legitimacy from the same Accords.
References in an international gazette to the
possible emergence of a new State, and proposals that
nationalist politicians should start discussing the
peaceful dissolution of Bosnia and Herzegovina or that
the country should not exist at all have been met by
counter-statements to the effect that the disaffected
elements are welcome to leave, but will not be allowed
to take any part of the country with them.
Thus, while regional prospects for reconciliation
have improved, the language and logic of politics
inside Bosnia and Herzegovina appears to have rather
deteriorated. After Serbia’s Parliament expressed its
formal regret in March over the Srebrenica massacres,
the Republika Srpska Government threatened to retract
its endorsement of the 2004 report which established
the facts about the events of July 1995 in Srebrenica.
The truth about Srebrenica and other shameful
episodes of the war has been well established by the
International Court of Justice and the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia through
criminal investigation, forensic research and testimony
scrutinized and tested at war-crimes trials. The way
forward is to face the truth and use it to ensure that
such crimes are never allowed to happen again, and not
to deny the truth.
While I have used my executive powers with
appropriate restraint, these have been faced with
continued resistance from the Republika Srpska. On
14 December, I extended the mandates of foreign
judges and prosecutors working in the War Crimes
Division of the State Court. This decision, based on the
country’s obligations to the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, enjoyed the
unanimous support of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council. The decision has, however,
been strongly criticized by Republika Srpska.
Meanwhile, there have been problems in the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, where a
divided Government limped from crisis to crisis during
the reporting period. The Federation has failed to

4

complete the appointments to Government and
judiciary functions and the need to make budget cuts
required by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in
the face of determined opposition from members of
war veterans’ organizations. The Federation has
considerable difficulty dealing efficiently with the
necessary IMF conditions, which may affect Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s fiscal sustainability in the medium
and long terms. In this regard, as far as IMF
negotiations are concerned, the situation is much better
in Republika Srpska.
Let me give another example of the difficulties
we face with the 22 December ruling of the European
Court of Human Rights against discrimination against
minorities in the election to the State-level Presidency
and House of Peoples. While Republika Srpska
representatives would agree to narrow constitutional
amendments that would implement the 22 December
ruling, Federation politicians, on their side, insist on
far more wide-ranging changes, seeking to use the
Court’s verdict to promote their own very different
visions of how the country should be restructured. The
net result is that the European Court of Human Rights
ruling will not be put into practice before the 3 October
general elections, meaning that this autumn once again
not all citizens will be able to candidate to all
positions. This issue must therefore be a top priority of
the new Government.
This chronic political disagreement has occurred
at a time when unemployment has continued to rise,
living standards have continued to fall, and the
capacity of the authorities to meet the basic needs of
citizens has been systematically eroded by declining
revenue. With great difficulty the relevant authorities
are striving to meet the IMF terms for a €1.2-billion
Stand-by Arrangement; at the same time, generous
development assistance continues to come from the
World Bank, the EU and other international financial
institutions and bilateral donors. However, none or
very few of the key reforms that would allow the
country to take full advantage of this assistance, and
which would revive the economy and reverse the
decline in employment and living standards, have been
enacted during the reporting period; nor have the
domestic authorities made any progress on the
remaining objectives and conditions — the so-called
5+2 agenda — set by the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board in February 2008 for the

10-37267

S/PV.6319

transition of Office of the High Representative (OHR)
to a reinforced EU-led presence.
The objectives relating to State and defence
property remain unmet. In December 2009 I provided
the State, entity and Brcko District Governments with
an inventory of the properties in question, but this has
yet to jump-start constructive negotiation. Serb and
Bosniak leaders rejected the OHR inventory — for
opposite reasons. At the same time, the entities have
declined to conduct their own assessment of what it is
that institutions require in order to function properly.
Now, unilateral steps to register properties under the
ownership of the entities or the State threaten the
whole exercise.
NATO’s decision in April to make a Membership
Action Plan conditional upon the State’s taking
ownership of properties required by the armed forces
has so far shown no sign of producing a breakthrough.
All this means that the condition according to which
the Peace Implementation Council must be in a
position to make “a positive assessment of the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina based on full compliance
with the Dayton Peace Agreement” looks somewhat
remote, and it is not clear when a decision to close the
Office of the High Representative could be taken.
In this respect, let me here welcome the European
Council conclusions of 25 January, expressing
readiness to extend the executive operation of the EU
Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina should the situation
require it. I myself remain convinced that we will need
this presence beyond 2010 for reassurance purposes.
Yet the authorities have demonstrated that progress can
be made, as they pushed through the reforms that have
made the country’s bid for visa liberalization with the
European Union a credible one. They did this in
response to popular pressure on an issue concerning
which the connection between reform and immediate
benefits for citizens was clear.
In this respect, I have repeatedly highlighted the
need to stress the causal links between reforms
required for Euro-Atlantic integration and the practical
benefits citizens will derive from the process. In the
case of visa reform, the authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina have shown that they are able to respond
to the logic of popular demand. I believe this can be
applied to other reforms that have been blocked until
now. In other words, the election campaign can
actually be used to create momentum for change,

10-37267

instead of being used as an excuse to keep things as
they are. Elections in October could in fact help,
particularly if voters both seek to hold their
representatives to a real accounting during the
campaign and then turn out in force on election day.
This year’s election will see a surge of young
people who are eligible to vote for the first time. This
may alter the electoral arithmetic, and even a modest
change could produce more constructive coalitions in
the next Parliament. That is most likely to happen if the
international community remains focused on Bosnia
and Herzegovina, requires absolute respect for the
Dayton Peace Agreement and continues to foster a
constructive atmosphere for constitutional and other
reforms. This is the way to get to the objective that we
all want to reach — where Bosnia and Herzegovina can
move towards full Euro-Atlantic integration under its
own steam — and that means with full ownership of
the responsibilities that go along with it.
I am truly convinced that this possibility can
become a reality for Bosnia and Herzegovina. Its
people have shown on many occasions that they indeed
have the talent needed. And I will, as High
Representative but also as the EU Special
Representative, continue to dedicate all my efforts to
assisting and supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
efforts in this direction. The European Union, too, is
firmly committed to accompanying Bosnia and
Herzegovina on this path, as was confirmed by High
Representative Ashton’s recent visit to the country.
Let me conclude by congratulating Bosnia and
Herzegovina once again and by wishing it success in
its contribution to the work of the Security Council.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Inzko for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Haris
Silajdžić, Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Mr. Silajdžić (spoke in Arabic): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, and to congratulate you on
acceding to the presidency of the Security Council.
(spoke in English)
It was 18 years ago almost to the day that Bosnia
and Herzegovina became a Member of the United
Nations. In these 18 years, Bosnia and Herzegovina has
travelled the difficult road from being a country that

5

S/PV.6319

suffered the worst atrocities and civilian plight in
Europe since the Second World War to being a
non-permanent member of the Security Council and an
active participant in the peacebuilding efforts of the
international community. As a grim reminder of Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s recent pest, this July we will
solemnly mark the fifteenth anniversary of the
Srebrenica genocide.
We have made progress in strengthening and
advancing relations with our neighbouring countries
Croatia, Montenegro and Serbia, contributing in that
way to regional cooperation as one of the major
prerequisites for lasting peace and stability in the
region. Bosnia and Herzegovina has also made
continued progress in meeting conditions for EuroAtlantic integration. At their meeting held on 22 and
23 April in Tallinn, NATO foreign ministers granted
the Membership Action Plan to Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Accession to the Membership Action
Plan is recognition of the progress achieved and a
strong stimulus for an even greater commitment to
Euro-Atlantic integration. Bosnia and Herzegovina has
also met all the conditions required for visa
liberalization with the European Union.
Even though Bosnia and Herzegovina has
undoubtedly achieved significant progress, I have
come here today to tell the Council that the Dayton
Peace Agreement has not been implemented in its
central parts. I will go into some detail on this subject,
and I ask Council members to bear with me in those
details.
The Dayton Peace Agreement has been
continuously adjusted to the “realities on the ground”,
which have resulted from the systematic violations of
the Agreement, and not the other way around. This is
demonstrated by the fact that the report the High
Representative has submitted here today (S/2010/235)
is the thirty-seventh of its kind.
Most of the problems and challenges that Bosnia
and Herzegovina faces today stem from the failure to
implement the central elements of the Dayton Peace
Agreement, particularly its annex 7, which guarantees
the right of all refugees and displaced persons freely to
return to their homes of origin in safety — a right
confirmed by this Council’s resolutions. As a result of
the systematic and continuous violations of annex 7,
out of some 46 per cent of non-Serbs who lived in
Republika Srpska — an entity of Bosnia and

6

Herzegovina — before they were either killed or
cleansed, only 8 per cent live there now.
The failure to implement annex 7 has resulted in
the most serious constitutional problem facing Bosnia
and Herzegovina today. The so-called entity voting
mechanism, which was intended as a safeguard for the
legitimate territorial interests of the two entities as
perceived by all three constituent peoples, has morphed
into a mechanism by which one ethnic group from one
entity blocks the State without any input from the other
constituent peoples. And this mechanism continues to
be used as if annex 7 had been fully implemented.
The entity voting mechanism allows only 10 Serb
deputies elected from the Republika Srpska entity —
who constitute only 22 per cent of Parliament’s 42
deputies — to block any proposed decision of the
Parliament of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Over the past
13 years, these 10 deputies have used entity voting to
block over 260 proposed laws. In contrast, Parliament
enacted less than 150 laws in the same period. This
ethnic monopoly on territorial interests solidifies
ethnic division, renders the State dysfunctional and in
turn perpetuates instability.
Certainly, the views expressed here are not shared
by all political actors in Bosnia and Herzegovina, but
the United States Congress, the European Commission,
the European Parliament, the Council of Europe and
the Venice Commission have all rightly identified
entity voting as the main obstacle to the efforts to
transform Bosnia and Herzegovina into a viable and
self-sustainable country, capable of functioning in the
absence of the Office of the High Representative. All
of these institutions have recommended that entity
voting be either eliminated or reformed, and all of their
recommendations have so far been ignored.
The second fundamental problem — the question
of State property — stems from the fact that the rights
given to the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina through
Annex 4, which is the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, have been set aside in favour of political
compromises necessitated by the so-called realities on
the ground.
Under article I of the Dayton Constitution,
Bosnia and Herzegovina was established as the sole
legal successor to the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Socialist Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and, as such, it remains the owner of all
property registered to those predecessors. Similarly,

10-37267

S/PV.6319

under the Succession Agreement — the agreement
among all countries of the former Yugoslavia —
Bosnia and Herzegovina is the owner of all formerYugoslavia property on its territory. The entities have
no ownership rights and no basis for claims over any
such property.
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s ownership of State
property is the right guaranteed by article I of the
Dayton Constitution and was unequivocally confirmed
as such by a final and binding verdict of the State
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina — a court created by
the Office of the High Representative, generously
funded and supported by many Governments and
staffed by international judges and prosecutors from an
even greater number of countries.
It is therefore unacceptable to seek consensus to
implement this existing law or to seek political
compromises with those who block its implementation.
The same mistake was made when the High
Representative imposed entity-based privatization in
1998, with obvious negative consequences for the
return of refugees, the consolidation of the single
economic space and the reintegration of society in
general.
One of the demands made by Slobodan Milosevic
at Dayton was to divide State property between the
entities. He did not achieve that goal, and it is puzzling
that some still insist on that demand. It is true that
Bosnia and Herzegovina has two entities under the
Dayton Peace Agreement, but that Agreement also
preserved the legal continuity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, including, of course, ownership of the
State property. That was one of the key balances that
made Dayton possible, and it also served as a primary
cohesive factor between the two entities. State property
is as central to the Dayton Peace Agreement as the
two-entity structure.
The High Representative rightly points out the
continuing challenges to the Dayton Peace Agreement
by the Republika Srpska entity authorities. But these
challenges will not be answered by strengthening the
position of the challengers, especially bearing in mind
their open calls for a referendum on secession.
Partitioning State property between the entities will
obviously strengthen those claims and eliminate a
primary cohesive factor. There is obviously a reason
why that was not done in Dayton, and it cannot be
quietly
introduced
now
without
far-reaching

10-37267

consequences. The High Representative’s recent letter
to the State Attorney of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
which he called on the State Attorney to stop the
registration of State property, despite the fact that the
State Attorney was merely acting on the basis of
existing law and legal precedents, encountered strong
opposition in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The High
Representative did not use the Bonn powers, however.
Thus this letter can only be construed as pressure on
the courts and the judicial system that is outside the
purview of those powers.
The Security Council had a very good reason for
insisting on the implementation of the Dayton
Agreement “in its entirety” (resolution 1031 (1995),
para. 30) when it adopted resolution 1031 (1995). That
is precisely what we advocate. The solutions and the
myriad difficult compromises built into Dayton
ensured that the Agreement would function if and only
if all of its elements were fully implemented. The
non-implementation of one element made the
functioning of many others difficult, if not impossible.
Today, the implementation of Dayton in its
entirety has been practically replaced by the
implementation of the five goals and two conditions.
Some of those goals and conditions have nothing to do
with the Dayton Agreement — the signing of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement with the
European Union, for example. Some of them were
resolved in Dayton including the fact that Bosnia and
Herzegovina owns most of the State property as the
legal successor of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as former High Representative Lajčák
officially communicated. Some other central elements
of Dayton are conspicuously missing from this list of
five plus two: the right of refugees to return, for
example.
It is not the sheer arbitrariness of this list that is
disconcerting, but the fact that the closure of the Office
of the High Representative, rather than the
implementation of Dayton, has become a goal in and of
itself. And one of the central elements of Dayton has
been marked for change in order to serve that goal,
namely, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s ownership of State
property.
This will not lead to Dayton’s implementation in
its entirety, but, more likely, to its demise. Dayton was
a difficult compromise, creating the necessity for a
number of its elements to function in unison. The

7

S/PV.6319

Office of the High Representative was put in place to
ensure precisely such functioning, not to give
legitimacy to à-la-carte implementation, just so it can
leave. If the mission of the Office of the High
Representative has morphed from full implementation
mode to departure mode, we can only conclude that
this transformation is not in accordance with the clear
language of Council resolution 1031 (1995).
At the same time, we cannot be expected to
provide assistance for that transformation. Not only do
we take our international obligations — including
under Security Council resolutions — seriously. We,
moreover, remain conscious of the dangers facing
Bosnia and Herzegovina if Dayton’s central elements
are slowly reduced, modified or completely taken
away. For, if one central element of Dayton is on the
table, so must be all the others.
In conclusion, I wish to state that article I of the
Dayton Constitution, by which Bosnia and
Herzegovina does not disappear but continues its legal
existence as a State, was the outcome of the patriotic
struggle and sacrifices of the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and of the assistance of friendly
countries. That is precisely why no one has the
mandate to question the meaning of that article or the
other pillars of the Dayton Peace Agreement. It is our
hope that the Security Council will continue to uphold
the commitments of the Dayton Peace Agreement and
remain the guardian of peace and stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and in the region.
Ms. Anderson (United States of America): Let
me begin by welcoming to the Council Mr. Haris
Silajdžić, Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I thank him very much for his comments
today. Let me also welcome High Representative Inzko
and thank him for his comprehensive and excellent
briefing. The United States deeply appreciates his
dedication and hard work in support of implementation
of the Dayton Accords.
Nearly 15 years have passed since the signing of
the Dayton Accords. In that time, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has made significant progress to
overcome its past. The country now has a single
military, has signed a Stabilization and Association
Agreement with the European Union (EU) and has
taken steps towards NATO membership.
We welcome the decision of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s leaders to destroy excess arms and

8

ammunition. The United States is proud to be a partner
in that important effort. And in January of this year, we
welcomed Bosnia and Herzegovina as a valued
colleague on the Security Council. These important
accomplishments all show that the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina want to live in a stable, functional
State capable of European and Euro-Atlantic
integration. The United States supports the aspiration
of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s people for a European
future.
With this in mind, let me highlight three concerns
raised by High Representative Inzko’s report (see
S/2010/235). First, while some progress has been made
on defence and other necessary reforms, more needs to
be done. We share the High Representative’s
conclusion that Bosnia and Herzegovina has made only
limited progress in addressing constitutional and other
reforms necessary for EU candidacy. We urge Bosnia’s
leaders to cross the ethnic divide and find the
compromises needed to build a functional State that
can meet EU and NATO requirements.
As Vice-President Biden said to the Bosnian
Parliament on 19 May 2009, the United States is proud
to support a peaceful, successful Bosnia and
Herzegovina. But to achieve this goal, Bosnia’s leaders
must work together across ethnic lines and party lines
and interact with the rest of the world as a single
sovereign State.
Along with our European partners, the United
States will continue to engage with participants from
all of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s communities in
promoting the constitutional reforms needed for the
country’s eventual integration into the EU and NATO.
But ultimately, the burden of achieving the country’s
aspirations rests on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s political
leaders and depends on their responsibility,
commitment and willingness to compromise.
Secondly, like many in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and many in this Chamber, the United States looks
forward to the day when the Office of the High
Representative will no longer be needed. Again, we
urge Bosnia’s leaders to find the compromises needed
to fulfil the remaining requirements, particularly on
immovable defence property. In this regard, we also
share High Representative Inzko’s concerns about what
the report calls a deteriorated political atmosphere,
including challenges to the High Representative’s
authority. In numerous resolutions, the Council has

10-37267

S/PV.6319

affirmed the High Representative’s Bonn powers and
his responsibility to exercise them to ensure peace,
stability and compliance with the Dayton Agreement.
Thirdly, as we approach the October 2010
national elections, we are concerned that divisive and
damaging political rhetoric may threaten regional
reconciliation efforts, undermine progress on the
country’s Euro-Atlantic agenda and distract attention
from real national priorities. It is simply unacceptable
to propose or speculate about the dissolution of the
State, even a peaceful dissolution. It is important for
the country’s leadership to break the troubling cycle in
which narrow ethnic and short-term political interests
are pursued at the expense of long-term objectives that
would benefit all of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
communities.
Despite the challenges that lie ahead, Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s responsible and constructive tenure on
the Council to date demonstrates again the positive role
that the country can play in the international
community. We welcome the progress that Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its neighbours have made to promote
reconciliation, improve bilateral relations and confront
the legacy of the past by condemning war crimes.
In April, NATO foreign ministers invited Bosnia
into NATO’s Membership Action Plan, but with the
clear expectation that the issue of immovable defence
property must be resolved before Bosnia and
Herzegovina can advance in the process. This decision
shows the international community’s confidence that
Bosnia and Herzegovina will undertake the important
reforms still needed to strengthen its institutions and
function more effectively as a State. The ultimate
responsibility for resolving these issues rests with its
leadership.
The United States remains committed to the
framework established by the Dayton Accords and to
strengthening State institutions. We also remain firmly
committed to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity and its integration into EuroAtlantic institutions, in line with the goals of its leaders
and the wishes of its citizens.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
extend a warm welcome to the Chairman of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, His Excellency
Mr. Haris Silajdžić, and to thank him for his statement
made this morning. My appreciation also goes to High
Representative Valentin Inzko for his comprehensive

10-37267

briefing. I commend the dedicated efforts of Mr. Inzko
and his staff made with sincerity and passion to address
complex and sensitive issues on the ground in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
I would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina on its contribution to international peace
and security as a member of the Security Council since
January. The successful post-conflict nation-building
effort of Bosnia and Herzegovina is amply reflected in
its active membership of the Council.
Encouraging positive developments include the
acceptance of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s application
for a NATO Membership Action Plan, with some
conditions, and the prospects for visa liberalization for
travel by citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
European Union (EU) countries.
The country’s relations with Serbia have
improved dramatically, as President Silajdžić and
President Tadić signed the Istanbul Declaration at the
recent summit meeting, along with President Gül of
Turkey. We commend the flexibility shown by both
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia and the important
role played by Turkey in achieving this milestone.
Japan fully supports the policy of Bosnia and
Herzegovina towards Euro-Atlantic integration. We
hope that the country will be able to meet the five
objectives and two conditions soon and that the
transition from the Office of the High Representative
to the EU Special Representative will be realized at the
earliest possible date.
Bosnia and Herzegovina can advance its efforts
towards accession to the EU by accelerating
constitutional reform. In that connection, we note with
concern that neither the five objectives and two
conditions nor constitutional reform have seen concrete
progress. Certain potential causes of instability remain,
as manifested by the recent adoption of the law on
referendum by the National Assembly of the Republika
Srpska.
It is important that the October general elections
be conducted in a fair and stable environment. We urge
all parties to refrain from escalating the ethnocentric
rhetoric and to adopt a reasonable and restrained
attitude. The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
requires continued engagement by the international
community. We believe it is essential that the High

9

S/PV.6319

Representative make full and appropriate use of his
authority. When a negative sign is detected, he should
exercise his early warning function and hold
consultations with the parties concerned.
Japan, as a member of and major contributor to
the Peace Implementation Council, reaffirms its full
support for the High Representative’s role. Japan
continues to contribute to the economic development
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to promoting human
security for every individual in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in other countries in the Western
Balkans.

Herzegovina, for contributing to a safe and secure
environment. It is important, however, that every effort
be made to support the role of the national security
forces so that they can assume responsibility for
protection.
We welcome the progress that has been achieved
in the country in the entrenchment of the rule of law.
We acknowledge the efforts of the European Union
Police Mission, in coordination with the High
Representative, to support police reform and
coordinating the policing aspects of combating major
and organized crime.

Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): We thank Mr. Inzko,
High Representative and European Union Special
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his
briefing. We welcome the Chairman of the Presidency
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, His Excellency
Mr. Silajdžić, and thank him for his statement.

We note, however, that the situation of refugees
and displaced persons remains outstanding. This is a
potentially destabilizing matter if not addressed in a
holistic way. We therefore call on the authorities to
address this matter with a view to ensuring their return
and resettlement.

We commend the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina for its important contribution to the
stability of the country. We also commend the High
Representative for his efforts in facilitating the
implementation of the Dayton Agreement. It is
important that all leaders in the country continue to
commit themselves to dialogue and peaceful
coexistence.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has made tremendous
economic progress. However, the global economic
crisis has had an adverse impact and the country needs
to mitigate the effects of the global slow-down on the
economy, particularly by protecting the most
vulnerable population. We therefore call upon the
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, with the
support of the international partners, to focus on
addressing these issues, which could have serious
implications for the stability of the country.

We note with concern from the briefing the
reported political actions questioning the sovereignty
and sustainability of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s State
institutions, as well as the continuing challenges to the
authority of the High Representative and the Steering
Board of the Peace Implementation Council. We call
on all leaders, particularly the authorities of Republika
Srpska, to refrain from anti-Dayton rhetoric that
challenges the sovereignty and constitutional order of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is important that all parties,
including the neighbours of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
uphold their commitments in the spirit of good
neighbourliness and peaceful coexistence, as enshrined
in the United Nations Charter.
The European Union Force in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (EUFOR) has continued to play a critical
role in providing the crucial reassurance needed by the
citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We note that it has
assisted the Office of the High Representative and
other international organizations in fulfilling their
respective mandates. We therefore salute EUFOR, in
collaboration with the armed forces of Bosnia and

10

Finally, we once again commend the High
Representative and his staff for the good work that they
are doing.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the High Representative for the statement that he has
just given and assure him of France’s support. I
welcome the presence of Mr. Silajdžić, Chairman of
the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
congratulate him on his country’s presence in the
Security Council. France associates itself with the
statement to be made by the representative of the
European Union.
We welcome the progress made by Bosnia and
Herzegovina on two important matters. First, on the
matter of the road map for lifting the visa obligations,
the report transmitted on 26 April by the European
Commission to the Council of Europe and the
European Parliament stresses the progress made on
securitizing documents in the fight against illegal

10-37267

S/PV.6319

immigration and for readmission. This represents a step
forward that brings Bosnia closer to the liberalization
anticipated by Europeans and Bosnians alike.
Secondly, on the matter of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, a month ago the allies offered Bosnia
and Herzegovina the Membership Action Plan on the
condition that the property of the Bosnian Ministry of
Defence be duly registered.
Unfortunately, much remains to be done. Month
after month, year after year, we have called on the
Bosnian authorities to resolve the internal conflicts that
are hindering their country from progressing towards
the prospects we offer. Unfortunately, judging from the
High Representative’s report (S/2010/235) and the tone
and substance of the briefing we have just heard, we
are still far from that point.
In 10 days, a Western Balkan summit will take
place in Sarajevo, 10 years after the Zagreb summit,
which enshrined the prospects of European
membership for all the countries of the region.
However, the international community has had a
massive presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina for
10 years and helped to rebuild its institutions.
Objectives and conditions have been set to seek a
transition that would allow the Bosnian authorities
themselves to decide the fate of their country. The
European Union and the United States have made a
commitment to a process to facilitate negotiations
among the Bosnian leaders and to help them to meet
the conditions set and to implement limited
constitutional reform.
To our regret, the country’s political leaders, in
particular those of Republika Srpska, have not seized
this opportunity. On the contrary, they have stepped up
their attacks on the international community which is
trying to stabilize the country. Such attacks are
intolerable on the part of the leaders seeking to get
their country into the European Union and NATO. We
call on all leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to adopt
an attitude worthy of the larger interests of their
country, especially in the run-up to the October
elections. It is high time that the interests of their
citizens be taken into account and that the latter no
longer be held hostage to an outdated political game.
We welcome the gestures made in the region in
recent
months,
showing
that
dialogue
and
reconciliation have a place in the Balkans and that the
regional cooperation sought by the European Union is

10-37267

not a pipedream. Once again, we call on the leaders of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to implement such initiatives
at the national level and to finally engage in a positive
process that will confirm Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
European perspective. The international community
cannot resolve the problems of Bosnia and
Herzegovina on behalf of its leaders and people. The
fate of their country depends on them alone. It is up to
them to understand that an honest compromise is better
than outmoded rhetoric or sterile intransigence. It is up
to them to exhibit the courage to resolve their
problems.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Haris Silajdžić, Chairman of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and thank him
for his statement. I thank High Representative Valentin
Inzko for his briefing on developments in the country
during the past six months.
Nigeria welcomes the positive developments,
including the progress made in addressing the
conditions for visa liberalization with the European
Union, as well as the acceptance of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s application for a Membership Action
Plan by NATO. We are pleased with the improved
relations between the country and its immediate
neighbours, resulting in increased diplomatic activity
among them, as well as the furtherance of
reconciliation and the promotion of peace within the
region.
We note that attacks against State institutions and
nationalistic rhetoric undermine efforts to promote
peace and stability. Such actions have also constrained
efforts by the High Representative and the Steering
Board of the Peace Implementation Council to fully
implement their mandates. The limited progress made
in implementing necessary reforms and in meeting the
outstanding requirements set by the Steering Board for
the transition from the Office of the High
Representative to a European Union presence requires
attention. The General Framework Agreement for
Peace needs sustained support.
If these issues are not handled properly, they
could trigger further tension and possibly affect the
general election slated for October. The leaders must
demonstrate the requisite political will to promote
reconciliation, peace and development in the country
and the region as a whole. In this regard, we urge
political leaders to refrain from divisive and

11

S/PV.6319

anti-Dayton rhetoric, as this may impede the progress
recorded thus far. They should also commit to dialogue
and compromise in resolving their differences.
We welcome the efforts of the United States and
the European Union to assist the country in resolving
the remaining issues on the agenda set by the Peace
Implementation Council for the closure of the Office of
the High Representative and in reforming the
Constitution within the framework of the Dayton
Agreement. We also welcome the follow-up meeting
being facilitated by the United States in June.
We note the call by the Parliamentary Assembly
of the Council of Europe for constitutional reform, and
the Sejdic-Finci decision on the election eligibility
provisions of the Constitution. It is our hope that any
envisaged process will take into account the specific
circumstances and concerns of all the country’s
peoples. We appreciate the role of European Union
peacekeeping, in collaboration with the armed forces of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, in fostering stability and
security in the country. We urge the High
Representative to continue with his efforts to promote
the admission of Bosnia and Herzegovina into the
European Union.
In conclusion, we urge continued support for the
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina in its efforts to
implement its justice sector reform strategy, to promote
the return of internally displaced persons, and to
strengthen its economy. We call for concerted action by
the international community to facilitate attainment of
the goals of these reform efforts.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): It is an honour to welcome
His Excellency Mr. Haris Silajdžić, Chairman of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and I thank
him for his statement. I also thank High Representative
Valentin Inzko for his informative briefing.
As we mark the eighteenth anniversary of the
admission of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the United
Nations, there are many more reasons for celebration.
A safe and secure environment in the country
continues. Progress has been made on many other
fronts, such as the efforts towards Euro-Atlantic
integration, the accession to the NATO Membership
Action Plan, and important developments in the
economic situation, despite enormous challenges. Also
encouraging is the fact that the regional situation has
improved and that Bosnia and Herzegovina’s relations
with its neighbours are developing constructively. The

12

positive role the country is playing in the international
community, as illustrated by its active membership in
the Security Council, is also commendable. These
developments show that unity and a sense of common
purpose among leaders can bear fruit not only in key
strategic spheres, but also in the form of benefits of
direct and immediate interest to ordinary citizens.
We join others in expressing concern at
statements and decisions made by political leaders in
the entities, especially Republika Srpska, that are
inconsistent with the Dayton Peace Agreement.
Challenges to the authority of the Security Council, the
Peace Implementation Council Steering Board and the
High Representative must cease. Protecting the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is indispensable. The Security Council
must continue to closely monitor the situation on the
ground.
As the country prepares for the next general
elections in October, nationalist and divisive rhetoric is
particularly worrisome. We urge all parties to exercise
maximum restraint in this regard. At the same time,
efforts to strengthen the State at the national level
should preserve the rights and prerogatives of all
communal entities. This is an important issue that has
to be addressed carefully. We therefore support
initiatives, such as the Butmir process, that seek to
engage the leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina in
this discussion. We hope that efforts in this regard can
be sustained so that they bear fruit soon.
The strong message of unity, cooperation and
peaceful coexistence that we all send today to Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s leaders is also valid for the Western
Balkans as a whole. We congratulate the Serbian
Parliament on the resolution adopted in March
regarding the Srebrenica massacre of 1995. Although
some might have preferred a different wording for it,
the historic apology made by the Serbs represents a
significant step towards reconciliation in the subregion.
Also encouraging was the address delivered in
Sarajevo by President Josipović on Croatia’s policies
during the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The international community should continue to
help Bosnia and Herzegovina find ways to overcome
political difficulties and strike the appropriate balance
between centralization and decentralization. We are
certain that the country, with our continued support,
will succeed in consolidating a fully functional and

10-37267

S/PV.6319

self-sustaining State. This is the only way to the future
of peace and prosperity that all in Bosnia and
Herzegovina wish for and rightfully deserve.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): I too would like to welcome His Excellency
Mr. Haris Silajdžić, Chairman of the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to thank him for his
informative briefing. I would also like to thank
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, for the quality of the presentation of
his third report (S/2010/235) on the implementation of
the General Framework Agreement for Peace in that
country. Gabon takes this opportunity to commend him
highly for his ongoing efforts to effectively implement
the Dayton Peace Agreement.
As noted in the report, significant progress has
been made in several areas, including the construction
of infrastructure, visa liberalization with the European
Union, and Bosnia and Herzegovina’s progress towards
membership of NATO. To these advances we must also
add the status of non-permanent member of the
Security Council, to which Bosnia and Herzegovina is
making a very significant contribution. This represents
the manifest recognition of the international
community of the efforts being deployed by the
authorities of the country to improve its future in the
political, institutional, economic and security sectors.
Although we welcome the achievement of these
steps, we are concerned about the various stumbling
blocks that continue to hinder the full implementation
of the Peace Agreement. The delay in setting up the
Office of the Special Representative of the European
Union, for example, has hindered the attainment of
some goals of the Agreement and the candidacy of
Bosnia and Herzegovina for the European Union.
A few months from the holding of general
elections in October 2010, it is very important that the
parties respect the obligations that they voluntary
undertook when they signed the Peace Agreement. In
this respect, we would encourage them to cooperate
fully with those involved in implementing the Peace
Agreement, including the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. To that end, we
welcome the decision taken by NATO to maintain its
presence in this country in order to continue to
contribute to the effectiveness of the Peace Agreement,
with the reassuring cooperation of the military mission

10-37267

of the European
Herzegovina.

Union

Force

in

Bosnia

and

My country remains committed to the sovereignty
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and praises the efforts of
the authorities of that country to launch a national
dialogue and reconcile with its neighbours. I would
therefore urge them to continue along this path and to
remain committed to the implementation of the Dayton
Peace Agreement.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): At the outset, let
me warmly welcome Mr. Haris Silajdžić, Chairman of
the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and thank
him for his important contribution.
I should also like to welcome the High
Representative,
my
friend
and
countryman
Mr. Valentin Inzko. We would like to thank him for the
report he submitted to the Council (see S/2010/235).
We fully share his assessment of recent developments
and the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We would
like to reaffirm our full and continued support for him
and his Office, as well as for the efforts that he has
been undertaking to fully implement the Dayton
Accords and to facilitate reform. High Representative
Inzko recalled the contribution my country was able to
make on this Council in 1992. Eighteen years later, as
partners and neighbours of Bosnia and Herzegovina, at
this very Council table we look back to that
contribution with great satisfaction.
We would like to align ourselves with the
statement to be delivered by the delegation of the
European Union (EU), but I should also like to make
the following additional points.
We congratulate Bosnia and Herzegovina on its
progress on the path towards Euro-Atlantic integration.
In its assessment, the European Commission has
attested that Bosnia and Herzegovina meets most of the
benchmarks set out in the visa road map. We are also
encouraged by the fact that, in Tallinn on 22 and
23 April, NATO foreign ministers offered Bosnia and
Herzegovina a Membership Action Plan, and we hope
that the condition to find an appropriate solution
regarding immovable defence property will be fulfilled
in due course.
We are pleased by the genuine commitment
shown in recent weeks and months to achieving
regional reconciliation. Both the adoption by the
Serbian Parliament of a resolution on 31 March

13

S/PV.6319

condemning the massacres in Srebrenica and offering
apologies to the families and relatives of the victims
and the visits of the Presidents of Serbia and Croatia
have clearly added to the stability of the entire Western
Balkans region. We believe that Chairman Silajdžić’s
own forthcoming visit to Belgrade will provide another
opportunity to substantially improve regional
cooperation.

environment that helps the Office of the High
Representative and other international actors to
implement their mandates. This assessment is also
reflected in the conclusions of the European Union
Foreign Affairs Council on 25 January and by
resolution 1895 (2009). Austria will maintain its
commitment as one of the core troop contributors to
that operation.

Unfortunately, progress on other important and
long-overdue reforms has been slow and has in many
cases stalled completely. We are very concerned by the
fact that this lack of progress is mostly due to
deliberate obstruction directed against the functioning
of the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Fulfilment of
the five objectives and two conditions for the closure
of the Office of the High Representative, the
implementation of the recent rulings of the European
Court of Human Rights and the adoption of a census
law applicable to the entire State are prerequisites for
the proper functioning of the State. We also hope to see
progress on constitutional reforms after the elections
on 3 October. These reforms will increase efficiency,
help Bosnia and Herzegovina to implement the reforms
necessary for accession to the European Union and
thereby contribute to stability and economic growth, to
the benefit of the entire population of the country.

Finally, let me reiterate our firm conviction that
the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the entire
region lies within the European Union. That is by far
the best way to create a broad zone of stability in the
Balkans. This message was again confirmed at a highlevel expert seminar that the Austrian Foreign Minister
Michael Spindelegger hosted in Vienna on 12 May.
Experts from the Western Balkans and the European
Union addressed the current political, economic and
social challenges of the Western Balkans with a view to
EU integration. We hope that these discussions and the
resulting recommendations will contribute in a positive
fashion to the debate on the future enlargement of the
European Union that will be an important part of the
upcoming EU-Western Balkans summit in Sarajevo on
2 June.

We appeal to all political parties in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to refrain from the use of divisive and
nationalistic rhetoric in the upcoming presidential and
parliamentary elections. We are particularly concerned
by the increase in the number of legal and political
actions that have been directed against State
institutions, competencies and laws, as well as
challenges to the authority of the High Representative,
including the adoption of a law by the National
Assembly of Republika Srpska on the potential holding
of a referendum. In this respect, it is particularly
worrying that political leaders of Republika Srpska
have repeatedly questioned the sovereignty and
sustainability of Bosnia and Herzegovina. That is not
acceptable.
Against the background of the global financial
crisis, the upcoming elections will be a crucial
opportunity to provide the population with serious
choices pertaining to necessary economic and social
reforms. We agree with the assessment of the High
Representative
that
the
European
Union-led
peacekeeping force in Bosnia and Herzegovina still
plays a key role in contributing to a safe and secure

14

Mr. Çorman (Turkey): Let me begin by
welcoming His Excellency Mr. Haris Silajdžić,
Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. He has come to New York right after his
visit to Istanbul, where he attended the Somalia
Conference. Let me extend once again the gratitude of
my authorities for his participation and most valuable
contributions.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
sincerely congratulate President Silajdžić on the
election of his country to the Security Council. The
presence of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the Council is a
clear sign of the confidence that the international
community has entrusted in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and Turkey feels privileged to share this historic
occasion with that country.
We are also pleased to see High Representative
Valentin Inzko among us again. I want to thank him for
his unrelenting efforts and leadership, as well as for
introducing the comprehensive report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2010/235) and the succinct briefing he
provided today.
As a Balkan country itself, Turkey attaches great
importance to achieving lasting peace and stability in

10-37267

S/PV.6319

the region. We consider a sovereign, democratic, and
stable and functional State of Bosnia and Herzegovina
in its internationally recognized borders to be an
undeniable prerequisite to this objective. That is why,
in addition to our excellent bilateral relations and as
underlined in the briefing of the High Representative,
Turkey continues to make every effort to assist Bosnia
and Herzegovina in its endeavours to promote regional
cooperation.
Indeed,
regional
ownership
and
inclusiveness should also be key elements in our quest
for peace and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In this context, the Turkish initiatives of holding
high-level trilateral meetings among Turkey, Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Croatia, as well as among
Turkey, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia, have
surely contributed to the enhancement of regional
understanding and collaboration. The Istanbul
Declaration signed on 24 April 2010 by the Presidents
of Turkey, Serbia and Mr. Silajdžić himself is an
important step in this direction. It will not only
strengthen the bilateral relations between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Serbia but will also help create an
environment conducive to regional dialogue and
cooperation. We understand that Mr. Silajdžić will now
be travelling to Belgrade, after his visit to New York.
We very much welcome that initiative and congratulate
Mr. Silajdžić on his leadership in thus continuing the
positive momentum created between the two countries.
We
also
thank
His
Excellency
High
Representative Valentin Inzko for his generous words
of recognition and praise concerning Turkey’s sincere
efforts. We express our resolute intention to continue
them with the same determination.
We are glad to see that, since the conflicts of the
1990s, Bosnia and Herzegovina has made considerable
progress. Of course, there are still daunting challenges
ahead, and progress has not been as swift as we all
expected. But, given its turbulent past, Bosnia and
Herzegovina is certainly making important strides in
the right direction. In that regard, cognizant of the fact
that the future of the region is closely tied to that of
Europe as a whole, we firmly support the aspiration of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to fully integrate with the
Euro-Atlantic institutions, and we hope that those
institutions will also embrace Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In that frame of mind, we greatly welcome the
decision taken at the NATO ministerial meeting, in
Tallinn, on 22 April 2010, accepting the application of

10-37267

Bosnia and Herzegovina to join the Membership
Action Plan. We are hopeful that the condition put
forward for that step will soon be met, so that Bosnia
and Herzegovina can start to benefit from enhanced
cooperation with NATO members. Bosnia and
Herzegovina should be further assisted in that
direction.
At the same time, we appreciate the progress
achieved in addressing the conditions for visa
liberalization with the European Union. Again, we
hope that the remaining technicalities will soon be
resolved, and that Bosnia and Herzegovina will enjoy
the same status as its regional neighbours. In that
regard, Turkey supports and appreciates the efforts of
the European Union to assist Bosnia and Herzegovina
to take its rightful place in the European family of
nations, including by providing stability with its Police
Mission and through Operation Althea. As an active
contributor to both of those missions, Turkey will
remain ready to continue and increase its contributions.
Having said that, and as I have already suggested,
we cannot help but share the concerns of Mr. Inzko
about several aspects of the domestic situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, in particular with respect to
anti-Dayton rhetoric and actions that challenge the
sovereignty and constitutional order of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The report of the High Representative
depicts those issues in great detail, and we agree in
general with the High Representative’s observations.
Let me also underscore that we firmly support the
High Representative in using the powers granted to
him, in order to lead Bosnia and Herzegovina to a
better future. Hence, we do not agree that the actions of
the High Representative are unlawful and reject the
challenges to the authority of the international
community and that of the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board. In particular, the new law on
referendum adopted by the Republika Srpska would be
in clear violation of appropriate legislation and valid
international legal mechanisms, and is therefore
unacceptable.
In the run-up to the general elections scheduled
for October, to whose free and fair conduct we attach
utmost importance, we want to see all parties embrace
a common vision and act in accordance with it, rather
than pursuing parochial ethnic interests. Thus, we
reject all secessionist intentions, support the
democratic forces in the country and remain hopeful

15

S/PV.6319

that the democratic ideals and aspirations of the
peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina will eventually
overcome divisive tendencies.
Let me conclude by stating once again that the
integration of Bosnia and Herzegovina into the
Euro-Atlantic structures will eliminate any feelings of
exclusion, instil confidence in the peoples of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and ensure the country’s future as a
strong, stable, secure and full-fledged European
country. Turkey is fully committed to that objective,
and we will do everything possible to assist the peoples
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to achieve their rightful
place in the international community.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I too would like to welcome among us
Mr. Haris Silajdžić, Chairman of the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina and
European Union Special Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and to thank them for their statements.
The delegation of Mexico welcomes the active
participation of Bosnia and Herzegovina as an elected
member of the Security Council. This demonstrates the
progress that the country has made over the past
several years. Bosnia and Herzegovina’s strategic
rapprochement vis-à-vis the European Union and the
development of more fluid cooperative relations with
its neighbours are important steps forward in
consolidating the country’s role on the international
stage and in promoting stability in the Balkans. Yet
these positive international developments should be
accompanied by improved political understanding in
the domestic arena. To bring lasting peace and stability
to Bosnia and Herzegovina, the country’s various
political forces must intensify their dialogue and
understanding and must demonstrate political will to
make genuine progress on pending aspects of the peace
process.
That is why we regret the extreme divisionist and
nationalist rhetoric of one of the parties, along with its
attempts to challenge the activities and mandate of the
High Representative and Special Representative of the
European Union. We reiterate our call to all political
actors in Bosnia and Herzegovina to redouble their
efforts to meet outstanding commitments, such as those
relating to refugees and displaced persons, State
property and security sector reform. We also call on
them to keep open the path of negotiation and dialogue

16

in order to narrow their differences and avoid action
that could endanger the country’s stability, in particular
with a view to the general election to be held in
October.
We consider that the presence of the European
Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(EUFOR) continues to be necessary to guarantee the
country’s security through its support for the Office of
the High Representative and other international entities
in fulfilling their mandates, and by providing training
and assistance to the country’s security forces. The
international community should continue to support the
efforts of the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to strengthen the rule of law.
We regret that, yet again, it has not been possible
to achieve the political consensus necessary to
implement the provisions of annex 7 of the Dayton
Peace Agreement, which provides for the establishment
of a comprehensive strategy on the return of refugees
and displaced persons. That is why we call once again
on State authorities to take stronger action to
implement the National War Crimes Prosecution
Strategy, the National Justice Sector Reform Strategy
and the package of constitutional reforms. We must
ensure that the legal framework is compatible with the
country’s international human rights obligations with
respect
to
equality
before
the
law
and
non-discrimination.
In that respect, we hope that efforts to compile
information on war crimes not yet in the central
database, the investigations concerning the 1,381 cases
already presented to the Office of the Chief Prosecutor,
and the broadening of legal cooperation agreements
with other countries of the region will soon yield
results that will make it possible to fight impunity and
make progress in the national reconciliation process.
All those efforts should include greater cooperation by
all States in the region with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
I should like to conclude by reiterating Mexico’s
support for the work of the High Representative. We
hope that Bosnia and Herzegovina will succeed in
permanently overcoming differences and consolidating
a multi-ethnic democratic State in which its citizens
can, along with all the citizens of the Balkan region,
enjoy a more stable and prosperous future as an
integral part of Europe.

10-37267

S/PV.6319

Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have listened carefully to the assessment
of the current situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina by
Mr. Haris Silajdžić, Chairman of the Presidency of that
country. Unfortunately, that assessment was unilateral
and unconstructive.
We
thank
Mr.
Valentin
Inzko,
High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his
introduction to the Council of the report on
developments in that country (S/2010/235, annex,
enclosure). We cannot recognize that document as
objective and balanced. Consistent with the negative
practices used in preparing it, the report suffers from
overt anti-Serbian excesses.
Republika Srpska is being held responsible for
the difficult pre-election political atmosphere in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, while the destructive role of
Federation politicians is being hushed up. Nor has
there been proper focus on Federation politicians who
have blocked the consideration of Republika Srpska’s
compromise constitutional amendments, which were
designed to alleviate the concerns expressed by the
European Court of Human Rights in its 2009 verdict.
The report’s criticism of the law on referendum
recently adopted in Republika Srpska sidesteps the fact
that its sphere of application is limited to the
jurisdiction of that entity.
In spite of a certain increase in the temperature of
political rhetoric in the unfolding campaign leading up
to the general election scheduled for 3 October, the
overall situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina could be
deemed satisfactory. In a number of areas, local
authorities have been able to achieve decent results.
With regard to the report’s defence of
constitutional changes in Bosnia, we should take the
position that the major role in such processes belongs
to local political figures and that these reforms should
be implemented solely with the consent of all Bosnian
parties, as called for in the Dayton Constitution. We
agree with colleagues who have today noted how
important it is for Bosnian parties to achieve that type
of agreement. The role of the international community
is to assist in reaching compromise, not to impose
quick fixes.
We believe it important to make further efforts to
promptly attain the goals and conditions agreed upon
by the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board,
which are designed to bring about conditions for

10-37267

drawing down the Office of the High Representative
and converting it into a mission of the European Union
Special Representative.
With regard to the final unresolved question of
the division of State property among various levels of
authority, it is essential to rely on the Steering Board’s
agreed territorial and functional approach, which
provides for transfer to the pan-Bosnian level of sites
for State agencies. Entity bodies would then exercise
all remaining relevant powers.
With regard to the High Representative’s
emergency mechanisms, especially the so-called Bonn
powers, we believe that the sphere of their application
is limited to the areas of ensuring the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and of
compliance with the Dayton Peace Agreement — and
here I might observe that the question of violations of
Dayton has not been noted for a number of years. In
our view, it is unacceptable to use those tools for shortterm political purposes, especially to resolve economic
disputes.
Russia is prepared to work together with partners
to continue to provide Bosnia and Herzegovina with all
possible support in building a modern democratic State
on the basis of the Dayton Peace Agreement. We
believe that the upcoming elections will be an
important step in that direction, confirming Bosnia’s
ability to address the challenges before it. For our part,
we will continue to interact constructively with the
delegation of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the Security
Council.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I too
would like to join other Security Council colleagues in
welcoming to the Council Chamber today His
Excellency Mr. Haris Silajdžić, Chairman of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina. I would also like to thank the High
Representative for his comprehensive, balanced and
sobering report on developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina over the past six months (S/2010/235,
annex, enclosure). The United Kingdom fully supports
and appreciates the High Representative’s efforts to
uphold the Dayton Agreement and to facilitate the
reform process in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The United Kingdom supports European Union
(EU) enlargement to all the countries of the Western
Balkans. EU integration is crucial to entrench stability

17

S/PV.6319

there. We are concerned that, while some countries in
the region have made significant progress over the past
year, Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to be held
back by political deadlock. We do not want to see
Bosnia and Herzegovina fall behind the rest of the
region.

European Court of Human Rights ruling on minority
rights in Bosnia and Herzegovina underlines that wider
need for constitutional reform. Progress in Bosnia and
Herzegovina on delivering the necessary reforms for
European visa liberalization demonstrates what can be
achieved when the political will exists.

Like the High Representative, the United
Kingdom welcomes recent positive steps on regional
cooperation in the Western Balkans. The Serbian
parliamentary resolution condemning the Srebrenica
massacre was a welcome step towards greater
reconciliation in the region. Serbia, Turkey and Bosnia
and Herzegovina have sought to improve their relations
through the Istanbul Declaration. We urge Bosnia and
Herzegovina to continue to respond positively to such
initiatives. We look forward to the forthcoming highlevel Sarajevo meeting on advancing regional
cooperation.

The High Representative’s report highlights the
economic difficulties faced by Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is important, therefore, that the
relevant authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina meet
their obligations under agreements with international
financial institutions, particularly the International
Monetary Fund. This requires the necessary legislation
not only to be enacted, but also promptly and
efficiently to be implemented.

We share the serious concern set out in the High
Representative’s report about the internal political
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina over the past six
months. In particular, we regret the lack of political
will to deliver progress on key reforms and the
challenges to the Dayton Agreement and to the High
Representative’s authority. The United Kingdom fully
supports all the decisions taken by the High
Representative during the reporting period. We are
concerned about plans for a referendum in the
Republika Srpska entity challenging the legitimacy of
the High Representative’s decisions. All actors in
Bosnia and Herzegovina need to be clear that the
international community, including the Security
Council, is fully committed to the country’s territorial
integrity and to the framework established by the
Dayton Agreement.
The European Union has made clear that a
membership application from Bosnia and Herzegovina
cannot be considered while the Office of the High
Representative remains in place. It is therefore
essential that Bosnian leaders work constructively
together to deliver the remaining objectives and
conditions, which remain necessary for the transition
of the Office of the High Representative to take place.
Furthermore, the European Union has been clear
that constitutional reform is required in order to create
a functional State. Central Government in Bosnia and
Herzegovina needs to be effective enough to meet the
responsibilities of EU and NATO membership. The

18

The United Kingdom welcomes the decision
taken by NATO foreign ministers to conditionally offer
Bosnia and Herzegovina a Membership Action Plan.
This is a strong signal of NATO’s commitment to
stability and security in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Bosnian leaders now need to focus urgently on
delivering the one final condition by resolving the
issue of defence property. Unless this issue is resolved,
the recent positive decision on the Membership Action
Plan cannot be progressed further.
We agree with the High Representative’s
assessment of the ongoing importance of the role
played by the European Union Force in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in underpinning stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
thank Bosnia and Herzegovina for its contribution to
the work of the Security Council so far this year. We
look forward to continuing to work closely with that
country for the remainder of its time on the Security
Council.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation wishes to thank you, Sir, for having
convened today’s meeting. We also thank the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Inzko,
for his briefing and for his efforts to achieve progress
in the political process in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I welcome the presence at today’s meeting of the
Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Haris Silajdžić, and thank him for his
statement.

10-37267

S/PV.6319

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina has
remained generally stable of late. Reforms in the area
of the Constitution, the rule of law and national
defence have contributed to some progress.
Preparations are under way for the general elections
scheduled for October, and economic reform has
achieved some results.
At the same time, Bosnia and Herzegovina is
confronting challenges that merit the due attention of
all parties. These challenges have been exacerbated by
attempts to hinder the implementation of the Dayton
Peace Agreement, which threaten to undermine State
sovereignty and authority, as well as existing
legislation. The integrity of the State is under threat.
In
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina,
economic
development has slowed, hampered by the international
economic crisis, while social problems have been
exacerbated, which is a cause of concern. China
respects the independence and territorial integrity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the right of its various
ethnic groups to choose their own paths to
development. We sincerely hope that all parties
concerned in Bosnia and Herzegovina will strive to
implement the Dayton Peace Agreement and work
actively for dialogue to strengthen the political and
reconciliation process, to ensure the success of the
general elections to be held in October, to achieve
further progress in the political and economic areas,
and to bring peace, stability and prosperity to Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the entire Balkan region.
We support the efforts of the international
community to strengthen its mediation with a view to
attaining high-level dialogue and concrete results. We
hope that the International Monetary Fund will duly
address the dire consequences of the economic and
political situation in the region and pursue vigorous
measures to improve it.
China welcomes the intention of the European
Union (EU) to continue to play an active role in
maintaining security and stability and promoting socioeconomic development in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The EU Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina has begun to
extend military assistance to the Bosnian army, which
will help to safeguard State sovereignty. China and
Bosnia and Herzegovina share a long-standing
friendship and have seen their relations thrive.
Mr. Nikola Špirić, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, recently

10-37267

concluded a successful visit to China, and we are doing
our utmost, alongside the international community, to
contribute to sustainable peace and development in his
country.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Lebanon.
At the outset, I wish to thank His Excellency
Mr. Haris Silajdžić for his statement. Our thanks go
also to High Representative Inzko for his
comprehensive briefing. We commend his efforts to
promote the political process and assure him of our full
support.
We support Bosnia and Herzegovina in its
endeavours to meet the objectives and conditions of
the Dayton Peace Agreement and the Steering Board of
the Peace Implementation Council, which will
ultimately lead to the closure of the Office of the High
Representative. We support Bosnia and Herzegovina as
it embarks on a path that will lead to stability and
prosperity.
The
country
has
seen
positive
developments, in particular with regard to meeting the
conditions set by the European Union for visa
liberalization and to relations with its neighbours.
However, we believe that progress should be
achieved in several areas, such as constitutional and
economic reform; the resolution of issues related to
State property, especially defence property; filling key
public positions; and the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons. That will require serious
dialogue with a view to achieving genuine
reconciliation and cooperation that will allow the State
to perform its functions. Any diversion from those
principles will have a negative impact on all parties,
irrespective of their political orientation and position,
and on the economic situation and livelihoods of
Bosnia’s citizens.
In the light of the elections to be held in October,
we call on all actors to exercise restraint and to refrain
from engaging in inflammatory rhetoric that focuses on
narrow ethnic interests and magnifies divisions. With
regard to the concerning escalation of rhetoric
attacking State institutions, laws and prerogatives, we
stress the importance of the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina within its
internationally recognized borders. We are concerned
over these attempts, which could compromise its unity,

19

S/PV.6319

and subsequently its stability and that of the entire
Balkan region.
In closing, we commend the positive environment
prevailing in the region and welcome the
announcement by Croatia and Serbia of their support
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We commend Turkey for its role in
conducting tripartite talks among Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its two neighbours. This initiative
will strengthen stability and good-neighbourly
relations. We cherish the hope that Bosnia and
Herzegovina will enjoy a future of security and
prosperity.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): At the outset, allow me to
welcome His Excellency Mr. Haris Silajdžić, Chairman
of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina. My
delegation is particularly pleased that his country is
participating in this debate for the first time as a
member of the Security Council.
We also welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative and European Union (EU) Special
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and thank
him for his briefing. The report he presented
introduced (S/2010/235) reflects the challenges and
complexities of the situation. I would also like to
reaffirm Croatia’s full and continued support for him
and his Office, and to express our appreciation for the
personal effort he invests in carrying out his mission.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the European Union
in a few minutes. Here, I wish to make some additional
comments.
Croatia strongly supports the clear and
unambiguous European and Euro-Atlantic perspective
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Our support for and
commitment to the European perspective for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as for all the countries of South-East
Europe, was formalized in the delivery of our
translation of the EU acquis communautaire to the
prime ministers at the Croatian-Slovenian regional
conference in Brdo, near Kranj, in March this year. We
believe that membership in the European Union is the
future of all countries of South-East Europe as the most
suitable framework for their overall development. We

20

also warmly welcomed the recent invitation extended
by NATO to Bosnia and Herzegovina to join its
Membership Action Plan, a step that Croatia strongly
and actively supported.
For Croatia, the territorial integrity, sovereignty
and equality of the three constituent peoples are the
basic preconditions for the country’s stability and
sustainability. Assisting Bosnia and Herzegovina in
reaching sustainable stability and functionality is one
of our regional priorities.
As we just heard, the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina have made significant progress in the area
of visa liberalization requirements. Croatia is strongly
convinced that this progress should be recognized and
hopes to see visa liberalization implemented in the
course of this year. The citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina deserve the same privileges as the citizens
of other countries of the region. Any delay would only
benefit those advocating the status quo, and the peoples
and citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina would
continue to bear the consequences beyond their direct
responsibilities.
The stability, security and progress of South-East
Europe are in Croatia’s strategic interest. We firmly
support all the countries of the region in their reforms,
and we offer them our assistance and experience on
their EU and NATO integration paths. Following the
success of the Zagreb summit, we believe that the time
is ripe to re-energize the process. Thus, we look
forward to the upcoming conference to be held in
Sarajevo on 2 June — marking the tenth anniversary of
the Zagreb summit and bringing together ministers of
foreign affairs of the EU and the region — as an
additional impetus for Bosnia and Herzegovina to
continue more energetically with the necessary reforms
and to further its efforts towards Euro-Atlantic
integration.
However, Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to
face considerable problems, some of which are
challenging its very foundations as established by the
Dayton Peace Agreement. Regrettably, we have heard
that in most other areas only limited progress has been
noted and that some serious challenges have been
raised by the authorities of Republika Srpska to State
institutions and their functioning, as well as to the
authority of the High Representative. Croatia urges the
political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to find
strength and reach compromise on issues key to a

10-37267

S/PV.6319

sustainable future for the country, its peoples and
citizens. There will be no progress without
consensus — which has to come from within — and
which Croatia, together with other friends of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, strongly advocates.
Croatia calls for negotiations on constitutional
reform to be continued as soon as the new authorities
are formed after the October elections. Further delays
on constitutional reform could have long-term
consequences for the country’s future, constitutional
reform being a key precondition for successful EuroAtlantic integration. Croatia advocates constitutional
amendments that would provide full equality for all
constituent peoples, as well as for all citizens, applied
throughout the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In this process, the political views of the
representatives of the three constituent peoples should
be valued equally, as the country’s stability depends on
respect for the constitutional principle of the collective
equality of all three constituent peoples — Bosniaks,
Serbs and Croats — and all citizens. We have stated on
several occasions that there cannot be a Bosnia and
Herzegovina without Croats in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Their political and cultural survival is
vital to the continued existence of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as these two elements are closely
intertwined. Given the singular position of Croats in
Bosnia and Herzegovina as the smallest and most
vulnerable group, it is all the more important that their
voice be considered on a basis of equality, both ethnic
and civic, as guaranteed in the Constitution and as
arising from the history of the country. All three
peoples must feel that Bosnia and Herzegovina is their
country, and they should feel safe and protected
throughout its entire territory. Their fundamental rights
and freedoms, as well as their civic and ethnic rights,
should be protected throughout, and their right
guaranteed to return safe and protected to their pre-war
homes.
The fight against impunity for war crimes is yet
another important factor in the normalization of the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Croatia firmly
believes that the mandate of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia cannot be declared
complete without bringing to justice the two remaining
fugitives, Ratko Mladic and Goran Hadzic, indicted for
the most atrocious crimes committed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in Croatia. It is also important that, at

10-37267

the same time, national courts fulfil their lasting
responsibility and address other war crime cases.
In such circumstances, Croatia believes that it
would be premature to begin the closure of the Office
of the High Representative this year. In this regard,
Croatia is concerned by the general sense of fatigue in
the international community and believes that a strong
international commitment is still very much needed in
order to help improve conditions that will move the
current situation forward and help remedy the
remaining fundamental problems.
Before closing, I would like to reiterate that
Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina enjoy a very
close, friendly and cordial relationship on many levels.
Strong Croatian support has been duly recognized by
Bosnia and Herzegovina and is manifested by our
intense and frequent communication at the highest
level, underscored by a number of visits exchanged. As
noted in the High Representative’s report, over the past
months both President Josipović and Prime Minister
Kosor visited Sarajevo, while the Chairman of the
Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina
visited Zagreb. The Government of Croatia and the
Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina are
preparing a joint session, which should take place next
month. We therefore believe that the observation made
in paragraph 20 of the High Representative’s report,
implying strained political relations, is surely
inadvertently imprecise.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor
to the representative of Serbia.
Mr. Starčević (Serbia) I would like first of all to
welcome Mr. Haris Silajdžić, Chairman of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
The delegation of Serbia has studied the thirtyseventh report on the implementation of the Dayton
Peace Agreement (S/2010/235) and listened to the
views expressed in the Council today with keen
interest. As a signatory and guarantor of the
implementation of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and pursuant to
resolution 1031 (1995), Serbia is consistently and
firmly committed to full respect for the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Proceeding from the strategic foreign policy priorities
and commitments of the Republic of Serbia to the

21

S/PV.6319

promotion of relations with neighbouring countries, I
would like to confirm once again the support of my
country for the integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and our readiness for close cooperation in all areas of
mutual interest, particularly in building peace, stability
and prosperity in the Balkans and in furthering our
common goal of joining the European Union (EU).

Serbia supports Bosnia and Herzegovina on its
road to the European Union and strongly advocates its
inclusion in the EU decision on visa regime
liberalization. Serbia expects that the EU-Western
Balkans conference, to be held in Sarajevo on 2 June,
will encourage the EU commitment to continuing the
process of enlargement.

As a country committed to maintaining goodneighbourly relations, Serbia is a staunch advocate of
the lasting stabilization of the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It will respect every agreement reached
by consent of the two entities and by consensus among
the three constituent peoples in Bosnia and
Herzegovina containing sustainable solutions that are
in the spirit of modern democratic values. We
encourage all participants in this process to do
everything that is necessary to achieving such an
agreement. Similarly, it is by upholding the principle of
consensus — two plus three — that Serbia views the
ongoing process of transfer of competences from the
Office of the High Representative to the EU Special
Representative.

Serbia continues to believe that bilateral and
intra-regional economic cooperation provides a special
impetus to the lasting stabilization of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as well as of the entire region of SouthEast Europe and the Western Balkans. For its part,
Serbia stands ready to cooperate fully in this regard.

Guided by its resolve to help achieve complete
normalization and foster a new quality of relations,
Serbia has taken important steps towards full national
reconciliation. The declaration on Srebrenica adopted
by the National Assembly of the Republic of Serbia is
a clear signal of the support of my country to Bosnia
and Herzegovina and of our readiness to confront the
past and take political responsibility for the future and
well-being of the region.
The Declaration adopted at the Istanbul summit
by the Presidents of Serbia and Turkey and the
Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and the results of the trilateral meetings
of the Foreign Ministers of Serbia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Turkey held thus far have made an
important contribution and given impetus to the
promotion of good-neighbourly relations, better
regional cooperation and a common European future.
Serbia views the development of its relations with
Republika Srpska on the basis of the Agreement on
Special Parallel Relations to be within the context of
its efforts to strengthen overall relations with Bosnia
and Herzegovina. I wish also to point out that my
country supports the continuation of negotiations and
concrete work on the resolution of border issues
between Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia.

22

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, acting head
of the delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations.
Mr. Serrano: I wish to thank you, Sir, for having
invited the European Union (EU) to today’s important
meeting.
The candidate countries Turkey and Croatia; the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania and Montenegro; as
well as the Republic of Moldova, Ukraine and Georgia
align themselves with this declaration.
I wish to thank High Representative Inzko for his
presentation and reiterate the full support of the EU for
his Office and actions. We have also listened carefully
to President Silajdžić’s important statement, and I wish
to express my gratitude for the cooperation and support
Bosnia and Herzegovina has extended to the European
Union during its membership in the Security Council.
As the High Representative has reported, Bosnia
and Herzegovina has made some progress in recent
months in advancing its European and Euro-Atlantic
perspectives. We commend these developments and
encourage further efforts. It is also encouraging that
regional cooperation in the Western Balkans has
continued to develop positively, with renewed
constructive engagement from Serbia and Croatia and
with Turkey playing a useful role. We look forward to
the momentum that will be generated by the
EU-Western Balkans ministerial meeting in Sarajevo
on 2 June. But as the High Representative has pointed
out, the overall political climate in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has continued to be negative.

10-37267

S/PV.6319

Unhelpful rhetoric has increased in the run-up to
the elections scheduled for 3 October. It remains a
matter of great concern that the authority of State
institutions and competencies and the authority of the
High Representative have been increasingly challenged
over the past six months. The adoption of a new law on
referendums by Republika Srpska may be particularly
worrying should it be used to challenge the existing
constitutional framework. The European Union wishes
to reiterate its strong support for High Representative
Inzko and calls on all parties in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to comply fully with the decisions taken
by him and not to seek to challenge his authority. We
underline once again our firm commitment to the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Against this backdrop, we encourage all political
leaders to work for the long-term interests of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Consensus is urgently needed to
achieve political reforms and to tackle significant
economic and social challenges.
The European Union is firmly committed to and
fully engaged in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
European Union is using all instruments at its disposal,
including by providing significant financial assistance
and expertise. The Lisbon Treaty gives us new impetus
and new possibilities for an enhanced political
presence in the country in the future. Through our two
missions on the ground, the European Union Force in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR ALTHEA) and the
European Union Police Mission, the European Union
supports Bosnia and Herzegovina’s efforts to maintain
a safe and secure environment.
The European Union is committed to continuing
the executive mandate of EUFOR ALTHEA in
accordance with resolution 1895 (2009). Should the
situation require it, the EU stands ready to maintain an
executive military role to support these efforts beyond
2010, under a United Nations mandate. Building on its
achievements, the operation has started to provide
non-executive capacity-building and training support,
thus contributing to strengthening local ownership and
capacity. The EU Police Mission mandate has also
been extended until the end of 2011, with a specific
focus on fighting organized crime and corruption and
on enhancing cooperation among police, prosecutors
and the penitentiary system.

10-37267

We firmly believe that the future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina indeed lies within the European Union.
We are encouraged that, when there is political
dialogue and consensus, the country can achieve
reforms. Visa liberalization is a concrete example. As a
result of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s good progress in
meeting the benchmarks, the European Commission is
working on a proposal for updating the Schengen white
list, on which the Council and the European Parliament
will decide together in the coming months.
Such positive political will also needs to be
demonstrated in other areas to ensure that Bosnia and
Herzegovina does not fall behind the rest of the region
in its European integration process. As High
Representative Ashton noted in her address to the
Security Council on 4 May (see S/PV.6306), steps
remain to be taken by Bosnia and Herzegovina to
secure a well-functioning State. In particular,
additional efforts are needed in order to meet the
outstanding requirements - five objectives and two
conditions - for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative, notably regarding State and defence
property. The European Union has been clear that it
will not be in a position to consider an application for
membership by Bosnia and Herzegovina until the
transition of the Office of the High Representative to a
reinforced EU presence has been decided.
Progress is also needed on constitutional reform
to enable the better functioning of Bosnia and
Herzegovina institutions, as well as to implement the
ruling of the European Court of Human Rights on the
rights of minorities to stand for election and be
appointed to important State-level institutions. The law
on census should be adopted without further delay. The
European Union continues to attach importance to a
full cooperation with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
In his report, the High Representative has set out
some urgent and pressing reform priorities for Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Many of these are essential if Bosnia
and Herzegovina is to realize its ambition of EU
accession. Without them, Bosnia and Herzegovina
compromises its strategic priority and risks falling
further behind other countries in the region as regards
the European integration process. We cannot afford to
waste time. It is the responsibility of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina leadership to move ahead rapidly and
constructively, and to do so as soon as possible.

23

S/PV.6319

As high-level visits by High Representative
Ashton and Commissioner Füle have shown, the
European Union remains fully committed to Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and will remain so after the eventual
closure of the Office of the High Representative. In
turn, we encourage all of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
political leaders to be committed to the European
Union and to act in support of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s European aspirations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Haris Silajdžić, Chairman
of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to make
a further statement.
Mr. Silajdžić: Let me thank the representatives
of the countries now members of the Security Council
for their valuable contributions, comments and views,
which my country will certainly take into
consideration, especially since, as I have said, I came
here today because I believe that the basic law of
Bosnia and Herzegovina — the Dayton Peace
Agreement and especially its pillars such as the
Constitution and its article I — is being questioned
right now, in particular on the issue of State property.
This is not about the property, per se, in Bosnia
and Herzegovina; it is about the character of the State
and the character of our Agreement. The Agreement,
signed by all the countries present at Dayton, is that
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues as a State under
international law. So, we believe that maintaining the
Dayton Agreement, as it is, is vital to peace and
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Of course, the Dayton Agreement came at a great
price for citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
especially Bosniaks and Croats. Tens of thousands
were killed and hundreds of thousands remain to this
day in the diaspora, ethnically cleansed. So that is why
we will not allow anyone to question that to which all
of us agreed in Dayton. It may appear to some that
Bosnia and Herzegovina managed to prevail in Dayton
by remaining a unified country. But I assure the
Council that what I have described is a fact of life. And
I am very sorry and regretful to have heard here that
the representative of the Russian Federation viewed my
speech as not constructive.
The Russian Government participated in the
Dayton Agreement procedures, and they are a part of
the process. The Russian Government agreed to and
signed the Dayton Peace Agreement as a guarantor. I

24

regret that the Russian Government continues
uncritically to support only one ethnic group in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. That is not a very good contribution
to peace and stability and to maintaining the Dayton
Agreement as the basic law for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The Agreement ended genocide in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and brought peace to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and it must be maintained.
Let me end on a personal note here, because High
Representative Inzko reminded me of our beginnings.
When Bosnia and Herzegovina was attacked, it is true
that I, as the Foreign Minister, did not have a telephone
here — not even a chair to sit on. At that time, Foreign
Minister Mock and the Austrian Ambassador to the
United Nations extended their help to Bosnia and
Herzegovina and to our efforts to defend our country.
For that I am grateful. And of course I am grateful also
to all those who helped us during those difficult
moments for our people and our State.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The
representative of the Russian Federation wishes to
make a further statement, and I give him the floor.
Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Of course, I was not planning to take the
floor again, and I certainly do not wish now to become
involved in a debate on the foundations of the
divergent assessments of the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, or on the differing assessments of the
factors hindering agreement among the Bosnian parties
on pending problems. I do not think we need to do that
during today’s meeting. The positions of all external
participants assisting the Bosnian settlement process
are well known. My country’s position in particular is
well known.
Something on which we cannot fail to agree with
Mr. Silajdžić is that the Dayton Agreements must be
strictly and fully implemented by all parties. That is
absolutely certain. And we have consistently been
assisting to that end through our contacts and our
relations with all the Bosnian parties. I will leave the
assessment we heard from Mr. Silajdžić as a matter for
his own conscience. I am absolutely certain that the
ongoing efforts of the Russian Federation in support of
full implementation of the Dayton Agreements and in
support of the sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina
are well known.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is currently a member of
the Security Council, and I will reaffirm what I have

10-37267

S/PV.6319

already said: that we will continue to constructively
cooperate and interact with the delegation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina on the entire range of items on the
Council’s agenda. This is an important and critical
stage in establishing Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
statehood, and we are certain that Bosnia and
Herzegovina will successfully pass through this stage
and will work successfully in the Security Council.
The Russian Federation is absolutely convinced
also that we have every reason to believe that all
parties and political actors in Bosnia and Herzegovina,

10-37267

on the firm basis of the Dayton Agreement, will
resolve their disputes and achieve consensus on all
pending issues for the effective establishment of a
democratic Bosnian State, in the interest of
strengthening stability and security in the country and
throughout the Balkan region.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
further speakers on my list. The Security Council has
thus concluded the present stage of its consideration of
the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

25
