S/PV.8561

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8561st meeting

Tuesday, 25 June 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Sipaco Ribala
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia/Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Matjila
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementaiton of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017), 2401 (2018) and 2449 (2018) (S/2019/508)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-19221 (E)
*1919221*

S/PV.8561

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401 (2018) and
2449 (2018) (S/2019/508)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Major
General Alexey Bakin, Head of the Russian Centre
for the Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in the Syrian
Arab Republic and Refugee Migration Monitoring,
and Mr. David Lillie, Executive Director of the Syrian
American Medical Society.
The representative of France has asked for the floor.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to speak on a point of order. France has not
objected to the participation of the Head of the Russian
Reconciliation Centre as a briefer in this meeting.
However, we want to point out that the monthly
humanitarian briefings are intended to give the
Security Council an opportunity to receive objective
information about the situation on the ground based
on information collected by impartial humanitarian
actors and United Nations agencies, as the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs does every
month. The participation of civil society helps keep the
Council apprised of realities and difficulties that arise.
Despite the fact that it has been invited to speak under
rule 39, the Russian Reconciliation Centre is neither a
humanitarian actor nor a United Nations agency. It is
an entity of the Russian Ministry of Defence, which is
an active party to the conflict, and the information it
presents should be viewed in that light.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The representative
of Germany has asked for the floor.
2/23

25/06/2019

Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Kuwait, Belgium and
Germany, the co-penholders of the humanitarian
dossier, are in favour of a balanced approach to the
choice of briefers. We expect every briefer to respect
today’s humanitarian, non-political agenda, and we
trust that the Head of the Russian Reconciliation Centre
will support that agenda in his briefing as well. Since
the de-confliction mechanism is on our agenda today,
and we would like to understand why it has failed utterly
and led to the death of innocent civilians, the Centre
may be able to shed some light on that question. We
note the presence today in the Chamber of the Executive
Director of the Syrian American Medical Society,
which should complement the rest of the picture.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked for the floor.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the United Nations Conference on
International Organization in San Francisco, where the
Charter of the United Nations was drafted, and whose
seventy-fifth anniversary we will mark next year, one
of the key areas of disagreement was the question of
the scope of the use of the right of veto and whether
it should be conditional or unconditional. At the time,
the Soviet Union was in favour of an unconditional
veto applicable to all issues discussed by the Security
Council, including proposals for issues to be discussed.
At the time, the delegations of the United States, the
United Kingdom, France and other countries objected to
the Soviet Union’s approach. Their argument ultimately
prevailed, and today in the Security Council when a
country objects to a proposed subject for discussion,
the permanent members do not exercise the veto but
vote on it as a procedural issue. At the time of the San
Francisco Conference, those delegations’ reason for
their position was that the unconditional use of the right
to veto would be a violation of freedom of speech. Today
we were surprised to see the French delegation take the
position of the Soviet Union during the drafting of the
Charter in San Francisco by casting doubt on the briefer
whom we invited to brief us on the situation in Syria.
Since Council members have persistently asked us
about the state of affairs on the ground, we have tried
to enable them to hear about it first-hand. Through
all the years of this conflict, no one has done more to
normalize the situation on the ground in Syria than the
Russian Reconciliation Centre. I would like to draw your
attention, Mr. President, to the fact that our delegation
has never questioned any of the briefers proposed by
19-19221

25/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

the delegations that have expressed doubts today, but
if that is the game they want to play, we are prepared
to go with it in future. Nonetheless, I still suggest that
delegations listen to our representative, because he can
shed light on many questions that are of interest to them
as well.
The President (spoke in Arabic): If there are no
objections to any of the briefers for this meeting, we
shall proceed.
It was so decided.
Mr. Lowcock and Major General Bakin are joining
the meeting via video-teleconference from Rome and
Damascus, respectively.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/508, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401
(2018) and 2449 (2018).
I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: This is the fifth humanitarian
briefing on Syria we have provided the Security
Council in the past eight weeks. Week after week, we
have highlighted the impact of the hostilities in the
north-west. I do not want to repeat everything we have
so often told the Council. Let me simply quote the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Michelle Bachelet, as
she summarized the situation yesterday. She said her
Office had
“received reports of hundreds of ongoing civilian
casualties and destruction to civilian infrastructure,
including hospitals and schools, mainly caused by
air strikes by the Government of Syria and its allies,
but also, to a lesser extent, ground-based attacks by
armed groups”.
We have repeatedly asked the Council to make that
stop. It has not stopped, or even slowed. Despite efforts
to introduce a ceasefire in the north-west, hostilities
continue unabated. Fighting among Syrian Government
forces and their allies, armed opposition forces and the
Security Council-listed terrorist organization Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham continues to impact civilians every day.

S/PV. 8561

Over the weekend of 21 to 23 June, we received
reports of air strikes affecting more than 55 communities
and artillery shelling affecting more than 21
communities in Idlib, Hama and Aleppo governorates.
At least 32 civilians, including women and children,
reportedly died, and others were wounded, in air strikes
and artillery shelling in southern Idlib. Over the same
period, a further seven people, including a child, were
reportedly killed and others were injured as a result of
air strikes and artillery shelling in northern rural Hama
governorate. Hundreds of thousands of people have
been displaced.
One of the areas coming under regular attack is
Maarat Al-Numan, in southern Idlib. Humanitarian
partners working in the health sector have been
warning that they are particularly worried about Maarat
National Hospital. It has reportedly been hit before
in previous years. At peak times, the hospital treated
about 20,000 people a month. It is now operating
under emergency conditions. But it remains the main
referral hospital in southern Idlib. While operating in
a conflict zone and in an area under the control of a
Security Council-listed terrorist organization, they
keep their life-saving services going with the support
of humanitarian organizations.
There is serious reason to worry. On 20 June, an
ambulance transporting an injured woman in Maarat
Al-Numan was hit, killing the woman and three medical
workers. Two paramedics were seriously injured. We
must see an end to such attacks on medical workers,
transport and facilities. We must see hospitals like
Maarat National Hospital protected.
Last week I told the Council (see S/PV.8553) that I
would update it today on the conclusions I had reached
on the impact of recent events on the de-confliction
system in Idlib. I briefed the Council in detail on
17 May (see S/PV.8527) about the de-confliction system
and how it works. Let me remind the Council of the
purpose of that system. All parties to conflict — States
and armed groups — are obliged under international
humanitarian law to protect medical facilities and other
humanitarian sites in the conduct of hostilities. That
means not directing attacks against them and avoiding
incidental harm to them.
The de-confliction system aims to help parties
to the conflict fulfil those obligations. It provides
the parties, including the Russian Federation — and,
through it, the Government of Syria — as well as

19-192213/23

S/PV.8561

The situation in the Middle East

Turkey, the United States and other members of the
international coalition forces with the coordinates of
medical facilities and other humanitarian sites to help
those parties take precautions to spare them. I have
briefed the Council, including in detail on 17 May and
again last week on 18 June, on how medical facilities and
other civilian objects inside Idlib have been impacted
by the conflict. In the light of that, I have written to the
Russian Federation to request information as to how the
details provided through the de-confliction mechanism
are used.
We have also consulted with humanitarian
organizations operating inside Idlib that are running
medical facilities there. At their request, we will
continue to run the de-confliction system in Idlib for
the organizations that want to report their coordinates
to us. But I want to make clear that this does not mean
that it is our judgment that the de-confliction system
in Idlib is, in practice, protecting medical facilities. I
am not sure that it is. More can be done to strengthen
the system. But the critical question is what those
receiving information on the location of medical
facilities are doing with that information. I will keep
the Council informed.
In addition to the north-west, we are also following
the humanitarian situation in other parts of the country
with concern. In Rukban, along the Syrian-Jordanian
border, some 27,000 people remain in desperate need of
humanitarian assistance. Inadequate basic services are
costing lives, as attested by the widely reported death
of a young woman and her child while giving birth in
the camp on 5 June. Deaths like those are preventable
if the proper care can be provided. We continue to call
for humanitarian access to Rukban in order to be able
to deliver life-saving aid and to assist those who would
like to leave the camp The last request for access to
Rukban, sent to the Government of Syria on 9 May,
was not approved. Another request is being prepared.
In the meantime, the United Nations is working with
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent on an operational plan
for another convoy immediately, should authorization
be given.
We also continue to provide assistance to the more
than 14,800 civilians who have left the camp over the
past months and are now at transit centres or places of
destination. The Syrian Government approved a third
United Nations visit to the shelters at transit centres,
which occurred on 18 June. Conditions in the shelters
remain adequate, and the process for moving on from
4/23

25/06/2019

the transit centres is relatively swift. Most people have
left the transit centres for southern and eastern Homs,
and those originally from Palmyra are also starting to
receive authorizations to return there. While aid is being
delivered by humanitarian organizations to areas that
people coming out of Rukban are returning to, we have
also requested approval to visit them in the areas where
they are currently residing, and while access to the
shelters has been a welcome development, the request
of 30 May for such visits is still awaiting approval.
In Al-Hol camp, in north-eastern Syria,
humanitarian agencies continue to respond to the
needs of the nearly 73,000 people in the camp, which
continue to be considerable in the areas of health, water,
sanitation and hygiene, among others. At the same
time, we continue to be concerned about restricted
humanitarian access to the annex, where 11,000 foreign
nationals are living. In recent weeks, we have received
numerous reports of women giving birth alone in their
tents at night. No woman or newborn should be left alone
without the support of specialized health practitioners,
especially during childbirth. While there have been
some positive reports of children of foreign nationality
being repatriated, thousands more foreign nationals in
the camps still face an uncertain future. I call on all
Member States to take the measures necessary to ensure
that their nationals are repatriated for rehabilitation
and reintegration, or prosecution, as appropriate, in
line with international law and standards. I also call
on the parties on the ground to facilitate the voluntary
return or resettlement of internally displaced Syrians
at the camp.
I am increasingly concerned about the situation
in southern Syria, where, following reports of rising
tensions between Government forces and local groups
since May, conflict threatens to reignite.
The humanitarian response continues to face
access challenges across the country. During the
period covered by the Secretary-General’s latest report
(S/2019/508), access was limited in Raqqa city and
east of the Euphrates river in Deir-ez-Zor, including
in the Hajin enclave, mostly due to widespread
explosive-hazard contamination, and some areas in the
south of the country, as well as in eastern Ghouta, were
not sustainably accessible, owing to administrative
restrictions. We have seen a few positive developments
in access from Damascus, with a recent mission to
Al-Hol in the north-east, and recent approvals to deploy
to areas of Dara’a in the south and Abu Thohur and
19-19221

25/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Sinjar in south-east Idlib. But I continue to call on all
parties to allow safe, sustained and unimpeded access
to all locations in need at all times throughout Syria.
Week after week, month after month, year after
year, the Council has been briefed on the humanitarian
suffering in Syria. We have repeatedly pleaded for the
protection of civilians in order to ensure humanitarian
access and the parties’ full compliance with their
obligation to respect international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. We have come back
to the Council again and again to tell members about
the latest horror facing civilians and the failure of the
parties to implement their basic obligations. I repeat
our call again today. Ease the suffering. Save lives. End
the fighting. Obey the law.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to Mr. Bakin.
Mr. Bakin (spoke in Russian): The Russian Centre
for the Reconciliation of Opposing Sides and Refugee
Migration Monitoring is focusing its main efforts in the
Syrian Arab Republic on the non-military resolution of
the conflict and on providing comprehensive assistance
to Syrian citizens to return home and rebuild peaceful
lives. Through joint efforts with the Syrian Government
we have been able to achieve considerable improvement
in the situation in those areas of work. The statistics for
Syrian citizens returning home speaks for themselves.
Since the beginning of 2019 alone more than 220,000
Syrian citizens have returned home, more than 30,000
of them internally displaced persons and more than
190,000 refugees from abroad. The majority of Syrians
are returning from neighbouring States. Between
1,000 and 2,000 people are returning from Jordan and
Lebanon every day, which testifies to the effectiveness
of all the measures that have been taken.
However, along with the positive results there
are also problems. Despite the establishment of the
cessation of hostilities regime, the situation in the Idlib
de-escalation zone is complicated. Militias from some
uncontrolled terrorist groups are currently refusing to
observe the ceasefire regime in the Idlib zone and are
actively obstructing Russia and Turkey’s joint efforts
to stabilize the situation in north-western Syria. The
tensions in the zone have been spiralling once again
since April. Militias from the Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham
terrorist organization have united various terrorist
groups under their leadership and have ramped up
their attacks on Government positions and shelling of

S/PV. 8561

towns and villages. In April we recorded 169 violations
of the ceasefire regime by illegal armed groups, with
41 Syrian soldiers killed and 74 wounded, while eight
civilians died and 20 received injuries of varying
degrees of seriousness.
In May, 338 cases of shelling by militias were
recorded, with 36 Syrian soldiers killed and 118
wounded, along with 24 civilians killed and 32
wounded. In particular, on 5 May five children and one
woman were killed as a result of shelling by the Jaysh
Al-Izza group with a multiple launch rocket system
from the town of Al-Suqaylabiyah. On 15 May, a mortar
shell fired by Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham terrorists killed
eight civilians, including two children, in the village
of Al-Nayrab in Aleppo governorate. At the same time,
between the end of April and the beginning of May, a
significant number of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham militias
and groups allied to them concentrated near the cities of
Hama and Aleppo. Radical groups attempted to enter the
predominantly Christian cities of Al-Suqaylabiyah and
Muhradah in Hama governorate. During the attack on
the Government positions the terrorists used unmanned
aerial vehicles, tanks, pickup trucks fitted with heavycalibre machine guns, and suicide-bombing vehicles.
There has been no decrease in the terrorist activity
in the Idlib de-escalation zone in June. There have
been 302 cases of shelling and armed provocations
by militias, and Syrian soldiers and civilians have
continued to die. On 17 June, 11 civilians were killed and
15 injured by mortar fire from Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham
in the village of Kudeh, in Aleppo governorate. In
response to the ongoing provocations by terrorists, the
Government forces have been forced to take defensive
action. According to objective information, illegal
armed groups allied to Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham have
been resisting the Syrian armed forces in all areas
where there has been fighting, as well as members of
the Caucasus Emirate, Haras Al-Din and the Turkistan
Islamic Party. All those entities have been recognized
as terrorist organizations by the Security Council. The
jihadists have also repeatedly used multiple rocket
launch systems to fire on Russia’s Khmeimim air
base, posing a genuine threat to the lives of Russian
troops. The Russian Aerospace Forces have been forced
to retaliate with precision strikes on firing positions,
ammunition stockpiles and clusters of terrorists, but
their fire has been directed only at known targets
outside residential areas.

19-192215/23

S/PV.8561

The situation in the Middle East

The situation as a whole is under control thanks
entirely to Russia and Turkey’s joint coordinated
actions, in accordance with the memorandum signed
in Sochi on 17 September 2018 on the stabilization
of the situation in the Idlib de-escalation area. In the
quest for ways to resolve the problem of Idlib, we and
the Turks have been working actively to come up with
new measures and mutually acceptable solutions for
stabilizing the situation. At Russia’s request, in May
and June the Syrian Army twice established a ceasefire
regime under the framework of those actions. However,
a number of radical groups in the Idlib de-escalation
area have continued to violate the ceasefire regime
every time, firing on the Turkish armed forces’
observer posts as well as on the Government forces’
positions and on towns. We continue to see terrorists
preparing to stage provocative actions in order to
blame Government forces for allegedly using chemical
weapons against them.
We who are working here on the ground are
constantly seeing a one-sided interpretation of events
in the Idlib de-escalation area from a number of
countries that blame Syria and Russia for escalating
tensions while at the same time turning a blind
eye to the atrocities of jihadists and their terrorist
activity in the area. We categorically deny all the
allegations about the indiscriminate nature of strikes
by Government forces on targets in Idlib. We are sorry
to have to say that anti-Syrian non-governmental
organizations are deliberately disseminating this kind
of false and unverified information, misleading the
global community and thereby shielding Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham terrorists. Meanwhile, the Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham militias and other groups, whose activities
are not properly comprehended by the international
community, continue to execute captured Syrian
soldiers and local civilians just as the terrorists of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant did in Palmyra and
Raqqa. In the past two years, Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham
fighters in the Idlib de-escalation zone have abducted
at least 5,000 people, whose fate is unknown. Hundreds
have been executed without trial or evidence.
In view of the desperate humanitarian situation
in the area, the Syrian Government, working with
the Russian Reconciliation Centre and the support of
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, has been taking the
necessary measures to enable the civilian population
to make a decent, safe and voluntary departure from
the Idlib de-escalation area. Specifically, the Abu
6/23

25/06/2019

Al-Duhur crossing point in Aleppo governorate was
established on 4 March 2018. It can accommodate 1,100
people and 50 vehicles a day, although the movement
of refugees through it has currently been suspended
due to the serious threat of shelling by terrorists. An
additional crossing point was set up at Suran on 27 May
of this year that can admit 1,000 people and 50 vehicles
a day. Since the crossing-point operation began, a
total of more than 44,000 people have left the Idlib
de-escalation zone, including more than 14,000 women
and 20,000 children.
According to our information, between 40,000 and
80,000 internally displaced persons (IDPs) are ready
to leave the de-escalation area right now. The required
number of places have been prepared for them to be
received in IDP centres in Hama, Homs and Deir ezZor governorates. The Syrian Government is ready
to use all existing capacities to ensure the conditions
necessary to enable the civilian population to return
from the Idlib de-escalation area. Some 15,000 Syrians
who have left the Rukban refugee camp, as well as the
United Nations representatives who have been given
the opportunity to speak with Syrian citizens returning
to Homs and Hama governorates, have been able to see
for themselves that the Syrian Government has created
appropriate living conditions for its citizens.
In general, the cooperation between the guarantor
countries is enabling us to effectively counter
international terrorist organizations on Syrian territory
and keep the situation in the north-west under control.
We would like to point to our Turkish colleagues’ active
efforts to support the ceasefire regime in the Idlib
demilitarized zone.
I want to underscore that the actions of the
Russian Reconciliation Centre are strictly within
the framework of the implementation of the RussianTurkish memorandum to stabilize the situation in the
Idlib de-escalation area and the agreements reached
during the ongoing consultations with Turkey and Iran
in the Astana format. All of the efforts of the Astana
guarantors are aimed at implementing resolution
2254 (2015) in the interests of restoring normal life in
Syria. However, I want to draw the Council’s attention
to the fact that any agreements on a cessation of
hostilities cannot extend to the fight against terrorist
organizations, wherever they are. We believe that the
only way to rebuild Syria is through the definitive
elimination of terrorism, including in the de-escalation
zone, and through the return of IDPs and refugees to
19-19221

25/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

their homes and the post-conflict reconstruction of
the country.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Bakin
for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lillie.
Mr. Lillie: I would like to thank the Council for the
opportunity to brief it on the humanitarian situation in
north-western Syria. I would especially like to thank
the representatives of Kuwait, Germany and Belgium
for their willingness to accommodate me here today.
We have just heard from Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock about the grave humanitarian situation in
north-western Syria. My organization, the Syrian
American Medical Society, is currently conducting
medical-relief operations in Idlib, Hama and Aleppo
governorates. We operate 35 medical facilities ranging
from large hospitals to mobile clinics, and employ about
2,000 staff in the field. Those courageous doctors,
nurses, midwives and support staff work tirelessly to
provide life-saving care for those in need. Since the start
of the conflict, my organization has provided 14 million
medical services. Over the years we have helped people
of many different faiths and political affiliations. In our
work, we seek to maintain humanitarian principles and
to help all Syrians in need.
The current situation in north-west Syria continues
to deteriorate. The systematic attacks on health care
have been particularly severe. As the Under-SecretaryGeneral said, there have been more than 30 healthcare-related attacks since the end of April. Just days
ago, as was mentioned, three ambulance workers were
killed after their ambulance was directly targeted
in an air strike. Those attacks have greatly reduced
the capacity of the health system at a time when it is
already overwhelmed by a large civilian population
with significant health needs. Syrian American Medical
Society facilities alone have received more than 2,200
injured civilians. At the same time, the suspension
of routine services such as vaccinations has greatly
increased the risk of outbreaks of disease, including
measles and meningitis. If there is one word that
captures the current experience of civilians in Idlib, it
is suffering — tremendous human suffering.
We cannot discuss attacks on health care without
highlighting the use of the de-confliction mechanism.
My organization was among those that de-conflicted
many of their facilities in April 2018 by working closely

S/PV. 8561

with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) and other non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) to build trust and consensus that
NGOs and their field staff would supply all needed
information, while OCHA would ensure that the
mechanism would be properly implemented.
It is important to discuss the context here.
For years, NGOs were encouraged to share their
coordinates in order to reduce the risk of targeting
by parties to the conflict. There was resistance from
field staff, who argued that they themselves would be
held responsible by the local population in the event
that the facility was targeted. It was only after last
year’s brutal offensive in eastern Ghouta, which saw
13 health facilities systematically targeted in a 48-hour
period — a time when we lost four colleagues — that
the doctors finally agreed to share the coordinates.
After that assault, they felt that their facilities would
inevitably be targeted, regardless of whether or not
they shared their coordinates. Yet only days after
those coordinates were shared, a hospital in Arbin was
targeted by a bunker buster, which landed directly on a
patient in the emergency room. In the current offensive
in the north-west, nine different de-conflicted facilities
have been targeted — nine. In addition, one third of
the facilities targeted by air strikes were constructed
before the war, meaning that their location was already
public knowledge. That begs the question: where is the
accountability? Have we lost our capacity for outrage?
Since April 2018, when many organizations
deconflicted their facilities, not a single investigation
has been completed. Rather than seeking answers
and accountability, some members of the Council
have instead sought to delay, distract and discredit
the mechanism. Yet all that achieves is to further
damage the credibility of this institution, and it only
exacerbates the suffering of the Syrian people. We have
now reached a point where doctors and humanitarian
workers on the ground no longer trust the mechanism.
They have fulfilled their part of the agreement, at great
risk to themselves. Can the Council not meet them
halfway? We should not leave them to feel alone or
abandoned. There are steps that can be taken to improve
both the process and the current mechanism. Council
members should consider granting investigators of
the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic and the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism access to the

19-192217/23

S/PV.8561

The situation in the Middle East

data or authorizing a fact-finding mission to investigate
the attacks.
I would also like to briefly discuss the humanitarian
response on the ground. The response of donors
to the recent offensive is significantly below what
is needed. There have been at least 330,000 newly
displaced individuals, with only 110,000 having been
received at internally displaced persons camps. Yet
the Humanitarian Task Force allocated enough funds
for only 5,000 new units of shelter. Be assured that the
civilian population feels completely abandoned by the
international community. How can one blame them?
Doctors cannot help patients when they do not have
essential supplies, such as anaesthetics and surgical
kits. People in remote areas cannot be reached when
there are not enough funds for mobile clinics. The
international community must not only come together to
seek peace in Syria and prevent the continued violation
of international humanitarian law by all parties, but
also use their financial resources to help alleviate the
suffering of all Syrians.
On the topic of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham and
extremism in north-western Syria, it is an extremely
significant issue that the Council must consider. The
kidnapping and torture, for ransom, of humanitarian
workers by armed groups are an outrage that must be
addressed, as is the targeting of civilian populations
in the city of Aleppo by armed groups. But let me
be clear: the way to combat terrorism is not through
the bombardment of civilian areas and the targeting
of civilian infrastructure. The subsequent human
suffering is what fuels terrorism. Have we not learned
that over the years? The best way to combat terrorism is
by supporting the civilian population, who long to live
in peace and freedom, not under groups such as Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham. The best way to provide that support is
through humanitarian and stabilization activities.
Not long ago I remember speaking to a doctor from
Idlib just after several donors suspended their aid to
the north-west due to fears of diversion. He made an
impassioned case for continuing to support humanitarian
workers. He said that Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham told people
that they were alone and the world had abandoned them
but Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham was there to help them. As
humanitarian workers, we say that that is not true. We
tell people that we are there to help them and that our
donors from around the world are ready to support
them. We impose no ideology and no conditions. We
are present to help and support people. That example
8/23

25/06/2019

perfectly illustrates the importance of supporting
humanitarian workers. They are the beacons of hope
in a very dark conflict. We must all work together to
support and protect them and ensure that they have
adequate financial resources to carry out their work.
I again thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity
to appear before the Security Council today. I hope
that, together, we can work towards a peaceful future
in Syria.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Lillie
for his briefing.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less so that
the Security Council can make the best possible use of
its time, in particular in open meetings.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): If you, Mr. President,
were to put out the hourglass again, we would see more
clearly that we are speaking within the five minutes.
I will deliver this statement on behalf of the three
co-penholders: Kuwait, Germany and Belgium. I would
like to thank the briefers for the information that
they provided today on the humanitarian situation in
Syria. We extend our gratitude and deep respect to all
humanitarian and medical workers throughout Syria,
especially those in the very challenging environment in
and around Idlib.
As the Secretary-General said last week, the
situation in Idlib is especially dangerous and, yet again,
civilians are paying a horrific price. The Council has
met on numerous occasions, most recently last week
(see S/PV.8553), to address that situation. We have heard
repeatedly the clear assessment of the United Nations
that any large-scale military offensive would lead to a
humanitarian catastrophe for Syria and the region. The
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
again today drew the Council’s attention to the further
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in northwestern Syria as a result of the continued air strikes
and shelling and the reported use of barrels bombs. We
call for the protection of the 3 million civilians living in
the region and we condemn the loss of innocent civilian
lives. The 350,000 internally displaced persons who
were left with no other choice than fleeing the violence
19-19221

25/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

face a particularly dire situation. Those people are
among the most vulnerable, many of them having been
displaced several times or facing family separation in
fleeing the violence.
The attacks on civilian infrastructure, including
schools and health-care facilities, over the past
few weeks are deeply alarming, especially those
on health-care facilities whose coordinates were
communicated under the deconfliction mechanism. We
recall resolutions 2286 (2016) and 2427 (2018), which
condemn attacks on hospitals and schools, respectively.
While we strongly condemn the attacks perpetrated
by Security Council-designated terrorist groups,
notably Hayat Tahrir al-Sham, we remind all parties that
counter-terrorism efforts cannot absolve the obligations
of all parties under international humanitarian law,
including the protection of civilians and respect for
the principles of distinction and proportionality. We
reiterate our call for the sustained implementation
of the ceasefire arrangements of the Russia-Turkey
memorandum of understanding of September 2018.
We also reiterate our call for a nation-wide cessation
of hostilities in accordance with resolution 2401 (2018).
We call for a surge in diplomacy among the key players
to urgently stabilize and de-escalate the situation.
While the United Nations has been requesting
access for months, still no agreement has been reached
on a third desperately needed convoy to the Rukban
camp. That is unacceptable. The United Nations and
its partners must be able to provide assistance to those
remaining in the camp. Inhabitants should be able to
make an informed choice as to whether or not to leave
the camp in a voluntary, safe and dignified manner. For
those who are willing to leave the camp, key protection
standards must be in place. That includes regular and
continued access throughout the transition from the
camp to their final destinations.
The situation in the Al-Hol camp also remains
deeply concerning. It is overcrowded and the
humanitarian agencies and partners working there face
challenging conditions. Improved access is needed for
the population of more than 70,000 persons, 90 per cent
of whom are women and children, who face particular
protection concerns. We support all efforts to provide
adequate protection to all vulnerable groups, including
children who are suspected of being associated with
armed groups. Such children must be treated first and
foremost as victims.

S/PV. 8561

Since the conflict began nine years ago, Syria and
its people have witnessed some of the most serious
crimes under international law. No lasting peace is
possible without justice and accountability. We stand
firm in our commitment to fighting impunity. In that
context, we renew our support for the work of the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism.
Millions of refugees remain abroad. Regarding the
return of refugees, our position remains unchanged.
All returns must be safe, voluntary and dignified.
Tens of thousands of Syrians remain detained, missing
or unaccounted for. The Council recently adopted
resolution 2474 (2019), the first resolution of the
Security Council on missing persons in armed conflict.
The resolution is particularly relevant to the situation in
Syria today. The families of those detained or missing
deserve to know the fate of their loved ones. We call for
urgent and tangible progress on this issue.
Humanitarian access continues to be a challenge.
We want to remind all the parties to the conflict of
paragraph 1 of resolution 2449 (2018), which “calls
upon all parties to ensure principled, sustained and
improved humanitarian assistance to Syria in 2019”.
Parties must live up to their obligations in that regard.
Finally, we reiterate our full support for Special
Envoy Pedersen, whom we will hear from in a few days,
in his efforts to reach an inclusive and credible political
solution in Syria on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015)
and the 2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock and Mr. David Lillie for their briefings.
We also thank Major General Bakin, the Head of the
Russian Reconciliation Centre, for his briefing on
the latest situation in Syria. I would like to note that
the information provided by the Russian specialist is
reflected in the bulletins of the Russian Ministry of
Defence on the de-escalation zones, which we distribute
on a regular basis to Security Council members.
Given the briefing by Major General Bakin, we
will not speak in detail today, especially because we
discussed the humanitarian situation in Syria just last
week (see S/PV.8553). However, we have been obliged
to conclude that the information conveyed from the
high forum that is the Security Council sometimes
contradicts operational reports coming directly from
the de-escalation zones, which testifies to attempts to
politicize the Syrian humanitarian dossier.

19-192219/23

S/PV.8561

The situation in the Middle East

In general, it is time to stop applying double
standards with regard to what is happening in Syria.
Mr. Lillie said today that the people of Idlib feel
abandoned. They have not been abandoned. They are
being held hostage by the terrorists of Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham. We are constantly hearing about suffering
in the Rukban camp for internally displaced persons
(IDPs), but very little is said about the Al-Hol camp,
where the humanitarian situation is critical. We have
already asked why the Council has not considered the
situation in which the so-called coalition wiped Baghouz
and Hajin off the face of the Earth. In the first quarter
of 2019 alone, as a result of mass coalition air strikes
on the town of Baghouz Al-Fawqani in Deir ez-Zor
governorate, more than 1,200 people died and civilian
infrastructure was destroyed, including hospitals and
schools. All of that is public information. And once
again, of course, we could also mention Raqqa, which
was literally razed to the ground.
We have repeatedly heard and continue to hear
calls from Council members on the need to adhere
to the Sochi memorandum of 17 September 2018. We
certainly have not abandoned it, as the Head of the
Russian Reconciliation Centre confirmed today. The
memorandum is being implemented, and it asserts in
black and white the importance of combating terrorist
activities. I will say it once again. All military action is
aimed exclusively at eliminating hotbeds of terrorism.
We want to stress once again that the Syrian armed
forces and the Russian Aerospace Forces only attack
terrorist targets confirmed by intelligence. In that
regard, we once again urge the Secretariat and the
United Nations specialized agencies, including the
World Health Organization, not to rush to release
unverified information. Data should be taken from
reliable, non-politicized sources, and should always be
double-checked, including as to whether infrastructure
that has allegedly been attacked has been through the
de-confliction process. Unfortunately, we still have
serious doubts about the reliability of those sources and
their verification methodology.
We continue to be concerned about the situation on
the eastern bank of the Euphrates in the Al-Tanf area,
which is illegally occupied by the United States. We
would like to point out once again that under the Geneva
Conventions, the occupying Power is responsible for the
population of an occupied territory. Needless to say, the
Council should pay particular attention to the situation
10/23

25/06/2019

in the Al-Hol IDP camp in Hasakah governorate, which
is not under the control of the Syrian authorities.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore that
Russia’s position remains unchanged. We will continue
to make every effort to restore peace to Syria both
in our national capacity and as a permanent member
of the Security Council and a member of the Astana
troika, which has done more than any other format to
de-escalate and eliminate the terrorist threat, expand
humanitarian assistance and advance the political
process.
Speaking of the political process, we are pleased
to note the level of cooperation that has recently been
established between the Syrian authorities and the
Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, Mr. Pedersen. We hope that the dialogue
between the United Nations and Damascus will help to
launch a sustainable political process that is Syrian-led
and Syrian-owned, with the assistance of the United
Nations, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015)
and the decisions of the Syrian National Dialogue
Congress in Sochi. We call on all interested parties
to unite their efforts to stabilize the situation in Syria
and work together to eliminate terrorism, undertake
post-conflict reconstruction and help refugees and
IDPs return home. Strengthening efforts in those areas
will help to give Special Envoy Pedersen’s efforts
significant momentum.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for yet another
deeply sobering briefing.
One hundred and thirty-nine days have now passed
since the last United Nations-Syrian Arab Red Crescent
humanitarian assistance convoy arrived in Rukban in
early February, that is, 139 days in which no heed has
been paid to the call of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs to ease the suffering. Since
February, the Al-Assad regime has failed to approve
multiple requests from the United Nations to make a
third humanitarian aid delivery to Rukban, where
reports of dwindling food supplies are growing
increasingly dire. It is unacceptable for the regime to
withhold humanitarian aid deliveries as a means of
forcing civilians to flee the encampment and furthering
its claims that the humanitarian conditions in Syria
are stabilizing. Under-Secretary-General Lowcock’s
briefing today demonstrates that nothing could be
further from the truth.
19-19221

25/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

The United States renews its call to the Al-Assad
regime to approve the United Nations request for a
third convoy to Rukban immediately. It must also
allow unfettered regular humanitarian assistance to
Rukban as long as there are displaced people in the
encampment. Furthermore, the United States calls on
the Russian Federation to secure the Al-Assad regime’s
compliance with the requests of the United Nations
for a third convoy, as well as to lift the Russian and
Syrian military blockade of commercial access to the
Rukban camp.
The United States supports the United Nations
efforts to facilitate voluntary, safe, dignified and
informed departures from Rukban in combination with
additional aid delivered to the camp. We stand ready
to provide security assurances for United Nations
humanitarian convoys to Rukban. Any accusation
that the United States is responsible for blocking
humanitarian aid deliveries to Rukban is absolutely
false. Although thousands of civilians have already left
Rukban for relocation centres in Homs owing to the
dire humanitarian conditions, the United States does
not consider returns voluntary if people are leaving the
camp because they are not receiving the food, water,
medicine and shelter that they need to survive. We
strongly encourage the Al-Assad regime to allow the
United Nations unfettered access to Rukban residents
from the time they depart Rukban until they reach their
home or destination of their choice.
The Security Council must support the continued
authorization of cross-border aid deliveries under
resolution 2449 (2018). The United States calls on
every Council member, and our regional partners, to
ensure that the United Nations can freely implement
cross-border aid deliveries through all agreed border
crossings, including from Jordan, and in accordance
with resolution 2449 (2018). There is no substitute for
the United Nations cross-border operations, which
are the most transparent, effective and essential way
to deliver humanitarian assistance to those who need
it most — people like the 3 million civilians in Idlib
who, according to Mr. Lowcock, are completely reliant
on United Nations cross-border aid deliveries under
resolution 2449 (2018).
Turning to the situation in Idlib, the United States
is alarmed at yet another deliberate escalation of air
strikes in north-west Syria by Syrian forces over the
past week, despite repeated calls by Council members,
as well as the Secretary-General and other senior United

S/PV. 8561

Nations officials, for an immediate de-escalation. The
United States remains gravely concerned about the
possibility that without an immediate and full return by
all parties to the 2018 Sochi agreement ceasefire line
and the restoration of the de-escalation agreements, the
humanitarian conditions in Idlib and north-west Syria
could soon be beyond the ability of the United Nations
to mount a humanitarian response. The United States
takes the Under-Secretary-General’s remarks on the
status of the de-confliction mechanism very seriously.
Any attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure as
such, including schools and medical facilities, are off
limits, regardless of whether they are part of the United
Nations de-confliction mechanism.
This should not even need to be said, let alone
repeated meeting after meeting. When it comes to
north-west Syria, it is clear who has control of the
airspace and is therefore responsible for the attacks
on the de-conflicted sites. The United States therefore
urges Russia to assure the United Nations and the
Council that it will abide by all of its commitments
to the de-confliction mechanism and ensure that
Syrian forces also act in full compliance with the
de-confliction arrangements.
The Russian Federation can — and must — do better
to restore peace and bring about a political solution to
the conflict. Unfortunately, the Russian Federation and
the track record of the Russian Reconciliation Centre
for Syria on de-escalation and reconciliation speaks for
itself — another Russian-brokered agreement made,
another Russian-brokered agreement tossed aside for
military and political expediency.
The situation in Idlib is escalating. Thousands
were killed last year during the regime and Russian
joint offensive in eastern Ghouta — a former Astanaprotected de-escalation zone — and the situation in
south-west Syria is deteriorating despite a Russianbrokered reconciliation agreement there with local
communities. The United States is concerned that,
despite the regime’s recapture — with Russian
assistance by brute military force — of areas such
as eastern Ghouta and south-west Syria, the United
Nations and humanitarian actors continue to struggle
for access to those locations. Meanwhile, civilians’
access to electricity and safe drinking water in those
areas remains intermittent.
Eastern Ghouta and south-west Syria have become
black holes of information due to residents’ fear of

19-1922111/23

S/PV.8561

The situation in the Middle East

sharing information and ending up in the custody of
the regime. However, the United States is aware of
reports that the Al-Assad regime is deploying a vast
network of intelligence checkpoints where regime
forces regularly arrest civilians and force them into
conscription, in violation of the Russian-brokered
reconciliation agreements.
The United States is also concerned about
increasing indications that the regime plans to take
full control of the region and about growing frustration
among communities in Dara’a and Quneitra, as regime
intelligence forces expand their control across the
area and establish checkpoints into Dara’a. Reports of
assassinations, kidnappings, poor provision of essential
services and forced conscription all call into question
Russia’s role as a trustworthy broker between the Syrian
people and the regime forces for improved security and
living conditions in the south.
Finally, the United States would like to thank David
Lillie, Executive Director of the Syrian American
Medical Society, for being with us today and for his
important and troubling briefing to the Council. The
Syrian American Medical Society’s network of medical
professionals and health facilities are real lifelines
to millions of people in north-west Syria. We on the
Council must protect them, civil society and civilian
populations from any further attacks by the Al-Assad
regime and its allies.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank our briefers, beginning with
Mark Lowcock for his very useful briefing. I commend
his teams for their outstanding work in responding to
the humanitarian emergency in Syria. I would also
like to thank the Executive Director of the Syrian
American Medical Society for his very enlightening
briefing. It is clear — we are indeed witnessing another
humanitarian disaster in north-west Syria. We also
took note of the information conveyed by the Russian
Reconciliation Centre for Syria. Now more than ever,
we must focus our efforts on three priorities, namely,
the preservation of the ceasefire in Idlib, respect for
international humanitarian law and the quest for a
lasting political solution.
First, preserving the ceasefire in Idlib is an absolute
imperative. Given that another tragedy is unfolding in
the north-west of the country, we must do everything
in our power to prevent Idlib from becoming another
Aleppo — the lives of more than 3 million civilians,
12/23

25/06/2019

including 1 million children, are at stake. We strongly
condemn the strikes that have indiscriminately targeted
the city of Idlib and its population in recent days. The
risk of escalation is at its peak, as illustrated by the
regime’s attacks on Turkish patrols this month.
We call on the signatories to the ceasefire agreement
to honour their commitments and ensure an effective
ceasefire in the north-west, the end of hostilities and
a nationwide ceasefire, in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015). Russia in particular must exert all the
necessary pressure on the regime to return to the front
lines agreed in Sochi. Discussions between Turkey and
Russia must also continue to allow for an immediate
de-escalation of the situation. Iran must also play its
part. We hope that upcoming deadlines set by the
international community will enable substantial and
lasting progress to be made on the situation in Idlib.
In addition, I reiterate that, in the event that chemical
weapons are used again, France will be extremely firm
and stands ready to act.
Secondly, respect for international humanitarian
law is binding on everyone and not negotiable. I would
like to recall two absolute priorities in that regard.
The first is the need to protect civilians, including
humanitarian and medical personnel. The fact that health
infrastructure, in particular facilities that have been
de-conflicted and schools, remain the targets of attacks
in the north-west of the country is unacceptable. We
strongly condemn the regime’s attack on an ambulance
on 20 June in Maarat Al-Numan. Attacks on hospitals
and health workers, which are part of the regime’s
military strategy to forcibly reclaim areas beyond its
control, constitute war crimes. I echo the remarks
made by my German colleague: those crimes will not
go unpunished. Furthermore, we take note of the letter
from the United Nations to the Russian Federation and
await Russia’s response. We must understand what that
will mean for the United Nations de-confliction system.
In addition to the protection of civilians, the
other absolute priority is ensuring immediate, safe,
secure, comprehensive, sustainable and unhindered
humanitarian access throughout Syria. I recall that
humanitarian aid must reach those who need it most.
In that context, the whole-of-Syria humanitarian
architecture — put in place by the United Nations to
respond to the needs of the most vulnerable Syrians
through the most effective channels — must be
maintained. It is also urgent that a new aid convoy be
immediately deployed to the Rukban camp. That is
19-19221

25/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

vital. We also call on those with the means to do so to
exert the necessary pressure on the regime to ensure
unimpeded humanitarian access to all areas under its
control, in particular the territories it reclaimed in 2018
in the south-west of the country and in eastern Ghouta.
The fact that only 60 per cent of the requests for access
made to the Syrian regime during April and May were
approved is unacceptable. Lastly, I would mention
the Al-Hol camp, where it is essential for the United
Nations to have sustainable access that is as direct and
effective as possible so as to provide assistance to the
73,000 people living there.
The third priority, which is inextricably linked to
the other two, is the launching of a sustainable political
process under the auspices of the United Nations. We
will no spare no effort to support the Special Envoy in
the implementation of a political solution based on all
the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522,annex). It is essential that the
Council do the same during our consultations with Geir
Pedersen on Thursday. In that regard, I refer to the key
issues of the constitutional committee and elections.
In line with resolution 2254 (2015), we must now
reflect on the conditions that will ensure that election
results are not determined in advance, as in the past;
that the elections will be free and fair; that all Syrians,
including refugees, can speak freely in the process and
that the United Nations will be involved in overseeing
the process. The Special Envoy has our full support to
move forward in that regard.
Only the establishment of a credible political
process will make it possible for refugees to return
to Syria, which must take place in safe and dignified
conditions and under the auspices of the United Nations.
Those conditions are clearly not being met now. In any
case, it is essential that the United Nations be given free
access to Syrian territory to monitor refugee returns
in a transparent manner. Council members know our
positions on issues related to reconstruction, the lifting
of sanctions and normalization. Our positions, which are
also those of the European Union, remain unchanged.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s meeting. We also thank Mr. Mark Lowcock for
his useful information, as well as the other briefers.
Peru is deeply concerned about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Syria. We deplore in particular
the extreme vulnerability of civilians in the north-west

S/PV. 8561

of the country. Such vulnerability is exacerbated by the
extensive control exercised by terrorist groups over the
area and the devastating consequences of the escalating
violence. We reiterate our firm condemnation of
terrorist activities of all kinds. But we underscore the
need for any counter-terrorism response to uphold the
humanitarian principles of proportionality, distinction
and precaution.
In the same vein, we deplore and decry the extensive
damage suffered by civilian infrastructure, including
schools and medical centres, often as a result of aerial
attacks that fail to distinguish between combatants and
civilians. Faced with that grim scenario, we urge the
Syrian Government and all relevant stakeholders in
this conflict to prevent further deterioration, which in
concrete terms means preserving the ceasefire agreed
by Turkey and Russia last September.
We commend the laudable efforts being undertaken
by the United Nations and other humanitarian agencies
to provide sustained assistance to the more than 70,000
internally displaced persons living in Al-Hol camp
in circumstances of great logistical complexity, and
where the risk of the spread of diseases is growing as
temperatures rise markedly. We note that almost half
of the displaced persons are of Iraqi origin, for which
reason we urge the authorities of Iraq to spare no effort to
facilitate their return, which, we underscore, must take
place under internationally accepted parameters and
with the support and assistance of the United Nations.
Turning to the situation in Rukban, Peru urges
the Syrian authorities and countries with influence
in the area to facilitate the delivery of United Nations
humanitarian aid. The failure to grant the requisite
permits is unjustified and should be roundly condemned
by the entire international community. Building on
that point, we underscore that efforts must continue
to facilitate the movement of those displaced persons
who wish to leave the camp in Rukban, the majority
of whom lack the economic resources to turn that
wish into reality. We therefore lend our backing to
the operational plan that the United Nations has been
developing to support such persons, together with other
actions aimed at guaranteeing their safe return. We
wish to draw attention equally to the importance of the
continued mobilization of the international community
to support humanitarian de-mining and the clearance of
improvised explosive devices in Syria, which continue
to wreak havoc among the population and hamper the
delivery of aid and assistance.

19-1922113/23

S/PV.8561

The situation in the Middle East

I conclude by recalling the urgent need to make
progress in achieving a political solution on the basis
of resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex), which is all the more pressing in
the current fragile circumstances, characterized as they
are by an upswing in violence, the upshot of which is
likely to bode ill for regional and global stability.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): At the outset I
should like to thank the briefers.
I think Mr. David Lillie was right to challenge
us. Humanitarian workers deserve our praise, thanks,
admiration and, above all, Security Council efforts to
protect them. I am sorry that those efforts have been
found wanting. I will come back to that in a minute.
I support what was said by the representatives
of France and Germany before the debate began. We
believe that it is important for the Council to hear from
all sides of a conflict, so we did not on this occasion
object to the invitation issued under rule 39 to the
Russian Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides
and Refugee Migration Monitoring in the Syrian Arab
Republic and to General Bakin. We are very strong
supporters of freedom of speech, but we prefer it to be
truthful speech. We believe that truth is indeed the first
casualty of war. That is a very good saying. I do not like
being told that we cannot trust information from the
United Nations or that we cannot trust the assessment
of the Security Council, but that instead we are to trust
Russian uniformed personnel even though Russia is a
party to the conflict. It is obvious that there is also a
conflict of interest. I wanted to explain all that before I
go on to the substance of my remarks.
Our agreement to hear briefers from one side of a
conflict, in particular military briefers in a humanitarian
context, should not be taken for granted in future for
the reasons I have set out. However, today I would like
to focus in particular on the hospitals, on the issues that
Mr. Mark Lowcock raised and on deconfliction. I also
really want to try to get to the bottom of this. I said last
time (see S/PV.8535) that I will keep asking questions
until I get answers. I hope that the General will be
able to help the Council get answers to the questions
it has concerning the attacks on the hospitals, because
these are very serious matters on which we just do not
seem to be able to make any progress. If I may, I would
therefore like to ask him some questions.
First, I would like to know why 30 hospitals have
been attacked? Also, why was an ambulance a direct
14/23

25/06/2019

target? Given what we have heard from David Lillie
and the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, and what
we know of international humanitarian law, why, in
the General’s view, do the attacks on the terrorists
eclipse the needs of civilians? To us they do not seem
proportionate and they do not appear to be preserving
the principles of international humanitarian law. If
the General believes that the hospitals are legitimate
military targets, we would like to see some of the
information that underpins that belief. In particular,
we would like to know where are the warnings that,
under the Geneva Conventions, need to be given before
a hospital can be treated as a military target. I would
also like to know how the General or how Russia sees
the deconfliction mechanism working for the reasons
the Under-Secretary-General set out.
I have three more questions, if I may. The first
is about the ceasefire. Why is it so difficult to obtain
a ceasefire when both we and the General support
the Turkish efforts in Idlib? What needs to change
on the ground in order to achieve a ceasefire? What
is happening to investigate and hold accountable the
people responsible for the attacks on hospitals? Finally,
may we have the names and designations of the Russian
and Syrian units involved in the attacks on the hospitals?
I also have points to make on Rukban. In that
respect, I share the concern of my colleagues about
the deteriorating situation and humanitarian access.
We, too, support the need for a third aid convoy
to be allowed in as a matter of urgency. We support
unfettered access for aid across Syria. With respect
to Al-Hol, we continue to support the United Nations
efforts to scale up its response and to provide aid to
humanitarian organizations operating at camps for
internally displaced persons, including Al-Hol.
A number of speakers have raised the political
situation and, as some have noted, Mr. Pedersen
will brief us later this month. What was said by the
representative of France, including his statement on
the use of chemical weapons, represents the United
Kingdom’s view. I hope that I will be able to get
some answers.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation thanks Mr. Mark Lowcock, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator; Major General Alexey
Bakin, Head of the Russian Reconciliation Centre;
19-19221

25/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

and Mr. David Lillie, Executive Director of the Syrian
American Medical Society for their concise briefings
on the humanitarian situation in Syria.
It is undeniable that the intensification of clashes
over the past several weeks, particularly in Idlib
governorate, is contributing to the worsening of an
already very worrying humanitarian situation. This
eight-year conflict has resulted in thousands of deaths
and the destruction of hospital and school infrastructure,
thereby depriving many people, mainly children, of
access to basic social services.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs estimates that more than 250 people have died
and that 350,000 others have left Idlib governorate to
seek refuge in border areas of Turkey since 29 April.
The Al-Hol camp has seen its population increase
from 10,000 in 2018 to 73,000 at present. With regard
to the Rukban camp, it has yet to receive any further
humanitarian convoys since the most recent one arrived
in February, which helped meet the needs of more than
40,000 displaced persons.
In that context, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its call
on all parties to comply with the provisions of the
17 September 2018 memorandum on the stabilization
of the situation in the Idlib de-escalation zone. Indeed,
respect for the ceasefire, which the memorandum
establishes, should enable the warring parties to create
the necessary conditions for safe, rapid, unhindered and
sustainable access to humanitarian aid for the affected
populations. In that regard, my delegation welcomes
the cross-border deliveries of humanitarian aid, in
accordance with resolution 2449 (2018). Such deliveries
allowed for the provision of aid to approximately
915,000 people per month from February to March.
My country notes with regret that, in addition
to the disastrous humanitarian consequences, the
military escalation in the north-western part of Syria is
dangerously compromising the tireless efforts of Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General Geir Pedersen to revive
the political process. Côte d’Ivoire therefore calls on
all Syrian parties, as well as regional and international
actors, to support his efforts to find a political solution,
in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).
In conclusion, my country reaffirms its conviction
that achieving peace in Syria will be possible if the
protagonists commit to dialogue as a means of settling
their differences so as to end the conflict and the
suffering of the Syrian people.

S/PV. 8561

Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and Major
General Bakin, Head of the Russian Reconciliation
Centre, for their briefings. I also thank the Russian
representative for providing first-hand information
on the situation on the ground, especially the Idlib
de-escalation zone. We also listened very carefully to
the statement delivered by Mr. Lillie.
China is concerned about the humanitarian situation
on the ground, and we support the efforts of the United
Nations and relevant parties to improve it. To date,
the humanitarian situation in Idlib has attracted the
attention of international community and the Council
has met many times on this matter. We hope that
our discussions will help Council members broaden
communication and deepen their understanding of all
aspects of the situation on the ground.
China supports the efforts of Russia and Turkey in
continuing to implement the memorandum promoting
the de-escalation of the conflict in Idlib. We call on
the international community to adopt common criteria,
in accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions and provisions of international law, to
counter the activities of terrorist groups. In the current
situation, all parties should seek comprehensive and
long-term solutions to counter terrorism and address the
humanitarian issues in the north-western part of Syria.
The United Nations and other parties should scale up
humanitarian assistance to internally displaced persons
(IDPs) in the north-western part of the country.
China is concerned about humanitarian problems
in other parts of Syria and IDP camps. We are in favour
of solutions tailored to the situation on the ground. We
note that approximately 1,000 displaced persons in the
Al-Hol camp have returned to their homes. We support
the proper resettlement of those people who are currently
living in the camps. The international community
should enhance dialogue and communication on the
issue of Rukban camp and coordinate action to help
more Syrians to return to their homes and end their
displacement as soon as possible.
Humanitarian operations in Syria should fully
respect Syria’s sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity, and strictly follow the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the principles governing
United Nations humanitarian relief and provisions of
international law. Communication and coordination
with the Syrian Government should be strengthened.

19-1922115/23

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.8561

In areas where the security situation is relatively
stable, the international community should support
the Syrian Government in demining, rebuilding
infrastructure, restoring health care, education
and social services, launching industrial projects,
promoting development and improving people’s
livelihoods so that an increasing number of Syrians can
emerge from the shadow of war and gradually return to
a stable and orderly life. China is concerned about the
negative impact of economic sanctions on the lives of
the Syrian people.
In order to meaningfully alleviate the humanitarian
situation in Syria, we must continue to advance the
political process. China supports the United Nations in
playing its role as the main channel for good offices
and supports Special Envoy Pedersen in pushing the
parties in Syria to seek solutions that accommodate
the concerns of all parties, in accordance with the
principle of a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned process
and resolution 2254 (2015). We hope that the parties in
Syria will narrow their differences and move forward
the political process through dialogue and negotiations.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, I thank UnderSecretary-General Mark Lowcock for updating the
Council on the current humanitarian situation in
Syria. We also thank the representatives of the Russian
Reconciliation Centre in Syria and the Syrian American
Medical Society.
There is no denying that the continuing escalation
of violence in north-west Syria has brought about
serious humanitarian consequences. My delegation is
deeply troubled by reports of an increase in the number
of civilian deaths and displaced persons, as well as the
damage to civilian infrastructure. Exactly one week
ago, the Council specifically discussed the situation
in north-western Syria. I recall that Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock stated at that same meeting that
“we are facing a humanitarian disaster unfolding
before our eyes” (S/PV.8553, p.3). The report of the
Secretary-General also specifies that “We are faced
with a horrendous disaster in the making” (S/2019/508,
para.42). That is indeed frightening. Do we really think
that we can afford another humanitarian catastrophe?
In addition, the situation in Rukban and Al-Hol camps,
where humanitarian conditions remain dire, also
demand the Council’s special attention.
My delegation
pertinent points.
16/23

wishes

to

highlight

three

25/06/2019

First and foremost, it is urgent for all parties to
cease hostilities and prioritize the safety and security
of civilians. We once again urge all sides to respect
and implement the September 2018 memorandum
between Russia and Turkey. We share the view of
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock, who spoke earlier,
on the deconfliction mechanism. There is a need for
all parties concerned to strengthen the system so as to
avoid further incidents, which would lead to further
casualties. Any mechanism is only as good as the people
who are supposed to implement it. Medical facilities
should never be the object of any attack.
Moreover, I would like to stress that peace is not an
alternative; peace is the objective. Saving people’s lives
is not an option; it should be and is the main goal. A
permanent ceasefire in north-west Syria is not a backup
plan; it must be the purpose.
Secondly, my delegation urges all parties to allow
safe, unimpeded and sustained access for United
Nations humanitarian operations to all requested
areas and populations, in all parts of Syria. With more
than 350,000 people being displaced and many forced
to live in the open, it is critical to ensure immediate
humanitarian assistance. Many of them have also
experienced displacement multiple times. In Al-Hol
camp, where more than 73,000 people are living in
difficult situations, tensions remain high. In Rukban,
the United Nations still requires access to deliver a
critical needs-based humanitarian response.
Third is the importance of a safe, voluntary and
dignified return of refugees to their home areas in
Syria, in accordance with international law. In addition,
we believe that the United Nations should be able to
monitor their overall movement until they are able to
return to their areas of origin.
The conflict and the humanitarian suffering in
Syria are undeniably the result of the absence of political
solutions. Humanitarian assistance is like a bandage
over an open wound. We need to heal the wound; a
bandage alone is insufficient to do so, especially if the
wound is larger than a Band-Aid.
We share the Secretary-General’s concern that the
escalation in north-west Syria is undermining Special
Envoy Pedersen’s efforts to revive the political process.
We cannot let that continue. I still believe that there
is a window of opportunity with regard to the Syrian
political process. And there is a glimmer of hope. Hope
and opportunity are important for us to move forward.
19-19221

25/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

However, the current escalation in north-western Syria
is indeed threatening the ongoing political process.
In conclusion, in my very humble view, the biggest
tragedy would be to become immune to the suffering of
civilians or to fail to cope with it and take action. But
I sincerely believe that the Council can still be united
in alleviating the adversity of the Syrian people. I still
have faith in the Council.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Allow me to begin by
thanking Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator; Mr. David Lillie, Executive Director of the
Syrian American Medical Society; and Major General
Bakin, of the Russian Reconciliation Centre, for their
briefings on the situation in Syria. I am also looking
forward to hearing from our colleague, the Permanent
Representative of Syria.
At the outset, South Africa would like to pay
tribute to the humanitarian workers who have lost their
lives in this devastating war. These men and women
put the lives of those they chose to help before their
own and paid the ultimate price. We thank them and
honour their sacrifice. In that regard, we must do all
we can to end the conflict in Syria so as to ensure that
these courageous men and women did not lose their
lives in vain.
South Africa believes that the only sustainable
solution to the Syrian question remains the achievement
of a political solution through an inclusive Syrianowned and Syrian-led dialogue. The efforts of all
stakeholders in that regard are undermined by the
continued escalation of violence in some parts of
Syria. In that connection, we call on all parties to fully
implement all relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolutions 2254 (2015), on the political road
map, and 2449 (2018), on cross-border humanitarian
access. We also call for the full implementation of the
September 2018 ceasefire memorandum and the recent
ceasefire brokered between Russia and Turkey. South
Africa calls on all parties to adhere to the provisions
contained in the ceasefire agreements.
As stated in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2019/508), the humanitarian situation remains dire,
particularly in the light of the increasing violence
in north-western Syria, which has led thousands of
civilians to flee the area. The situation in various camps
throughout Syria is also of concern. The upcoming
summer season is expected to lead to additional

S/PV. 8561

challenges to the already strained humanitarian
assistance response. We therefore call on all parties
to ensure that the required humanitarian assistance is
being provided to all those who require it, wherever
they may be.
In that regard, while we welcome the efforts of the
United Nations and the Syrian Government in assisting
those who are able to leave Rukban camp; many more
are unable to do so at this time due to various challenges,
including lack of resources. While people remain at
Rukban, it is essential that they be provided with the
assistance they require. We call on the relevant parties
to ensure that the required permissions for additional
aid convoys are granted.
With regard to the Syrian Golan, South Africa would
like to reiterate its position that this territory remains
illegally occupied, and calls on Israel to adhere to the
Council’s various resolutions and to withdraw from all
occupied territories. The annexation of territory seized
through the use of force is in violation of international
law and must be condemned. In order to ensure longterm peace and security in the Middle East, it is vital
that international law be respected and upheld.
In conclusion, South Africa remains committed
to protecting the fundamental interests of all Syrian
people, maintaining peace and stability in the Middle
East, upholding the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, and preserving the basic
norms governing international relations.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We welcome the convening of this
meeting. We thank Mr. Lowcock, Major General Bakin
and Mr. Lillie for their valuable briefings.
Once again, we commend all humanitarian actors
who continue to provide essential and urgent assistance
in conditions of insecurity, including in areas highly
contaminated by explosive remnants and landmines.
The degree of vulnerability in the Syrian Arab
Republic is worrisome. Most of Syria’s population is
already living in extreme poverty, with limited capacity
to endure further attacks and with acute humanitarian
needs. But the statistics, reports and figures do not
manage to reflect one iota of the suffering that these
people must feel as they leave everything behind in
order to save their lives and those of their loved ones.
We have already directly explained on several
occasions my country’s position on the appalling

19-1922117/23

S/PV.8561

The situation in the Middle East

humanitarian situation in Syria. The solution to this
long-standing conflict is not military, but political.
Humanitarian action cannot replace the primary
responsibility of the Syrian Arab Republic and the
entire international community to protect the civilian
population from indiscriminate attacks, in accordance
with international humanitarian law. It is precisely now,
when for the first time in a long time there seems to be a
window of opportunity to advance the political process,
that the Council must assume its role and seize this
opportunity to redouble efforts to support this process
and defend it tooth and nail.
Understanding that the situation in Idlib directly
influences the stability of the political process, we
reiterate the need for the full implementation of the
Russian-Turkish memorandum of September 2018
and for all parties to the conflict to comply with
international humanitarian law and the obligation to
protection of civilians. We insist that attacks on civilian
infrastructure such as hospitals and schools, as well as
other civilian spaces, cease immediately. Such attacks
fundamentally disrupt the provision of basic services
such as education and health care, especially for
women, children, the elderly, people with disabilities
and young people.
In conclusion, I would like to highlight a few
points that, from our perspective, could contribute
to alleviating the suffering of so many millions of
people through flexible, comprehensive and needsbased humanitarian assistance. In order to be able to
assess and respond to the growing needs of the affected
population, all parties exercising control on the ground
must facilitate safe, sustained and unhindered access
to the United Nations and its partners to all of Syria.
The parties must adhere to the rules of international
humanitarian law and refrain from attacks on the
civilian population and infrastructure. That includes
counter-terrorist offensives.

25/06/2019

to be a source of concern for us, especially since we
heard that permission for the entry of a new convoy
had been denied. We therefore urge the authorities
to continue to work with the United Nations and its
partners in the quest for joint solutions in order to help
those persons wishing to leave the camp and deliver
humanitarian assistance to those who remain.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank the
briefers for their presentations. I wish in particular to
thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for
the efforts made by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs on the ground.
The military escalation in north-west Syria continues
even as we speak. Reported airstrikes and shelling
have damaged 26 health-care facilities and almost 40
schools in the area. Attacks on densely populated areas,
homes, medical facilities and settlements for internally
displaced persons are unacceptable and must stop. All
parties must, as their first priority, protect civilians
in Idlib.
Any military operation, even if carried out against
United Nations-listed terrorist entities, should be fully
in line with international humanitarian and human
rights law, in order to preserve from harm the thousands
of civilians trapped in the middle of the fighting.
The protection of civilians and unhindered access to
humanitarian assistance are not a choice but a legal
obligation of all sides to the conflict. Those that do not
comply should be held accountable.
Let me once again underline the significance of
ensuring that the de-escalation zone in Idlib, as agreed
in the memorandum of understanding between Russia
and Turkey, is effectively restored and fully respected.
The recent escalation has already resulted in another
displacement of more than 350,000 persons.

The lives of the 72,000 people living in Al-Hol
camp, the vast majority of whom are women and
children, remain at risk. Uncertainty with respect to
the future and lack of information about their relatives
have triggered rising tensions. It is therefore vital that
sustained humanitarian access be maintained and that
solutions be considered with respect to the thousands of
foreign citizens who are living in the annex to the camp.

In addition, I want to stress our concern about the
dismal state of health-care facilities in Syria. Most
of them are not functional, and those still operating
are too poorly equipped to be able to provide care to
patients with injuries or further support to persons
with disabilities. In our opinion, the international
community, especially the Security Council, should
vigorously advocate for the health and protection of
civilians, especially women, children and persons with
disabilities, as stated in resolution 2475 (2019).

The situation of those people remaining in Rukban
camp and awaiting humanitarian assistance continues

Let me turn to the issue of humanitarian access
in Syria, especially in Al-Hol camp, where children

18/23

19-19221

25/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

constitute the majority of the population, as well as
Rukban camp, where the situation is increasingly dire
owing to the limited movement of goods and the fact
that there is practically no external access.
As recalled during today’s briefing, the second and
most recent humanitarian convoy to Rukban delivered
life-saving aid to the inhabitants of the camp at the
beginning of February. As we approach the end of
June, no progress has been made in terms of the third
convoy. We urge the Syrian authorities to swiftly
mobilize the next inter-agency convoy to Rukban,
where approximately 28,000 people remain in urgent
need of humanitarian assistance.
In conclusion, let me once again stress the
crucial importance of the effective and credible
re-implementation of the Idlib de-escalation zone as a
sine qua non for averting a humanitarian catastrophe
in Syria and of making much-needed progress in the
political process, in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015) and the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex).
Mr. Sipaco Ribala (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): Equatorial Guinea welcomes the holding
of this meeting and reiterates its thanks to Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Major General Alexey Bakin and Mr. David
Lillie for the very useful information they have
provided us.
As has been described in detail, the situation in
Syria, particularly in the north-western part of the
country, is reaching alarming proportions. Over the
past two months, we have lost count of the number of
people, mostly women and children, who have been
killed in the current escalation of violence. There can
be no doubt that we are facing a genuine humanitarian
tragedy with clear regional repercussions. Against that
backdrop, it would make sense to ask ourselves if the
conflict might morph into a large-scale regional war or
if, on the contrary, the Syrian Government will succeed
in containing the jihadist threat and the rise of other
armed groups. Objectively speaking, it is impossible to
predict how the situation will play out.
No one wants to pay the bloody price of an open
war, including Syria’s immediate neighbours. The
parties must therefore spare no effort to rein in the
increasing number of attacks against the population,
defenceless civilians, civilian infrastructure and
health-care centres.

S/PV. 8561

The disastrous humanitarian situation is evident,
as can be seen in the camps for refugees and displaced
persons, including Al-Hol camp, where 73,000 people
live in appalling conditions, and Rukban camp, which,
because of the failure to deploy the third humanitarian
convoy, some 14,000 people have been compelled
to abandon owing to the horrendous humanitarian
conditions there. We must not underestimate the
seriousness of the situation in the two camps or
substantially downplay the real magnitude of the
humanitarian disaster they are currently facing.
Here we reiterate that in line with resolution
2449 (2018) and other relevant resolutions, crossborder assistance must remain a key component of
humanitarian action, and the parties must not stint on
efforts to allow humanitarian aid to reach Idlib and
other areas of the country cut off by the fighting.
Given the alarming levels of need and vulnerability
with adverse humanitarian consequences in north-west
Syria, the Government of Equatorial Guinea commends
the work done by the humanitarian community, which,
despite the many security restrictions, is resolutely
committed to responding to the needs of the population
affected by delivering emergency humanitarian aid.
I conclude my statement by stressing that there
can be no military solution to the conflict in Syria.
Peace and stability in Syria require all the parties to
compromise and fulfil their obligations to promote an
inclusive and peaceful political process.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Syria.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): There is a well-known adage that says, “That
which harms you can also help you grow”. This saying
makes considerably easier my task of criticizing the
invitation extended to the Executive Director of the socalled Syrian American Medical Society, particularly
in the light of the praise heaped by the United States
representative on that Society and its work in Syria.
I think the commendation speaks volumes as to the
extent to which the society is linked with United States
intelligence agencies operating actively in my country
and in other countries. That is not an accusation
against the society, which every year fails to obtain
consultative status in the meetings of non-governmental
organizations here in New York. Every year it submits
a request and fails to achieve consultative status for

19-1922119/23

S/PV.8561

The situation in the Middle East

reasons of which States Members of the Organization
are aware and there is no need to go into further detail.
As mentioned on its website, the organization is
affiliated with the Federal Government of the United
States. Indeed, it is affiliated with an agency called the
United States Agency for International Development
(USAID), for which the person present with us here
worked in Iraq, Afghanistan and then Syria for eight
years before he was transferred to preside over the
Syrian American Medical Society. The important thing
is that the society works for USAID and the latter
introduces itself on its website as an independent agency
of the United States Federal Government with a budget
of more than $27 billion. The person present with us
here who spoke on behalf of a society called the Syrian
American Medical Society is an employee of USAID,
which is an agency of the United States Administration,
meaning that he is a non-independent federal employee.
He should therefore not have been invited to speak
before the Council. He is an American, not a Syrian.
He has no right to speak about another country, while
the Syrian American Medical Society or the American
Syrian Medical Society — I do not know what they call
it — is not authorized to work in Syria. That means that
it is an illegal organization that is illegally active on
Syrian territory. There is something important called
legal ignorance, which does not authorize anyone
to ignore the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, resolutions of the Security Council or the
General Assembly or the consensual resolutions of
other important international institutions, which I will
address now.
First, the Geneva Conventions do not allow the
society to be active on the territory of another State
without the consent of the State involved. Secondly, the
system that established the International Federation of
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies in 1921 forbids
any medical or non-medical society from being active
on the occupied territory of another State unless
that State approves it. As members know, General
Assembly resolution 46/182 stipulates that no one can
provide humanitarian assistance without the consent
of the authorities of the State concerned. Paragraph
14 of the General Assembly resolution on the pattern
of conferences that we adopt by consensus every year
stipulates that United Nations halls, buildings and
facilities are not allowed to be used against the interests
of a State Member of the United Nations.
20/23

25/06/2019

There is another important point to mention. The
Executive Director of that organization or society said
that it provided 14 million medical services in Idlib.
All members know that, according to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and others, the
Al-Nusra Front controls 99 per cent of Idlib. That means
that a terrorist group controls 99 per cent of Idlib where
the Syrian American Medical Society is active. How
could it be that the society is active in places controlled
by a terrorist group? Hence, there is cooperation
between the terrorist group and the society, meaning
that the society provides assistance to a terrorist group
in Idlib rather than providing assistance to civilians
in Idlib.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): It is dangerous
to humanitarian workers on the ground to allege a
connection with the Al-Nusra Front when none exists. I
want to put that on the record because that could really
put lives at risk.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor
back to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic
to conclude his statement.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): That is the first time that I have seen
a representative of a country interrupting the
representative of another country while reading his
statement to raise a point of order. That does not happen.
No one may interrupt an ambassador of another country
while delivering a statement. In any case, I recounted
facts and information and posed legitimate questions to
all members. Consider what I said regarding information
and factual events. Members can verify them. They are
not accusations, rather they are facts.
My delegation has taken note of the sixtyfirst report on the implementation of supposedly
humanitarian resolutions aimed at supporting the
efforts of the Syrian Government and its institutions
to improve the lives and well-being of Syrian civilians
and to build their capacity to improve the difficult
humanitarian conditions that are the result of the civil
war imposed on my country. I will not address the
report before the Council in detail as it is intended to
deal with objectives that are not related to the interests
of the Syrian people or their security and well-being. It
is simply used to repeat obsolete things that may please
certain anti-Syrian Governments. The proof is that
most pages of the report focus on the situation in Idlib,
guided by the vision of the Office for the Coordination
19-19221

25/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

of Humanitarian Affairs and its open sources. It uses
vague language and fabricated names that take us back
to an era that we thought OCHA had left behind, an era
in which it was exploited by certain agendas of States
that have influence in the Security Council. Those
countries sought to undermine the efforts of the Syrian
Government and to find pretexts to accuse it and to
make it an enemy rather than to establish a partnership
with it and fully cooperate and coordinate with it in
advance. Cities such as Raqqa, Hajin, Baghouz, Deir
ez-Zor, Tell Rifaat, Palmyra, Afrin and Manbij did not
receive any attention from those who draft such reports.
They always write short and ambiguous expressions,
refusing to use clear language and without attributing
responsibility for the war crimes and crimes against
humanity to the international coalition, the occupying
Turkish forces, the militias and affiliated terrorist
groups. They do not address the tragic plight of the
civilians, including in areas occupied by the United
States, such as Rukban and Al-Hol camps. Because
they claim to be neutral and professional, as we hope
they truly are, they had to say something about the
existence and enormity of those unquestionable crimes.
In light of the information contained in the report,
we have the right to ask about hundreds of foreign
fighters whom the report claims to have resided in
Al-Hol camp and were reportedly transferred to other
places. We have extremely important information about
that. Thousands of foreign terrorists residing in Al-Hol
camp were transferred to other places. We have the
right to ask about their destination. What will their
fate be? Will they be recycled through Turkish territory
back into Syria? We have seen that happen in the northeast of the country and other areas in order to launch
attacks on peaceful civilian areas in the north-west of
Syria, such as the city of Kesab, or to enter Idlib and
its rural areas. On what basis were they released from
the camps? Who facilitated and funded this operation?
Are we going to see those terrorists in other targeted
countries, pursuant to the policies of certain countries
under fabricated names such as the Islamic State in
North Africa, like Da’esh in our region, Or the Islamic
State in the Caucasus and Central Asia? It would
seem that investing in terrorism is far more lucrative
for certain States Members of the Organization than
investing in the Sustainable Development Goals, the
environment, conflict containment, the fight against
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction or
humanitarian work.

S/PV. 8561

Ever since the first meeting of the Security Council
on the humanitarian situation in my country years ago,
we have stressed that a tangible improvement in the
humanitarian situation in Syria requires dealing with
foreign political, military and economic intervention
in the affairs of my country. Obviously, discussing
the details of these aggressive interventions requires
time that the Council is not willing to spend. I do
not believe that certain members of the Council are
willing to seriously engage in core issues leading
to the achievement of the noble objectives of real
humanitarian work.
Are the representatives of certain Western States
ready to discuss the terrorism that is targeting my
country? Some States are investing in this terrorism.
They collateralize their investment with tens of
thousands of foreign terrorist fighters from more than
100 States Members of the Organization, providing them
with all kinds of support, finance and weapons. Are the
representatives of those Western States ready to discuss
economic terrorism and the collective punishment that
their Governments practice by imposing unilateral
coercive sanctions against the Syrian people? These
sanctions do not exclude children, the elderly, women
or the sick. Are those colleagues willing to discuss the
role their Governments are playing in prolonging this
crisis, which has lasted for more than eight years? These
Governments are hindering the political solution and
thereby increasing the suffering of the Syrian people.
We all know the answer very well. We realize that those
Governments are offering various fake excuses and
pretexts to avoid this discussion, which would highlight
their serious political, legal and moral failings.
I will refrain from reading certain paragraphs
contained in my statement so as not to be accused
of attacking the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. We have made
great progress in spite of the enormous challenges we
face and we are confident that, together, we could have
achieved much more in the humanitarian field if some
of our United Nations partners had been committed
to the principles of humanitarian work, notably by
respecting the principles of sovereignty, neutrality,
non-politicization, full cooperation and coordination
with the Syrian Government, which is the key party
involved in meeting the needs of Syrians.
The Syrian Government, like every other
responsible Government in the world, including the
Governments of Member States, cannot sit idle while

19-1922121/23

S/PV.8561

The situation in the Middle East

terrorists control one of its regions and use the citizens
of Dara’a as human shields, targeting peaceful civilians
in neighbouring cities and towns with indiscriminate
missiles and rockets. It is obvious that the Syrian
Government must defend its citizens and has the right
to respond to terrorists launching missiles. It has the
right to fight terrorism, as stressed by international law,
the Charter of the United Nations and the anti-terrorism
resolutions. Any allegation that the Syrian Government
and its allies are deliberately targeting civilians or
civilian infrastructure is purely baseless.
In conclusion, I reaffirm that my country’s
Government will spare no effort to help the Syrian
people surpass these difficult times of the history of
their country by providing them with the support and
services they need to move forward to rehabilitate
and rebuild what has been destroyed by terrorism and
aggression. I also emphasize that the way to improve
the humanitarian situation in my country is clear to
everybody. It requires full respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic,
as well as the lifting of the illegal, inhumane and
unilateral coercive measures against it. The Syrian
State must be supported in the humanitarian and
development areas, in addition to the measures taken
by the Government to fight terrorism and put an end
to the illegal presence of United States, British, French
and Turkish forces throughout the entire territories of
the Syrian Arab Republic.
The President (spoke in Arabic): To clarify, the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic stated that,
in his experience, there had never been a case where a
Council member raised a point of order. In accordance
with rule 30 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, it is entirely acceptable for a Council member
to raise a point of order. However, the representative
of the United Kingdom raised a point of order before I
had given her the floor, so it was not possible to fully
interpret her statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Bakin to respond to
comments and questions raised.
Mr. Bakin (spoke in Russian): I do not wish
to make any additional comments further to my
earlier statement.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give
the floor to Mr. Lillie to respond to comments and
questions raised.
22/23

25/06/2019

Mr. Lillie: I, too, would like to pay tribute to the
humanitarians who have been lost in Syria — nearly
1,200 of them, as the representative of South Africa
mentioned in his remarks, which we appreciate.
With regard to the areas of Syria that we have
discussed here today, I sometimes wonder why healthcare workers stay in Syria. They stay to care for those
who have been injured and maimed, and to help bury
those who have died. They are unselfish, they are
heroic and they are true humanitarians. In fact, one of
the most dangerous jobs in Syria is to be a health-care
worker. One of the most dangerous places to be in Syria
today is at a health facility.
As has been stated here today, since the end of April
there have been 30 attacks on health facilities, mobile
health clinics and ambulances. The Syrian American
Medical Society alone has lost over 50 of its colleagues.
This week, my colleagues and fellow non-governmental
organizations have been reviewing a duty of care
policy — what to do about our colleagues who have
been maimed and who have died, and how we care for
their families. I have worked in humanitarian assistance
for decades in Darfur, South Sudan, Iraq, Afghanistan
and in many other places, for both governmental and
non-governmental organizations, and I have never put
so much care into such a policy — we have not had to.
Some of my colleagues would want to condemn or
to call out names, but we cannot so long as we stay
true to humanitarian standards. And it is not easy.
Of the nine de-conflicted facilities attacked since
late April, eight were from air strikes. While there
are many air forces operating in Syria, the only ones
conducting operations in that part of north-western
Syria are Russia’s and Syria’s. It was Russia that, for
years, pushed to de-conflict. We were told to provide
coordinates and that they would make sure that those
coordinates were not targeted.
This organ and its investigative entities must hold
accountable those who have attacked civilians and
medical facilities or the people suffering in Syria will
lose the remaining thread of hope that the international
community cares. We owe it to the 1,200 humanitarians
who have perished in the conflict and the 2,200
individuals — women, children, civilians — who
the Syrian American Medical Society has seen in its
medical facilities injured from the conflict since the
end of April.
19-19221

25/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

We have heard many good words here today and I
can only ask that we put those words into action before
more civilian lives are lost.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I call on the
representative of the United Kingdom on a point
of order.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): That was a very
moving conclusion from Mr. Lillie.
I just wanted to say that I would like the record to
show that I did not get answers to my questions from
someone who ought to have been able to answer them
and that, for as long as we do not have answers to those
questions, the types of suffering, complications and
dilemmas that David Lillie has outlined will continue.
We therefore need to continue our efforts to try and get
to the bottom of the situation.

S/PV. 8561

I will spare Council colleagues reflections on the
irony that the issue of freedom of speech has been
raised with regard to what we heard at the beginning
and the fact that my questions have not been answered.
However, I would like to stress that we will need to
come back to the issue. It is so important.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The representative
of the Russian Federation has requested the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): I would just like to correct my British
colleague. All the answers to her questions are
contained in Major General Bakin’s statement. She
simply needs to read and listen to it again thoroughly. It
contains exhaustive answers, including with regard to
humanitarian matters.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

19-1922123/23
