United Nations

S/PV.9227

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9227

th meeting
Tuesday, 20 December 2022, 10.35 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Kamboj/Mr. Verma/Mr. Ravindran. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Mythen
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Huitfeldt
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Wood

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2022/916)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-76293 (E)
*2276293*

S/PV.9227

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2022/916)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Kazakhstan, Pakistan and Uzbekistan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Roza
Otunbayeva, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan; Mr. Martin Griffiths, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator; and Ms. Mahbouba
Seraj, Afghan women’s rights activist.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/916, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
At this meeting, the Security Council will
hear briefings by Ms. Otunbayeva, Mr. Griffiths,
Ms. Seraj and myself, in my capacity as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011).
I give the floor to Ms. Otunbayeva.
Ms. Otunbayeva: I have visited as many parts
of Afghanistan as possible in my first three months
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
What struck me most was the misery of so many
Afghans who live in great poverty and uncertainty
about the future. Many told me during my visits
around the country that they are simply surviving. My
colleague Martin Griffiths will provide details on the
humanitarian situation. Beyond pressing immediate
humanitarian needs, however, Afghanistan is a country
still traumatized by long decades of war. The Taliban
2/33

20/12/2022

remain essentially in control of the country but unable
to satisfactorily address the problem of terrorist groups
operating inside Afghanistan. We are deeply concerned
about the recent activity of the Islamic State-Khorosan
Province in particular, as well as the attacks on the
embassies of the Russian Federation and Pakistan and
a hotel hosting many Chinese nationals, which resulted
in significant civilian casualties. There nonetheless
remains a general sense of security and freedom of
movement for Afghans. On the other hand, we are
greatly concerned about the recent continued exchanges
of fire between Afghanistan and Pakistan and welcome
all efforts towards de-escalation.
There is no significant visible political opposition
to the Taliban inside Afghanistan. The exiled politicians
of the Republic are of course vocal critics, but they are
fragmented, and their statements resonate less and less
with the population inside Afghanistan. The Taliban
reject the need for any sort of intra-Afghan dialogue
and claim that their Government is sufficiently
representative. The United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) continues to push at all
levels for wider consultation and representation, as I
briefed the Council about during the Arria Formula
meeting in October. We also continue to interact with
many non-Taliban civil-society and political figures
in Afghanistan. We believe that the only way forward
for Afghanistan is through a more pluralistic polity
where all Afghans, especially women and minorities,
see themselves represented and have a real voice in
decision-making. That is clearly not the case now.
Moreover, the media and civil society, which are already
suffering from serious financial constraints, continue to
be stifled through intimidation by the de facto security
institutions and at times through repressive actions.
The suppression of opposing voices is all the
more unfortunate given the increasing harshness of
the Taliban’s social policies. We have seen a slew of
decrees that are especially harmful to women. Women
have been banned since 9 November from visiting
most public parks, bathhouses and gymnasiums. Their
social space is now being restricted as much as their
political space. The banning of secondary education
will mean that in two years no girls will be entering
university. That decision is extremely unpopular among
Afghans and even within the Taliban leadership. It
has been criticized by the entire Islamic world and
has undermined the Taliban’s relationship with the
international community, but it remains in force,
causing damage today that will be felt far into the future.
22-76293

20/12/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

On 13 November, the Taliban announced that their
leader, Haibatullah Akhundzada, had ordered judges to
implement capital and corporal punishments known as
hudūd and qisās in order to fully enforce sharia law.
UNAMA has documented that such punishments have
been taking place ever since the Taliban’s takeover.
However, since the announcement of the Taliban
leader’s order they have become increasingly public.
Any international criticism of such punishments as
violations of human rights has been rejected by the
Taliban as anti-Islamic. We have urged the Taliban
to do as many Islamic countries do and refrain from
inflicting pain, including through acts of corporal
punishment, in their application of religious law. On
7 December, the first judicially sanctioned public
execution — reportedly as an implementation of qisās
punishment — was carried out for a murder that took
place in 2017. It was attended by senior members of the
Taliban. I want to reiterate here what I have stressed to
the de facto authorities, which is that the death penalty
is incompatible with the core principles of international
human rights law. The United Nations uniformly
criticizes all countries that apply the death penalty or
corporal punishment.
It is clear that there are severe differences of
positions on a range of issues between UNAMA and
the de facto authorities. We, as the United Nations,
have an ongoing dialogue with the Taliban regarding
human rights concerns and specific violations of
international human rights law. We do not see eye to
eye with the Taliban on a number of issues, but the
focus is and should be on maintaining a dialogue in
the hope of a better future for Afghanistan, where
everyone — women, men, girls and boys — can live a
life of dignity and equality.
There are, however, some positive developments,
particularly on the economic front. The overall levels
of corruption are significantly down compared to the
days of the Republic, but there have been worrying
signs of an uptick in the past six months, especially in
petty corruption at the local level. For now, the main
impediment to investment, besides policy uncertainty,
is that it is extremely expensive for the Taliban to
engage in international financial transactions owing
to the reluctance of international banks to do business
with Afghanistan. However, the de facto authorities
announced the collection of more revenues in the first
10 months of 2022 than the Republic collected in 2021
and 2020 together, despite an economic contraction

S/PV.9227

of 20 per cent in 2021. With those revenues, and by
reducing the costs of Government, the Taliban have
managed to finance their operational budget and have
indicated that they have the resources to begin some
development projects. They have also managed to
maintain macroeconomic stability, albeit at a much
lower level of economic activity. After the currency’s
steep deterioration a year ago, the afghani has remained
generally stable. Exports have risen to a historic level
of about $1.7 billion this year, compared to about
$700 million under the Republic.
The de facto authorities are implementing an
economic strategy that focuses on self-reliance. They
are investing in sectors such as agriculture, irrigation,
infrastructure, water management and mining,
industries that can provide a foundation for economic
growth. The Taliban have identified the private sector
as a key driver of economic growth and are somewhat
responsive to the concerns of private-sector actors.
UNAMA has been in regular contact with private-sector
actors and organizations, including women’s chambers
of commerce. The main impediment to greater
investment is the high cost of international financial
transactions. And while the Taliban’s economic
management has been more effective than expected,
it should also be recognized that international donors
continue to feed more than half of the population.
The cash payments required to deliver humanitarian
assistance indirectly inject liquidity into the economy.
Without that assistance, the picture in Afghanistan
could be far bleaker.
Finally, there is evidence that the Taliban are
implementing the ban that they announced in April
on the cultivation of opium and other narcotics by
destroying fields that were planted before and after
the ban’s announcement. We will not be able to verify
the actual implementation of this ban until early next
year, but the intention behind it is commendable.
Nonetheless, the ban will have a negative effect on
the income of individual farmers, as few alternative
livelihood programmes have been put into place.
These somewhat positive economic developments
may not be sustainable if the real concerns of Afghans
are not addressed. Between 11 October and 8 November,
UNAMA carried out stakeholder consultations in
12 provinces selected to ensure a representation of
all Afghan communities and sectors. We engaged
with 519 participants, including 189 women and 83
representatives of the de facto authorities. The concerns

22-762933/33

S/PV.9227

The situation in Afghanistan

expressed by the population had to do with the ban
on girls’ education, lack of health-care facilities,
mental-health problems of the population, poverty
and economic insecurity, and discrimination against
ethnic minorities. The Taliban have not addressed these
issues, and in many cases their decisions have made
them worse.
But during these stakeholder discussions, Afghans
showed that they are also frustrated with the international community’s approach. They expressed a desire
for projects that are more long term, involve cash for
work rather than handouts, or are more participatory,
consultative and development-oriented. However, under
current conditions, donors are increasingly unwilling to
look beyond the provision of humanitarian assistance.
As long as girls remain excluded from school and the
de facto authorities continue to disregard other stated
concerns of the international community, we remain at
something of an impasse.
In UNAMA, we are undertaking an internal
review to assess what has and has not been effective
in the implementation of our mandate. This will yield
recommendations for our future mandate. But, overall,
we believe that engagement with the de facto authorities
must continue in some form.
As Council member themselves heard from
female humanitarian workers in yesterday’s closed
consultations of the whole, Afghans want continued
engagement from the international community and
believe that it is only through increased interaction
with the de facto authorities that positive change can
take place.
UNAMA’s focus must remain on the Afghan people,
providing them life-saving humanitarian assistance,
giving a voice to their demands for fundamental rights
and freedoms, and, by its presence, holding out hope that
Afghanistan will not be isolated from the international
community. We are committed to these goals and to
trying to maintain a space for positive engagement with
the Taliban. But we must do so with a sense of realism,
patience and a proper understanding of the situation as
it evolves. As always, we look to the Security Council
for support and guidance.
The President: I thank Ms. Otunbayeva for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
4/33

20/12/2022

Mr. Griffiths: It is impossible to come up with new
ways to describe the deprivation and suffering facing
people in Afghanistan, so allow me to share some wellknown, though still sobering, facts.
Ninety-seven percent of Afghans live in poverty.
Two thirds of the population need humanitarian
assistance to survive. Twenty million people face acute
hunger. Half of the people urgently need access to clean
water and sanitation. Some 1.1 million teenage girls
remain banned from school. Nearly 7 million Afghan
nationals remain in neighbouring countries, including
as refugees, and there are more than 3.4 million
internally displaced people in Afghanistan who have
yet to find a way home.
And if lingering conflict, entrenched poverty,
economic downfall — and I thank Special Representative
Otunbayeva for her briefing on that matter also — and
political instability were not enough, Afghanistan
must also face a worsening climate crisis. A third
consecutive drought is looming, bringing with it threats
of more displacement, more disease and more death.
Winter is already in full swing, causing temperatures to
plummet. This week temperatures will drop to -10°C in
remote areas of Ghor province, which earlier this year
registered pre-famine conditions.
The humanitarian community in Afghanistan
is fully mobilized, trying to address the most urgent
needs. Any progress we have made so far is thanks
to three main factors. First, there was the massive
scale-up, aided by the quick and generous donor
response, which enabled us to reach around 25 million
people in all 34 governorates with at least some form
of assistance. Secondly, there is the United Nations
cash facility, which has brought in at least $1.8 billion
this year to support humanitarian operations. For one
United Nations agency, by way of example, this has
enabled the injection of well over $55 million into the
economy each month, including by paying national
staff salaries, hiring tens of thousands of staff in
partner humanitarian organizations, and providing jobs
for labourers. And thirdly, there is the humanitarian
exception adopted by the Security Council in December
2021 in resolution 2615 (2021), which has played a
critical facilitating role.
A key component of the humanitarian exception
was to clarify that the provision of funds or assets to
designated persons or entities is permitted when it is
necessary for humanitarian and basic human-needs
programming. I cannot overstate how essential this legal
22-76293

20/12/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.9227

cover has been for humanitarian and commercial actors
alike. It allows us, the humanitarians, to implement at
scale, and it authorizes our business and commercial
partners, as a starting point, to process and pay funds
to line ministries headed by designated individuals. To
put it more clearly: it helps us and others to save lives.

organizations (NGOs). Those payments are in relatively
nominal amounts and are to pay for tax on rent and
withholding tax on national staff income.

Resolution 2615 (2021) requires that I as the
Emergency Relief Coordinator brief the Security
Council on the delivery of humanitarian assistance in
Afghanistan, so allow me to share some updates.

We have continued to implement and enhance
robust risk management and due diligence measures.
That includes a new system-wide approach to fraud
detection, clunkily labelled the Contractor Information
Management System, a centrally managed platform
that feeds back to United Nations agencies in real time
on the veracity of contractual partners and vendors.
Several organizations have also created new functions
in their operations, such as senior risk management and
compliance advisers, to assist in a more proactive and
engaged risk management.

But first, I would like to make an important
clarification. Transferring funds to line ministries for
the delivery of humanitarian aid in Afghanistan is not
new. Since long before August 2021, United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organization partners
were required by law to pay taxes, administrative
fees and public utilities. These could take the form of
withholding tax on income, sales tax, property tax, fees
for visas and work permits, vehicle registration duties,
electricity and water bills, and customs payments for
imported goods. Clearance fees paid to the Afghanistan
Telecommunications Regulatory Authority for the
use of communications equipment, including highfrequency radios and satellite phones, has allowed
operations to stay connected, particularly in hard-to
reach and remote areas or where there is poor coverage,
and, in a very limited number of cases, humanitarian
organizations have provided line ministries with assets,
including technical equipment, vehicles and office
supplies in support of programme implementation.
United Nations agencies in Afghanistan continue to
identify ways to strengthen interventions in a responsible
manner that safeguards humanitarian space. In that
regard, I commend the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) for its
recent partnership agreement with the Ministry of
Refugees and Repatriation in support of affected
populations. That agreement, if fully implemented,
helps to ensure that the de facto authorities do not
interfere in the humanitarian activities of UNHCR or
its partners.
However, the humanitarian exception is no carte
blanche for any operation. We are not transferring funds
to line ministries in any excessive fashion. Ninetyeight per cent of the 66 organizations that reported
making payments to line ministries — as required by
law — are national and international non-governmental

In that regard, I would like to draw the Council
member’s attention to what humanitarian partners have
been doing to minimize risks.

Another measure being utilized when supporting
the functions of key line ministries that provide basic
services is the direct contracting of utility companies
that provide electricity or Internet, rather than giving
funds via the line ministry. Likewise, for the daily
charges the United Nations makes related to security
escorts and perimeter protection, fuel is put directly into
escort vehicles, and food allowances are made either
in kind or through direct payment to the personnel
providing the security.
Due diligence assessments are conducted on all
money service providers and implementing partners
before partnering, and the signing of those contracts
is contingent upon the successful screening of their
directors, key personnel and other employees. Of note,
customs charges are currently approximately $23 per
container or shipment, which is same rate as during the
previous Government.
Let me be clear: failure to make some of the
payments that I have been describing can have severe
consequences for NGO partners, including the freezing
of bank accounts, the shutting of offices and even
de-registration.
Recipient line ministries headed by listed individuals include the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry
of Economy, the Ministry of Interior, the Ministry
of Water and Electricity, the Ministry of Refugees
and Repatriation, the Ministry of Transport and Civil
Aviation and the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation
and Livestock. Thanks to the authorization provided

22-762935/33

S/PV.9227

The situation in Afghanistan

by resolution 2615 (2021), we have been able to meet
and match humanitarian needs and do so in a manner
consistent with the instructions of the Security Council.
For example, the leasing of State-owned warehouses
from local municipalities has enabled the United Nations
to maintain the food stocks needed to reach 22 million
people over the course of this year. Those warehouses
were a critical part of the United Nations supply chain
network prior to August 2021, and there were no
alternate facilities that could have been used, given the
scale of monthly requirements.
Payments to the Customs and Revenue Department
by United Nations-contracted commercial transporters,
as well as the payments of fees for processing exemption
certificates to the Customs and Revenue Department,
have facilitated the entry of 1.1 million metric tons of
life-saving food assistance.
Electricity and payments to the Ministry of
Transport and Civil Aviation have allowed the
United Nations Humanitarian Air Service to make
more than 4,000 domestic and international flights
in and out of Kabul this year, transporting more than
24,000 humanitarian workers to multiple locations
across the country.
Those efforts with money service providers and
with those who receive our assistance continue and
include a review of the legal status, national and
international registration documents, partnership
agreements, policies on anti-money laundering and
counter-terrorism financing and reference checks.
Council members can see me piling up the references
to verification and compliance and mitigation, on top of
pre-existing risk management processes, to which I have
referred. We have put therefore multiple monitoring
mechanisms in place to ensure that assistance goes
to the intended recipients. Those also include routine
post-distribution monitoring; the use of third-party
monitors; community feedback mechanisms; regular
site visits and field missions by both management
and technical staff; and external audits to verify
expenditures and check on cash distributions to local
communities and beneficiaries.
Earlier this year, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, the Mission led by Ms. Roza
Otunbayeva, invited an expert to help to strengthen
the humanitarian community’s understanding and
implementation of the humanitarian exception and to
identify concrete measures to manage risks.
6/33

20/12/2022

Before I finish, I would like to share some of the
challenges that we face.
First, while we do maintain constructive
engagement, as encouraged by Ms. Otunbayeva, with
de facto authorities, we also, as she has described,
face routine interference and restrictions. They have
detained humanitarian staff, tried to influence or control
the humanitarian response and constrained women’s
freedom of movement and involvement in humanitarian
action. The mahram requirement, in particular, is what
hampers women’s participation in humanitarian action
the most and persistently affects women’s access to
services. There have been concerning reports from
Helmand province, among others, that women have
been prevented from entering health facilities when
they do not have a mahram.
Members of the Security Council — again, as
referenced by Ms. Otunbayeva — heard directly
yesterday from Afghan women humanitarian workers.
Effective humanitarian assistance relies on the
meaningful participation of women, as they stated. We
cannot overstate the importance of their capacities,
insight and ability to reach women and girls across
the country.
The second challenge relates to continued bank
de-risking. The humanitarian exception has been a
necessary, but still insufficient, condition for banks
to fully restart international transactions to and from
Afghanistan, given the range of non-sanction-related
factors they have to take into account. While our
partners report fewer challenges with transferring funds
into Afghanistan than they did before the exception
was secured, that remains a serious problem that will
remain with us for some time.
The third challenge is the daunting financial
challenge we face as we enter 2023. We need $4.6 billion
for the programme for next year to adequately address
the country’s needs. Despite the many pressing global
demands, we cannot underestimate the consequences of
decreasing funding to operations in Afghanistan.
And finally — and I particularly want to emphasize
this — there has been a paucity of progress on
restarting urgently needed development initiatives,
without which the humanitarian situation is likely to
further deteriorate, resulting in more people requiring
emergency assistance. Saving lives is certainly our
responsibility, but it is not ours alone, and I say that
as a lifelong humanitarian. Development partners also
22-76293

20/12/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

save lives. They deliver basic services. Humanitarian
programming cannot, and should not, be seen as the only
acceptable channel through which the extraordinary
suffering of Afghans is addressed.
In conclusion, our work is fraught with challenges.
Millions of people need humanitarian assistance to
survive. The figures I provided at the beginning of
these remarks are shocking and need no repetition.
The Council can be sure that, with its support, we will
continue to do at least the necessary for those people in
Afghanistan and for their future.
The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011).
I am pleased to brief the Security Council on
the work of the 1988 Committee, in accordance with
paragraph 56 of resolution 2255 (2015).
I am also thankful to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Roza Otunbayeva, and
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) for their support of the work of the 1988
Sanctions Committee and the continuous assistance to
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team.
As this will be my last briefing to the Council as Chair
of the Committee, please also allow me to also thank
my 1988 Committee colleagues, the Monitoring Team
and the Secretariat for their excellent cooperation, as
well as invaluable support over the past two years.
In its latest report to the Council, of May 2022
(see S/2022/419), 1988 Committee Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team noted that 41
United Nations-sanctioned individuals occupied Cabinet
and senior positions in the Taliban Administration.
That number is now believed to be over 60.
The Monitoring Team also reiterated that relations
between the Taliban and Al-Qaida remained close and
are underscored by the presence, both in Afghanistan
and the region, of Al-Qaida core leadership and affiliated
groups, such as Al-Qaida in the Indian Subcontinent.
On 1 August, the United States announced that, at the
end of July, the leader of Al-Qaida was killed in a Kabul
compound. However, that has not yet been confirmed
by the Taliban and Al-Qaida.
The Administration in Kabul remains overwhelmingly Taliban. Since taking power, concerns have been
expressed that the group has reversed policies and gone

S/PV.9227

back on commitments made prior to assuming power,
as reported by the Monitoring Team. Concerns have
also been expressed on the further erosion of human
rights, including the rights of women and girls, as well
as lack of progress on inclusive governance.
Regarding narcotics production in Afghanistan,
the report of the Monitoring Team stated that opium
poppy cultivation, accompanied by an ongoing boom in
methamphetamine production and trafficking, remains
Afghanistan’s largest illicit economic activity. Despite a
decree issued by the Taliban, in April 2022, banning the
cultivation, use and trafficking of narcotics, including
the fanning of opium poppy, the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime reported a 32 per cent increase
during 2021 in opium cultivation, with 2022 opium
prices having soared due to the announcement of the
cultivation ban.
The Monitoring Team has also reported that the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan (ISIL-K)
remains a primary threat in Afghanistan and in the
region, as has been demonstrated by its regular attacks
against Afghanistan’s neighbouring States, as well as
against minority ethnic and religious communities
in the country. Another worrisome fact is the attacks
of ISIL-K against diplomatic embassies and their
personnel. Moreover, ISIL-K maintains the potential to
attract disillusioned Taliban and foreign fighters into
its ranks, thereby enhancing its capability to carry out
attacks and its ability to regain a territorial hold in the
country, as well as the potential to establish a so-called
Islamic caliphate in the region in future.
The Monitoring Team has also noted the challenge
posed to the Taliban regime by the presence of the
National Resistance Front and other anti-Taliban groups
and that potential for further outbreaks of fighting
looms large in the absence of real or sustained dialogue.
As the Council is aware, the 1988 Committee’s
desired goal through the use of its sanctions measures
is to promote a peaceful, stable and prosperous
Afghanistan by deterring support to terrorist entities
and by supporting peace and stability discussions.
A travel-ban exemption granted in April 2019 to a
group of listed Taliban, with a view to enabling them to
engage in peace and stability discussions in a range of
countries, expired in August 2022 and was not extended
since the Committee was unable to reach consensus
on same. However, the Committee stood ready to
consider exemptions to the travel ban on a case-by-case

22-762937/33

S/PV.9227

The situation in Afghanistan

basis in accordance with the relevant resolutions and
Committee guidelines, with the overall objective of
furthering peace and stability in Afghanistan.
Humanitarian needs in Afghanistan remain dire. The
Council will recall that, following the uncertainty that
came in the wake of the August 2021 Taliban takeover of
Afghanistan, the Security Council acted to clarify that
humanitarian assistance and other activities that support
basic human needs in Afghanistan are not a violation of
paragraph 1 (a) of resolution 2255 (2015) and that the
processing of payments of funds, other financial assets,
economic resources and the provision of goods and
services needed to support humanitarian aid delivery
are permitted. That opened the door for much-needed
financing and aid delivery in order to mitigate the impact
of the crisis. The Sanctions Committee heard a briefing
from the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs on 4 April on the humanitarian activities in
Afghanistan. It remains our hope that the work of the
1988 Committee can and will support the creation of an
environment conducive to the formation of a peaceful
and stable Afghanistan free from terrorism and drugs.
In that respect, the work of the 1988 Committee
and of the Monitoring Team has become even more
essential in helping shape change for the better in
Afghanistan. Going forward, I would emphasize the
need for Member States to further support and assist
the work of the Committee and the Monitoring Team,
as outlined in paragraph 1 of resolution 2255 (2015) and
the annex to resolution 2611 (2021).
In that regard, we welcome the decision of the
Council to extend the mandate of the 1988 Sanctions
Committee and its Monitoring Team to continue to
oversee the implementation of sanctions measures, as
well as to support the peace and reconciliation process
in Afghanistan.
The overall effectiveness of the 1988 sanctions
measures relies on the coordination and communication
of all relevant Member States. Nowhere is that more
important than with the Member States of the region,
which share a common interest in ensuring a peaceful
and stable Afghanistan. In the aftermath of the Taliban
takeover, the Monitoring Team, in addition to its normal
interaction with Member States, has focused on greater
engagement with Afghanistan’s neighbours in order to
discuss the implementation of 1988 sanctions measures,
as well as to conduct threat assessments. It is my hope
that such outreach will continue and will be reciprocated.
8/33

20/12/2022

Please allow me once again to reiterate that the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011) and its Monitoring Team seek to
support peace and stabilization efforts in Afghanistan.
The Committee looks forward to a continuous fruitful
and cooperative relationship with Member States,
particularly those neighbouring Afghanistan, as
well as other relevant stakeholders. We also hope for
continued close engagement with UNAMA and other
relevant stakeholders in 2023 so as to ensure the full
implementation of the 1988 sanctions regime, along
with supporting negotiations towards securing a
peaceful, stable and inclusive Afghanistan.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to Ms. Seraj.
Ms. Seraj: First of all, before I begin I would like
to thank you, Madam President, and the Government
of India, for giving me this opportunity to talk about
Afghanistan, in my capacity as a human rights defender.
I am also a voice for the women of Afghanistan. I
would like to thank you very much for that and for
the opportunity to brief the Council on what is really
happening in Afghanistan today.
I thank you for inviting me to today’s important
meeting. It was nearly a year ago, in January, that I
was last here in the Council (see S/PV.8954). As I have
lived in Afghanistan since then, I can provide some
reflections on how things stand today as compared to
how they were in January. Let me therefore revisit some
of the points that I made then in this same forum and
see where we stand today. First, I said that hundreds of
thousands of Afghans had been displaced to countries
around the world and that women were literally being
erased from public life, down to the beheading of
female mannequins in shop windows. It pains me to say
that the situation has only worsened since then. Barely
two months after I said that in the Council, the world
was shocked by the promises that had been made to the
international community and that were not kept. The
schools were closed to girls. Girls were being locked
out of their schools and forced to return home.
It has been 700 days and Afghan girls have yet to
be permitted to return, making Afghanistan the only
country in the world where girls are banned from going
to school. And that is not the only thing. The Taliban
issued a mandate that women must cover their faces
when they go out, which was not something that was
22-76293

20/12/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

happening before. We covered the rest of our bodies
but not our faces. Women are not allowed to go out
in public without a male guardian. Women who used
to be the sole breadwinners for their families are no
longer permitted to go to their offices or workplaces.
Public corporal punishment has made its way back into
Afghan society. There are about three dozen edicts by
the Taliban that target the women of Afghanistan alone.
As I mentioned before, this is not just about women’s
status but about their literal erasure from public life. It
is a complete reversal of the empowerment enjoyed by
the women of Afghanistan over the past 20 years, when
they made advances in many walks of life.
Similarly, minorities have vanished and have been
banished from Afghanistan’s public and social life. Our
brothers and sisters in minority communities no longer
believe that the country belongs to them. Discriminatory
policies and fear of the unknown, as well as the gory
history of what happened to minorities in the 1990s,
serve as a grim reminder to them. In addition, ethnic and
religious minorities’ places of worship are deliberately
targeted by terrorist groups. It is very unfortunate that
the world is still silent about this.
Secondly, are we more safe and secure today
than we were a year and a half ago? Yes, the civil
war has ended, but we are living in fear every day.
International terrorist groups have been wreaking
havoc with impunity. The Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant-Khorasan, Al-Qaida and Al-Qaida in the
Indian Subcontinent and all the other cross-border
terrorist groups in the region are now emboldened. If
any Council members are under the impression that it
is only Afghanistan that will suffer as a result of the
terrorism in our country, they should think again. Just
in the past year, we have had attacks on the Russian
Embassy, the Ambassador of Pakistan and, very
recently, a hotel hosting Chinese visitors. Even the
United Nations report (see S/2022/916) mentions that
the terrorist entities enjoy more freedom of movement
today in Afghanistan.
Let me look back at what happened in the 1990s. We
are told that what happens in Afghanistan will stay in
Afghanistan. The world was unmoved when Al-Qaida
established itself and its bases in Afghanistan and
terrorist groups expanded their tentacles throughout
the region. The world stayed silent. It was only after the
attacks of 11 September 2001 that people realized that
the threat of terrorism is not limited to a single part of
the world. We can sense the same complacency today.

S/PV.9227

There is almost a naive belief that the terrorist entities
that now have free rein in Afghanistan will at worst
expand their reach within the region and nothing more.
History teaches us otherwise, and I do not want to have
to come back here in a year or so and say I told you so.
Thirdly, the Security Council’s resolutions talk
about the need for inclusive governance, but what is
the reality? The people of Afghanistan were used to
participating in their country’s governance structure.
It was not a perfect system, but at least it was inclusive
and participatory. Today’s governance is carried out
only by a small group of men. It is almost as if the rest
have no stake in the system.
Finally, and most important for the Afghan people,
the economic and humanitarian situations in the
country are dire. Mere words cannot express what we
have to go through every day, and mere statistics will
not show the full picture. Under-Secretary-General
Martin Griffiths provided clear statistics on the entire
situation in Afghanistan, and I really thank him for
that. It was a very compelling briefing. Just to give
an idea of where we stand — more than 20 million
people are facing acute hunger, the most anywhere
in the world. Malnutrition will affect more than
3 million children. There has been a sixfold increase
in debt across Afghanistan’s households because of the
economic collapse, job losses and inflation, and most
Afghans today live in poverty. In short, the ordinary
lives of the people of Afghanistan are full of misery
and destitution. We are truly thankful to all who have
provided assistance to our people. There are so many
here in the Chamber who have been generous with their
aid. But that is not enough. The needs of the people
are so enormous and the situation so miserable that our
requirements are huge.
Unfortunately, Afghanistan is an economy that has
depended on foreign aid for many decades now. The
takeover by the Taliban and the resultant stoppage
of aid and economic links to the world have hit us
hard. Development projects are at a standstill. No one
wants to invest in a country that is unstable. Banks
do not want to transact business with Afghanistan. In
addition, the policies of the Taliban have meant that
more than half of the members of the working-age
population — women — are now jobless and confined
to their homes. They were major contributors to work
and moneymaking in Afghanistan.

22-762939/33

S/PV.9227

The situation in Afghanistan

On behalf of the people of Afghanistan, I would
like to request that the Council continue to provide
life-saving aid to our people. Aid must reach all
Afghans, including women, minorities and other
vulnerable groups. The international community must
ensure that such humanitarian aid is not diverted. But
we also need support to reinvigorate our economy. The
Taliban must be made aware, in clear terms, that it is
their retrograde policies that are stopping the economy
from functioning normally and that they should reverse
them if the country is to find economic stability.
All members have been engaging with the Taliban,
which I consider to be a great idea and a great thing to
do. We want members to continue their engagement.
But when engaging with the Taliban, I ask that
members make sure to keep the interests of the people
of Afghanistan in mind. Ultimately, peace, security and
stability in Afghanistan are not only in the interest of
the people of Afghanistan, but also in the interest of the
entire world.
The President: I thank Ms. Seraj for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway.
Ms. Huitfeldt (Norway): I would like to thank
Special Representative Otunbayeva, Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths and Ms. Seraj, for their extremely
valuable briefings. I am pleased to hear today from
Ms. Seraj, who took part in our meeting with the
Taliban in Oslo and, as she just mentioned, also briefed
the Security Council in January during Norway’s
presidency (see S/PV.8954). I think that everyone
around this table took note of her very thoughtprovoking message regarding the difficult situation in
Afghanistan. Norway will do all it can to support the
Afghan people, including once we leave the Council.
As this is one of Norway’s last statements during its
current Security Council tenure, allow me to emphasize
one of the core pillars of our membership, namely, the
importance of being consistent.
Today Afghanistan is the only country in the
world in which girls are denied access to education.
That cannot continue. Nevertheless, throughout a
very challenging year for international diplomacy,
the Council has managed to come together on the
subject of Afghanistan. The Security Council has,
with one voice, expressed concern over the increasing
10/33

20/12/2022

erosion of respect for the human rights of the Afghan
people, especially for women and girls. We also agree
that it is important to prevent international terrorist
organizations from gaining a foothold in the country,
and we are all concerned that the lack of a legitimate
and representative Government poses a threat to
the country’s stability. Together, we must clearly
communicate our expectations to the Taliban.
Since the Taliban took power by force, Norway’s
message has been clear: we will judge the Taliban by
their actions, not by their words. Thus far, we are deeply
disappointed. We see that security for many Afghan
people has improved, but without a representative and
responsible Government there can be no stability. Most
women and girls have no access to education, to work,
to freedom of movement or to free speech. On many
levels, women have basically been erased from public
life. Moreover, the targeting of vulnerable minority
groups is unacceptable. This is a human rights crisis.
It is also bad for the economy. Sustainable development
in Afghanistan is impossible if half the population
is excluded.
Norway has been at the forefront of arguing for
continued contact with the Taliban. We believe that it is
necessary to talk to those who are in power, but we must
do so with our eyes open and avoid giving legitimacy
to the Taliban. At the beginning of the year, we invited
the Taliban to Norway. Many were surprised and
disappointed by that decision, but I remain convinced
that the stakes in Afghanistan are too high for us to
look the other way.
History has taught us that no one will benefit if
the country descends into civil war or becomes a
place where terrorist groups thrive. Today the Islamic
State poses an increasing threat in Afghanistan. If not
contained, that threat could also spread more widely in
the region and internationally. The Taliban must ensure
that Afghan territory is not used to plan or finance
terrorist acts, or to shelter or train terrorists. It is the
Afghan population that bears the brunt of the Taliban’s
actions, but instability in Afghanistan is also a threat to
international peace and security.
Against that backdrop, it is essential that the
Security Council remain united in support of the
Afghan people. We must focus on what we can do to
create leverage and to make our message heard in order
to deliver basic services and rights.
22-76293

20/12/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

For the past two years, Norway has been the
penholder on the Afghanistan file in the Council. Our
main focus has been on strengthening international
support for the Afghan people. I am encouraged by the
ability of the Council to find pragmatic solutions to a
politically challenging situation. In March, we were
able to adopt a renewed mandate for the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
covering all pillars of the Charter of the United Nations
(resolution 2626 (2022)). Let me once again express
Norway’s gratitude to the representatives of Afghan
civil society who worked so closely with us to achieve
that success. The only way we can steer a way through
the challenging crisis Afghanistan is facing is to listen
to its people.
The Council has equipped UNAMA with a strong
mandate. UNAMA should take the lead in translating
that mandate into joint international action. The Council
must also continue to listen to Afghan voices — to
the Afghan women and men who directly convey the
experiences and interests of the Afghan people.
The Afghan people are facing yet another brutal
winter. More than two thirds of the Afghan population
will need humanitarian assistance in the coming year.
The Taliban are imposing restrictions on human rights
in violation of Afghanistan’s international obligations.
The hopes many Afghans had for greater stability and
security are fading. The picture is bleak, but the Afghan
people are not giving up hope. The Council must be
consistent and owes it to the Afghan people not to give
up, either.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Roza Otunbayeva, and the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Martin
Griffiths, for their informative briefings. I also thank
Ms. Mahbouba Seraj for her contribution. I wish to
congratulate you, Madam, on India’s outstanding work
as Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011).
The most recent report of the Secretary-General
on the situation in Afghanistan and its implications
for international peace and security (S/2022/916) is
damning. There has been little to no progress on the
political, security, economic or humanitarian tracks
in Afghanistan. Ms. Seraj’s poignant testimony was
compelling in many ways.

S/PV.9227

On the political front, the restructuring of the State
apparatus and the establishment of institutions by the
Taliban continues. Efforts to promote dialogue and the
return of Afghans in exile through the Commission
for Return and Communication with Former Afghan
Officials and Political Figures are noteworthy.
However, despite the various measures taken, the lack
of representation of the diversity of the Afghan people,
both ethnically and socially, in the political landscape
persists. Very little progress has been made during the
reporting period. The inclusion of women in governance
structures is not advancing. Girls’ education and their
access to secondary education are crucial, and the
international community must continue to advocate
boldly for them. Afghanistan is a party to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child, which recognizes the right
of every child to education regardless of gender. It
is incumbent on the country’s de facto authorities to
ensure respect for the right to education by allowing
girls to attend school at every level. It is unacceptable
that generations of young Afghan boys and girls who
are the adults of the future may grow up thinking that
the marginalization of women in society is normal.
We must continue our efforts to support the
resilience of Afghan women and convince the Taliban
that the marginalization of women and girls, who make
up half of the Afghan population, deprives the country
of significant economic actors able to play a major role
in the country’s growth, which is in crisis. At the same
time, that marginalization prevents the population
as a whole from rallying to support Afghanistan’s
development and stability. The Council should be an
epicentre for supporting and mobilizing the resilience
of women suffering in regions plagued by instability.
We commend the efforts of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), the
Office for the Coordination for Humanitarian Affairs,
the United Nations country team and Afghan and
international non-governmental organizations to
promote women’s rights and their inclusion in society.
The security situation on the ground in Afghanistan
is fragile. We are concerned about the security breaches
related to the armed opposition and attacks by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan. The
12 December attack on a Kabul hotel in one of the
capital’s main commercial areas, resulting in civilian
casualties, is unacceptable. We condemn the attack
and call on the de facto authorities to step up their
efforts to combat terrorism and meet their obligation

22-7629311/33

S/PV.9227

The situation in Afghanistan

to protect the population. The illicit drug trade, along
with frequent clashes between the opposition and security
forces, the presence of foreign forces on Afghan territory
and continued border tensions, is increasing the volatility
of the situation on the ground. Furthermore, the civilian
population continues to suffer the deadly consequences of
the use of improvised explosive devices. The continued
cooperation of Afghanistan’s neighbours will be vital
to the quest for peace and stability and to prevent the
situation in the region from deteriorating further. We
commend UNAMA’s work in combating the illicit trade,
accumulation and diversion of small arms and light
weapons and their ammunition, and of explosive materials.
On the economic front, despite the degree to which
the situation has stabilized, most of the factors that
have adversely affected the economy since August
2021 persist, including the sharp drop in development
assistance, the difficulties related to international
financial operations and their impact on the banking
sector. The freezing of Afghan assets has contributed
to creating a significant financial crisis that is affecting
the population. Coupled with the mistrust of donors and
banking institutions, the sanctions are increasing the
precariousness of the situation for the population. We
call on donors to pursue their multidimensional work
to support the recovery of the Afghan economy. The
Special Trust Fund for Afghanistan, managed by the
United Nations Development Programme, remains a
critical funding platform for the 2022 United Nations
Transitional Engagement Framework for Afghanistan.
The worrisome humanitarian situation in
Afghanistan is a result of social, political, economic
and security crises, as well as climate change, which
is exacerbating other vulnerabilities. The lack of basic
supplies, medicines and regular salaries for healthcare workers makes the task of humanitarian workers
difficult. At the same time, drought, food insecurity and
malnutrition persist. Threats and acts of intimidation
by local authorities against humanitarian workers,
such as restrictions on their freedom of movement,
are not likely to calm the situation on the ground. We
condemn the multiple obstacles to access to aid and the
harassment of humanitarian personnel.
In conclusion, we reiterate the need for dialogue
among the Afghan forces. A stable and prosperous
Afghanistan cannot be built without women, as well
as all other segments of society. The international
community must maintain its commitment in
Afghanistan in support of the legitimate aspirations of
the Afghan people for security and dignity.
12/33

20/12/2022

Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Otunbayeva, Under-Secretary-General Griffiths and
you, Madam President, in your capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011), for our briefings. I also listened closely to
Ms. Seraj’s statement.
Afghanistan is currently at a critical stage of
nation-building. Much remains to be done to realize
peace and development. The Afghan people should
not be forgotten. The international community should
make greater efforts to provide additional support and
assistance. In the light of the current situation, I would
like to make four points.
First, we must resolutely combat terrorism and
prevent the return of terrorist forces. The series of
recent terrorist attacks in Afghanistan led to heavy
casualties and signalled an increasingly severe threat
of terrorism. As a neighbour of Afghanistan, China
is deeply concerned about that. The international
community should maintain its unity and cooperation,
abandon double standards and politicization and help
Afghanistan effectively fight terrorism and organized
crime, while working to prevent Afghanistan from once
again becoming a hub of terrorist organizations such
as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida
and the Eastern Turkistan Islamic Movement. We urge
the Afghan Taliban to steer clear of all terrorist forces
and take resolute and vigorous measures to ensure the
safety of Afghans and foreign diplomats and nationals
in Afghanistan. The foreign troops left large quantities
of weapons behind after their withdrawal. Considering
the current threat of terrorism, a high level of vigilance
should be maintained to ensure those weapons do not
proliferate. We welcome the positive measures taken by
Afghanistan’s de facto authorities to strengthen their
control over weapons and ammunition. We hope that
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) will step up its communication and
cooperation with Afghanistan and promote support for
Afghan capacity-building.
Secondly, we should scale up resources to help
Afghans deal with difficulties related to their ability
to earn a living. The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/916) acknowledges that 28.3 million Afghans
will be in need of humanitarian assistance next year,
which is an increase of 4 million from the previous
year. Resolution 2615 (2021), adopted in December
2021, makes it clear that humanitarian assistance to
22-76293

20/12/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.9227

Afghanistan is not in violation of Security Council
sanctions and therefore should dispel the concerns
and doubts of humanitarian agencies. The resolution,
however, is not a panacea. It cannot and does not
fundamentally address the challenges related to the
provision of humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan.

promote the peaceful development of Afghanistan.
As the Secretary-General said in his report, “all sides
must set aside mutual blame and hardened positions,
and engage, with respect, patience and realism, on
an agenda that places Afghans’ future at its centre.”
(S/2022/916, para. 84)

The international assistance received by
Afghanistan for 2022 to date is far lower than that
before August 2021. The substantial drop in donor aid
from developed countries, resulting in a shortage of
humanitarian resources, has been an important factor
contributing to Afghanistan’s current predicament.
Meanwhile, the obstacles to humanitarian assistance
resulting from unilateral sanctions remain glaring
despite the adoption of resolution 2615 (2021). We regret
to see that the Afghan frozen overseas assets have not
been returned to the hands of Afghans. Instead, they
were moved from one account over which they have
no control to another account over which they have no
control, and excuses are being made for the delay of
their return.

In the current situation, the Security Council should
seriously reflect on the Taliban sanctions mechanism
and prevent it from having a negative impact on
Afghanistan’s socioeconomic development. Travel
exemptions are a necessary tool for engagement. They
should not become a bargaining chip in negotiations.
Regrettably, the Council did not reach consensus in
September on extending those exemptions. The facts
show that terminating the exemptions has only created
more obstacles to dialogue and engagement. It was not
a wise decision.

Thirdly, integrated measures should be taken to
support the sound development of Afghanistan. The
intertwined problems facing Afghanistan should be
tackled at their roots. The rights and interests of Afghan
women and girls in education and employment should
be guaranteed. We expect the Taliban authorities to
make greater efforts in responding to the concerns of
the international community, which inevitably includes
ensuring Afghanistan’s overall stability, gradual
development and progress.
In the past year, the Afghan interim administration
has worked actively to stabilize the economy, steadily
increase its tax revenue and engage in economic and
trade cooperation and efforts to connect with countries
in the region. The progress made in those areas should be
encouraged. The international community should help
Afghanistan restore its domestic market, completely
eliminate the root causes of its instability and embark
on the path to lasting peace and development. We
expect and encourage UNAMA to make more efforts
and explore further efforts in that regard, so as to create
better conditions for the development of Afghanistan.
Fourthly, we should maintain dialogue and
engagement and provide patient guidance. Only through
engaging with the Afghan interim administration in
a pragmatic manner can we enhance understanding
and mutual trust, exert positive influence and better

For a long time, Afghanistan’s neighbours and
surrounding countries have made tremendous efforts in
support of the Afghan peace process. In the past year,
China has provided Afghanistan with ¥300 million in
emergency aid and actively worked to deliver ¥1 billion
in bilateral assistance. We have expanded our economic
and trade cooperation with Afghanistan, opened up
an air corridor for Afghan pine nuts exports to China
and granted zero-tariff imports for 98 per cent of
the products from Afghanistan, providing ongoing
care and assistance to the Afghans through concrete
actions. China supports the important role played by
the United Nations in assisting Afghans in their peace
and rebuilding efforts. China would like to work with
the international community and contribute further to
peace, stability and development in Afghanistan.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I thank Ms. Roza Otunbayeva,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for her briefing, and we affirm
the support of the United Arab Emirates for her efforts.
I also thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, and Ambassador Kamboj for
their briefings. I thank Ms. Mahbouba Seraj, Afghan
women’s rights activist, for her impressive presentation
that reflected the difficult situation in Afghanistan
and the suffering of the Afghan people, especially
women and girls. We appreciate her participation in
today’s meeting.

22-7629313/33

S/PV.9227

The situation in Afghanistan

The briefings that we heard today confirm our
view about the course of the situation in Afghanistan
over the past few months. We regret that the new year
does not hold promising hopes for the Afghan people.
The country is already experiencing the highest levels
of food insecurity, and two-thirds of the population are
in need of humanitarian assistance. The situation of
women and girls is getting worse owing to the most
recent wave of restrictions that prevent them from
accessing public places, including parks. That requires
a decisive response from the Council.
In addition, the deteriorating security situation
is exposing the challenges that the Taliban faces in
combating terrorist activities, as we have seen in the
recent attacks, including the attack against the Embassy
of Pakistan in Kabul, which the United Arab Emirates
condemned. We continue to condemn all forms of
violence and terrorism that undermine security and
stability in Afghanistan.
Taking all those factors into account, I would like
to focus today on some areas in which the Council
can take a strategic approach, if we can work in a
collaborative manner.
First, given the most recent developments and the
lack of response from the de facto Afghan authorities
to the Council’s calls, the international community may
stop its engagement with them and increase attempts to
isolate those authorities. However, we still believe that
there is no alternative to dialogue, and we continue to
advocate for thoughtful engagement with the de facto
authorities. Isolation will only entrench positions and
push the Taliban towards taking more extreme stances.

20/12/2022

aspects. We hope that the Council can use this mandate
renewal as an opportunity to review the strengths and
weaknesses of the mandate, to assess what the Mission
needs, and to avoid the creation of unjustified divisions
on the priorities of the Mission’s work.
Lastly, Afghanistan is an example of how climate
change negatively affects the situation in a country and
becomes a source of insecurity. As we heard during the
Arria Formula meeting in November, Afghanistan is
the sixth most at-risk country in the world in terms of
climate change impacts. UNAMA’s mandate to monitor
and report on the adverse impacts of drought will allow
the humanitarian community to adapt its interventions
in order to increase the resilience of Afghan
communities against those impacts. We would welcome
information on UNAMA’s assessment of the adverse
effects of climate change and how the United Nations,
including this Council, can better support Afghanistan
and respond to those challenges.
In conclusion, we should not succumb to the idea
that 2023 will be another difficult year for Afghanistan.
It is imperative that the Council stand ready to consider
all the possible ways to assist the Afghan people and
alleviate their suffering. We all ultimately share a
common vision for a stable, inclusive and self-sufficient
Afghanistan, in which men and women can equally
undertake productive roles in their communities. The
United Arab Emirates looks forward to continuing to
work with all members of the Council next year towards
achieving that vision.

Secondly, we must focus on areas in which concrete
outcomes are achievable. The recent International
Conference on Afghan Women’s Education, held in
Bali, Indonesia, is one such example of seeking out
ways for the international stakeholders to effect real
change. In that respect, we welcome the activation of
the Afghan Fund announced in September, and we look
forward to its contribution to providing stability to the
economy for the benefit of the Afghan people.

Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Brazil thanks all the
briefers for their invaluable updates on the situation
in Afghanistan and the implementation of the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan. Likewise, we convey our appreciation to
you, Madam President, for your briefing as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011). Let me also extend a welcome
to the Afghan delegation and thank its members for
enriching today’s discussion with their presence
and perspective.

Thirdly, the renewal of UNAMA’s mandate will
provide an opportunity for the international community
to speak with one voice and to send a clear and firm
message to Afghan stakeholders. Despite the exceptional
circumstances, UNAMA has been delivering on
the ground with regard to all aspects of its mandate,
including humanitarian, political and economic

Barring any unforeseen events, this should be our
last gathering on the topic of Afghanistan in 2022.
Throughout the year, we have attended numerous
briefings, consultations and Arria-formula and
expert-level meetings, and we have received abundant
information about the situation on the ground. Much
has been said, and many ideas have been put forward.

14/33

22-76293

20/12/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.9227

Amid everything else, one element remains constant:
the plight of Afghans and their remarkable strength and
resilience as they face multiple crises across all sectors
of society.

We draw inspiration from the extraordinary
resilience of the Afghan people through these trying
times and hope to be able to build upon our response in
the year ahead.

Fifteen months after the Taliban takeover, economic
activity is estimated to have contracted by around
30 per cent, and the banking system has collapsed,
while unemployment and inflation have surged.
Discriminatory policies have pushed women and girls
out of public life. With the breakdown of basic services
and the high levels of food insecurity, the population
has plunged deeper into poverty, becoming more and
more dependent on humanitarian assistance, which
already faces enough issues of its own, from the lack of
funding to restrictions of all sorts on the work of field
agents. Meanwhile, the country grapples with multiple
terrorist attacks and the many problems associated with
drug trafficking following a sharp rise in opium prices.

Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Otunbayeva and Under-Secretary-General Griffiths
for their briefings. And we thank Ms. Seraj for her
very sobering briefing on the overall situation in
Afghanistan. The international community should
take heed of her warning about the growing threat of
terrorism emanating from Afghan soil. The United
States would also like to thank the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) team
for its ongoing work and tireless commitment to
implementing the Security Council’s mandate in
support of the Afghan people and international peace
and security under challenging circumstances.

As we prepare for the task that awaits the Security
Council in 2023, we invite fellow Council members to
take stock of our coordinated efforts and renew our
shared resolve in support of stability and prosperity
for all Afghans. Based on the information we have
received since August 2021 and on the advice of the
leadership of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, there can be no doubt that further isolating
the de facto authority will not yield positive results.
It is therefore important to keep channels open and
engage constructively with the de facto leaders, even
in the absence of formal recognition. We must continue
to insist on more inclusiveness and on the rights and
liberties of women and girls. We should also consider
reassessing the travel bans in place. While necessary,
they should not impair the ability of Afghan de facto
leaders to engage with their regional counterparts and
the broader international community.
Creative solutions are needed to address the
urgency of rebuilding Afghanistan’s banking system
and overcoming its severe liquidity crisis as conditions
to induce sustained recovery and domestic growth. This
brings us to the need to reassess the situation of Afghan
assets held abroad. Measures adopted thus far have
been insufficient, and we should explore innovative
ways to resolve the issue in a manner that satisfies the
interests of the Afghan people.

As we all know, the reality on the ground more than
one year after the Taliban takeover is dire. The Taliban
has restricted the enjoyment of human rights by women
and girls, including their right to education, movement
and peaceful assembly as well as their right to work.
Many independent media outlets have closed or been
heavily censored. Those who dare to speak against the
Taliban are frequently detained or worse. The Taliban’s
actions have caused the economy to continue to decline,
and Afghanistan’s already overwhelming humanitarian
needs are growing.
It is not only women and girls who are affected.
We have seen the reports that the Taliban have ordered
judges to impose the strict interpretation of sharia
law, which includes carrying out public executions,
amputations and floggings. These punishments are
an affront to the dignity and the human rights of all
Afghans. Many Afghans continue to reject these actions
by the Taliban. As the Taliban increasingly adopt their
old practices, they move further from normalization
with the international community and the recognition
they desire.
We remain grateful for UNAMA’s efforts inside
the country, including its work to foster dialogue at
subnational levels, and its urging of all stakeholders
to respect human rights. We believe UNAMA is well
positioned to convene key stakeholders at the local
and national level, including women and civil society
groups, in ways that promote meaningful dialogue with
the Taliban on a range of important issues.

22-7629315/33

S/PV.9227

The situation in Afghanistan

As the world’s leading humanitarian donor, the
United States has always understood the centrality
of humanitarian aid to help Afghans recover from a
crippling economic crisis, decades of conflict and
recurring natural disasters. We have provided more
than $1.1 billion in humanitarian assistance since
August 2021, and we will continue to address the needs
of vulnerable Afghans in Afghanistan and of those who
have fled to neighbouring countries. Our humanitarian
aid has been and will remain unconditional, impartial
and consistent with humanitarian principles.
We are proud to have championed resolution 2615
(2021) last December, which maintains sanctions on
bad actors while enabling humanitarian organizations
to provide urgently needed humanitarian assistance
and other activities that support basic human needs in
Afghanistan. We also note that this resolution maintains
an oversight mechanism to mitigate the diversion of
assistance to sanctioned individuals.
We remain steadfast in holding the Taliban
accountable for their commitments to the Afghan
people and the international community. We expect
the Taliban to follow through with their commitments
on counter-terrorism in accordance with the Doha
agreement. We also expect the Taliban to allow safe
passage and freedom of movement, make efforts to
build an inclusive system that gives the people a voice
in their political future, and take responsibility for
efforts aimed at supporting economic stability.

20/12/2022

I also thank you, Madam President, for your briefing
as Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011). I commend India’s
pragmatic leadership of this Committee over the last
two years.
The situation in Afghanistan remains concerning.
We have witnessed a consistent disturbing trend of
terrorist attacks by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant-Khorasan, as well as recurrent clashes with
opposition forces and the continued presence of foreign
terrorist groups, which are worsening the security
situation. Afghanistan continues to be a haven for
terrorist groups, including Al-Qaida, whose affiliates,
such as Al-Shabaab, have inflicted constant fear and
suffering on millions of civilians in the Horn of Africa
for years. In that regard, the way the world responds
to the situation in Afghanistan has a direct bearing on
our own security in the Horn of Africa. It is important
that the Taliban understand that part of what they must
do if they expect to gain international recognition is to
secure sustained peace and security in Afghanistan and
ensure that the territory of Afghanistan is not a haven
for any terrorist groups. It must therefore cut ties with
such organizations and undertake meaningful counterterrorism measures.

The United States has repeatedly stated that the
legitimacy and support that the Taliban seeks from the
international community begins with the legitimacy
they earn from the Afghan people through their actions.
We will continue to work closely with UNAMA to aid
the Afghan people now and in future.

Over the past 16 months the Security Council and the
international community have stepped up their support
efforts for the people of Afghanistan, including through
resolution 2615 (2021), by which the Council instituted
exemptions for humanitarian agencies enabling them
to deliver and navigate United Nations sanctions. But
despite concerted efforts, the statistics point to a grim
2023. At least 28 million Afghans, including 12.7 million
children, will require humanitarian assistance at a time
when the 2022 humanitarian response plan is only just
over 50 per cent funded. We also note that the 2023
requirement of $4.6 billion remains largely unmet, as
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths mentioned. We
encourage all partners to scale up their assistance,
especially during the winter, which is usually marked
by increased humanitarian needs. Given that the
international response plan requires $51.5 billion
in 2023, United Nations humanitarian operations in
Afghanistan and elsewhere must operate in a difficult
environment in more effective ways.

Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Roza Otunbayeva, UnderSecretary-General Martin Griffiths and Ms. Mahbouba
Seraj for their briefings.

The increasing global humanitarian needs call for the
consideration of pragmatic approaches to humanitarian
action. We need to adopt a humanitarian-developmentpeace nexus approach in responding to the humanitarian

Without a serious national political dialogue among
Afghans about the future of their country, we could
see the re-emergence of conflict. We regularly hear
from Afghans that they do not want to see a return to
conflict. We also see there is an active dialogue under
way among Afghans inside the country, at subnational
levels and in the diaspora. The United States supports
these Afghan-led efforts towards a political dialogue.

16/33

22-76293

20/12/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

and development crises in Afghanistan. We commend
and call for further support for programmes such as
the United Nations Development Programme’s areabased approach for development emergency initiatives,
which seeks to provide community-level solutions
to complement urgent humanitarian interventions,
and the alternative development programme of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, which
has reached more than 10,000 farmers in an initiative
aimed at strengthening food security and livelihoods.
It is unfortunate that while the people continue to face
economic hardships, the management of the frozen
Afghan assets remains contentious. We urge the
relevant stakeholders to identify suitable and mutually
agreeable mechanisms and frameworks to enable those
funds to be injected into the ailing economy.
It is regrettable that Afghan girls are still forbidden
to attend secondary schools while women are denied
opportunities to work and rightfully contribute to their
country’s development, despite constant appeals by the
Security Council, as well as regional and international
partners. The disturbing trend whereby the authorities
are using the mahram regulation as a systematic way
to discriminate against women must stop. We see that
this practice is taking root in other conflict situations,
such as Yemen, and could spread further to Africa and
beyond if not quickly halted. While we commend the
resilience of Afghan women, we join others in calling
on the Taliban to cease its retrogressive practices.
They must honour the right of girls to an education and
mainstream women into the economy by refraining
from denying them opportunities to work. There
is also a need to put in place an inclusive political
and governance system marked by the meaningful
participation of a wide spectrum of Afghan society,
including women and minority groups.
Since this is the last briefing on Afghanistan
that Kenya will participate in as an elected member
of the Council for 2021 and 2022, we commend the
Secretariat, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan team and other United Nations agencies,
as well as humanitarian and civil society organizations,
for their efforts in seeking solutions to the challenges
faced by the people of Afghanistan. We will continue to
follow their work closely, knowing that a peaceful and
secure Afghanistan has cross-regional peace dividends.

S/PV.9227

I reaffirm Kenya’s solidarity with the people of
Afghanistan. We stand ready to support all endeavours
aimed at securing their safety, security and well-being.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Otunbayeva
and Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for their update
and detailed information. It is always of particular value
to listen to the voices of civil society in the Security
Council, and we thank Ms. Seraj, a powerful voice for
Afghan women, for her account.
Since August 2021, every time we have met to
discuss this issue we have found ourselves bound to tell
a desolate story of broken promises. The Taliban have so
far failed to uphold any promises they have made. They
have misled the international community, betrayed the
people of Afghanistan and let them down, especially
women and girls. Calls for inclusivity and respect for
fundamental rights have so far fallen on deaf ears.
Instead, the Taliban are continually, methodically and
resolutely engaged in repealing every achievement and
democratic gain made during the previous two decades,
to the detriment of the Afghan people, as Ms. Seraj also
clearly explained.
As we heard, there is hardly any aspect of life in
the country that does not give reason for great concern.
Girls continue to be barred from secondary schools, an
aberration from the most obscurantist times, which puts
young girls at risk of child marriage and economic and
sexual exploitation. Women are deprived of their right
to safety, freedom and fulfilment and are increasingly
barred from the public arena. In Afghanistan, women
feel left alone, at the mercy of men with long beards
who are inherently and openly anti-women and happy
to impose degrading rules. Women in Afghanistan
today have nowhere to turn. There is no longer support,
shelter or independent bodies to redress their rights.
The outside world is their last resort. Minorities
are persecuted and the civic space continues to be
severely restricted. Artists remain under threat and
cultural heritage is under constant attack. This severe
rollback by the Taliban of rights, their ramping up
of reprisals targeting opponents and critics and their
clampdown on freedom of expression depict a descent
into severe authoritarianism. The complete absence
of the rule of law, the disregard of the constitutional
framework and the arbitrary exercise of power without
recourse have only worsened the overall situation,
perpetuating impunity.

22-7629317/33

S/PV.9227

The situation in Afghanistan

The security situation is no better. The fears of
continuing ties with terrorist groups are reasonable
and should be addressed. We have seen an increase
in attacks against Hazaras and Shia Muslims, as well
as other targets, by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant-Khorasan.
Despite improvements in revenue collection and the
fight against corruption — and it would be interesting
to know how they benefit the millions in need — the
economy remains in free fall. As we heard from the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to the sanctions regime under resolution 1988
(2011), drug production, opium planting and trafficking
are very much present. So a growing humanitarian crisis,
further exacerbated by climate change, global food and
energy markets, could have regional spillover effects.
We express our full support for the work of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) in its efforts to implement its mandate in such
an extremely challenging environment. We strongly
encourage the Mission staff not to be disheartened by
the difficulties and to always bear in mind that however
little they may be able to achieve, for the citizens of
Afghanistan they represent hope and encouragement.
UNAMA must insist that the authorities fully respect
the commitments that derive from the treaties to which
Afghanistan is a party. An inclusive Government,
respect for human rights and a genuine fight against
terrorism should be the red line in any engagement with
the Taliban.
The draconian and misogynistic Taliban rule does
not reflect Afghans’ religion, culture or values. The
ruthless rulers are simply disfiguring Afghanistan into
Talibanistan, making it a gender-apartheid regime.
We cannot give up. We cannot abandon the people of
Afghanistan to such desolation. We cannot contemplate
how 38 million people are deprived of their rights and
dispossessed of their future.
The Taliban seek recognition; they do not hide it.
They must earn it by representing the people, all the
people, not just themselves. That is why the work of
UNAMA is crucial, and it needs to be reviewed and
adapted continuously, as necessary.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I want to thank Ambassador
Kamboj for her briefing in her capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011). I also thank Special
18/33

20/12/2022

Representative Otunbayeva and Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths for their briefings. I thank Ms. Seraj
for speaking to the reality of life under the Taliban for
the Afghan people, a truly dire reality for so many, as
attested to by Ms. Seraj.
Today is the last opportunity of Ireland’s current
Security Council term to address the situation in
Afghanistan — a situation that has deteriorated gravely
these past two years, beyond what we had imagined or
feared. But we must recognize that it devolved exactly
as the Afghan people had warned it would.
The Council has moved from calls two years ago for
inclusive dialogue in the pursuit of peace to calls now
to end the abuse and repression of the Afghan people.
Warnings from Afghan women that peace talks would
fail without their full, equal and meaningful participation
have been replaced by demands for the Taliban to halt
the persecution, erasure and violence perpetrated
against Afghan women and girls — “erasure”, a word
that Ms. Seraj used so movingly, and “mahram” too.
Girls have been denied the right to education for 435
days. The concerns of the international community for
the protection of Afghan civilians have escalated to
pleas for the Taliban to prevent the further suffering,
starvation and subjugation of a people on the brink.
The principal responsibility of the Security
Council is the maintenance of international peace and
security. Yet there is no peace in Afghanistan — not
for the Afghan people or for humanitarians delivering
life-saving assistance. Neither is there peace and
security in the region, with cross-border terrorism,
weapons proliferation and narcotics trafficking. We are
failing in that responsibility. We are failing to hold the
Taliban truly and fully to account. We are failing to
uphold the rights and dignity of the Afghan people.
Once more, the Council meets to hear of
intensifying abuses being perpetrated by the Taliban
against the Afghan people — surveillance, arbitrary
arrest, detention and targeted attacks against Afghan
civilians, particularly Hazara and other religious
minorities, human rights defenders and lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender, queer and intersex persons, as
well as the abhorrent return of the practices of public
floggings and public executions.
While the Taliban consolidate control through
abuse and violence, the Council has a responsibility to
recognize and call out those actions. Ireland condemns
22-76293

20/12/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.9227

those abuses in the strongest terms, and we call on the
Taliban to put an end to its tyranny of its own people,
the Afghan people.

As this is the last meeting on Afghanistan in which
Mexico will participate as an elected member for this
term, I would like to take stock of the past two years.

These stark human rights abuses take place against
the backdrop of the bleak and shocking humanitarian
situation
outlined
by
Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths, including climate crisis and famine. While
resolution 2615 (2021), providing exemptions for
humanitarian assistance, may have prevented systemic
collapse in Afghanistan, more than two thirds of the
Afghan people remain in severe humanitarian need.
Levels of emergency food insecurity in Afghanistan are
now among the highest in the world. Ireland reiterates
our call for the Taliban to end the intimidation of women
humanitarians. We also wholly condemn all instances of
aid interference and diversion. There is no justification
for blocking life-saving and life-sustaining support.

Afghanistan bears witness to the fragility
that characterizes some peacebuilding and peace
consolidation processes. When we joined the Council in
January 2021, hopes were pinned on the ongoing peace
negotiations. The fall of Kabul put an end to aspirations
for a more inclusive and representative country. Today
the prevailing situation is one of outright deterioration.
The edicts being promulgated in Kabul indicate that
this trend is very likely to continue.

Ireland commends the tireless efforts of Afghan
human rights defenders and civil society leaders
advocating for their agency and their rights. We salute in
particular the brave women of Afghanistan. Their rights
are inalienable. They cannot, and must not, be traded
away now in exchange for promises of improvement in
future. We encourage the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan to heed their calls for greater
participation in negotiations and dialogue processes and
call on the international community to create avenues
for direct engagement with Afghan women. The
international community must match the courage and
the bravery of the Afghan people with our own courage.
The Security Council must use the tools available to
it in support of the Afghan people, their needs and
their rights and to hold the Taliban accountable for
their actions.
The humanitarian, security and human rights crises
in Afghanistan are strikingly clear. Our mandate as a
Council is equally clear. And our response as a Council
must also be clear and unambiguous, particularly with
regard to the Taliban. For our part, Ireland will remain
actively engaged on this issue in support of the Afghan
people, even as we step away from the Council.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Special Representative Otunbayeva
and Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths for their
briefings, and we appreciate the thoughtful briefing by
Ms. Mahbouba Seraj.

The international community has been clear in its
call for the formation of a Government that includes
women and minority representatives. Such calls have
not been successful.
We recognize the need for direct engagement with
the Taliban. We believe in dialogue and preventive
diplomacy, and we also believe that this should be
realistic and patient, as the Secretary-General’s
proposes in his report (S/2022/916). However, we are
convinced that it cannot be ignored that, as time passes,
so do the opportunities and aspirations of many people.
The lack of cohesion and inclusiveness with which
the Taliban has exercised power has led to increasing
resistance from armed groups. As long as critics and
dissidents continue to be excluded and oppressed, there
is unlikely to be peace and stability in Afghanistan.
We follow with concern decisions to reform the
legal and judicial systems, which do not seem to be
conducive to progress. We deplore the extrajudicial
killings, arbitrary arrests, forced marriages and other
human rights violations. What is needed is an impartial
and independent judicial system.
Afghanistan continues to be the scene of terrorist
attacks against schools, places of worship and diplomatic
missions, among others. We condemn those attacks in
the strongest terms and reiterate our concern about the
lack of results in combating terrorism. Cooperation
with the countries of the region and the international
community is essential to put an end to this scourge.
The risks associated with the illicit trafficking,
stockpiling and diversion of small arms and light
weapons, as well as ammunition and explosives in
Afghanistan are also of concern. We commend the

22-7629319/33

S/PV.9227

The situation in Afghanistan

20/12/2022

United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) for its important work on this and other
complex and sensitive issues.

2021. We continue to work with the World Bank and
others on measures to put the Afghan economy on a
more sustainable footing.

Regrettably, the rise in gender-based violence
is increasingly obvious in many of the situations
considered by the Council. However, none is as
tragic as that in Afghanistan. The decisions of the
Taliban restrict the rights of women and girls and are
aimed at erasing women and girls from public life.
Mexico reiterates that the campaign to subjugate and
subordinate women is simply unacceptable. Therefore,
we will continue to advocate for the promotion of the
human rights of women and girls, while prioritizing
their right to education.

I would like to highlight three priorities. The first is
humanitarian aid. While 97 per cent of Afghans are in
poverty and two thirds are in dire humanitarian need,
the priority is for aid to reach those in need. Therefore,
the Taliban should end interference in United Nations
operations immediately and, in particular, give
assurances on the safety and access of humanitarian
workers, in particular female humanitarian workers,
who, as we have heard, are particularly constrained by
the mahram requirement.

As we have heard, Afghanistan faces an
unprecedented humanitarian crisis. The number of
people in need of assistance has increased exponentially,
and it is estimated that by 2023, that number will exceed
28 million. Mexico reiterates that humanitarian aid
cannot be less important than political considerations.
All humanitarian workers, including women, must be
able to carry out their work expeditiously and safely.
We trust that in March next year, when UNAMA’s
mandate is renewed, the Mission will be able to
continue working to promote human rights in a country
in which, unfortunately, the institutions created to
protect such rights have seemingly vanished. The
Afghan people deserve all our support, especially in
regaining their dignity.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
Like others, I would like to start by thanking UnderSecretary-General Griffiths and Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Otunbayeva for their briefings.
I thank the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for all its ongoing work
to support the Afghan people in such challenging
circumstances. I also thank Ms. Mahbouba Seraj for
returning to brief us again.
As we have heard, in the midst of one of the
harshest winters on record, two thirds of Afghanistan’s
population face severe hunger. The 2023 Afghanistan
humanitarian response plan is expected to be the largest
in United Nations history and reflects the scale of the
challenge. The United Kingdom remains steadfast in its
support for the Afghan people. As the second largest
donor to this year’s humanitarian response plan, we
have disbursed more than $600 million in humanitarian
and development assistance for Afghanistan since April
20/33

The second priority is human rights. The Taliban
continue to fail to live up to their commitments to
the Afghan people. As we have heard, the repression
of human rights is widespread. There are reports of
honour killings and child marriage, and floggings and
executions have returned. As we heard from Ms. Seraj,
in recent months, violations of the rights and freedoms
of women and girls, already the most drastic in the
world, have sharply increased. Those policies are a
systematic attempt to erase women and girls from
all spheres of social, economic, political and public
life. The United Nations has estimated that excluding
women from the workforce already costs the Afghan
economy up to $1 billion. Without fair and impartial
justice systems and access to education, there can be no
self-reliant, prosperous Afghanistan.
The third priority is counter-terrorism. We have
heard from the Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) about the deteriorating
security situation, and Ms. Seraj endorsed that point. We
have heard that the number of sanctioned individuals
among the Taliban has increased. We have heard
about Al-Qaida, Islamic State in Iraq and the LevantKhorasan and Da’esh. Members of the Council have
suffered terrorist attacks in Afghanistan. We should
be clear that while the Taliban are failing to meet their
counter-terrorism commitments, they cannot expect to
see sanctions relief or acquire legitimacy in the eyes of
the international community or the Afghan people.
In conclusion, it is truly a situation that, as the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General said,
is fraught with challenges. The Taliban are manifestly
failing to live up to their commitments and meet the
needs of the Afghan people for peace, prosperity and
22-76293

20/12/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

security. We should be in no doubt that we need a robust
international response that delivers humanitarian aid
but also delivers on the mandate of UNAMA.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Our collective aspiration
for the people of Afghanistan, more than 15 months
since the Taliban authorities took over the country,
continues to be frustrated by the State practices and
policies that have been adopted since August 2021. We
believe that Afghanistan, with its known history as
an ancient buffer State in global politics and an early
member of the Organization, deserves its rightful place
in the comity of nations.
We therefore encourage the continuing role of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and support the leadership of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Roza
Otunbayeva in promoting respect for the fundamental
human rights and freedoms of the Afghan people,
including women and girls; scaling up responses to
existing and new humanitarian emergencies; working
towards economic recovery and facilitating dialogue
between communities and the de facto authorities,
especially at the subnational level, on inclusive,
participatory and responsive governance.
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for her briefing today. We also thank
Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths for his
briefing on the humanitarian situation and the Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011), Ambassador Ruchira Kamboj,
for drawing our attention to the continuing implications
of the Taliban sanctions regime on the situation in
Afghanistan. We remain grateful to Ms. Mahbouba
Seraj for her clear and gendered voice, which reminds
us that women cannot be erased from the progress and
future of Afghanistan.
The resolution of the situation in Afghanistan
is one that requires the support of us all. We cannot
afford to be indifferent to the reported 23 per cent rise
in security-related incidents, including allegations
of human rights abuses and violations against former
Government officials, extrajudicial killings, arbitrary
arrests and detentions, the detonation of improvised
explosive devices, assassinations, clashes and the illtreatment of innocent civilians.
For the Afghan people to look into the future with
any degree of optimism or confidence, the Council must
prioritize the security and economic challenges facing

S/PV.9227

Afghanistan. Indeed, we should be concerned about the
deterioration of the security and economic situation in
that country and mobilize its leaders, regional Powers
and the international community in supporting coherent
and coordinated international action for the country’s
national peace process and economic development. In
that regard, we note the outcome of the sixth summit of
the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-building
Measures in Asia, which took place on 13 October in
Astana, in Kazakhstan. We welcome the President of
Uzbekistan’s proposal for forming an international
group of high-level negotiators to engage the de
facto authorities.
It is important that we collectively underscore to
the de facto authorities that even if they are unable to
satisfactorily fulfil the socioeconomic aspirations of
the Afghan people, they should not worsen their plight
by depriving them of their rights and dignity. They
must therefore be strongly encouraged to assume their
responsibilities by facilitating the rule of law, respecting
the fundamental human rights and freedoms of the
Afghan people and promoting inclusive governance.
The Taliban must be reminded that Afghan women and
girls, like all Afghans, should be treated with respect
and decency in all aspects of life. In that regard, we
reiterate the numerous calls from the international
community urging the Taliban to respect the right of all
girls and women to an education, to employment and
to participation in public and cultural life. We urge the
Taliban to abide by all the international human rights
obligations and commitments incumbent on Afghanistan
and to fully implement the human rights standards to
which Afghanistan has voluntarily acceded.
We note the challenging humanitarian situation
in Afghanistan, which is projected to affect some
28.3 million Afghans, and urge the scaling up of
funding to deal with the shortfall so as to meet the
humanitarian needs for the rest of this year and
beyond. We encourage UNAMA in its active role in
maintaining its field presence at the existing levels in
order to protect vital links between international and
local actors, create local competencies and facilitate
access for humanitarian organizations.
The continued retention of the Central Bank of
Afghanistan’s international financial reserves in the
amount of $9.5 billion amid the present socioeconomic
challenges in Afghanistan is unjustifiable. While
we note the well-intentioned establishment of the
$3.5 billion Afghan Fund to help stabilize Afghanistan’s

22-7629321/33

S/PV.9227

The situation in Afghanistan

20/12/2022

economy, we believe that more should be done — and
quickly — to help Afghan society recover as soon as
possible and rebuild its people’s resilience.

We took note of the report of the Secretary-General’s
report on the situation in Afghanistan (S/2022/916) and
would like to make the following points.

Before concluding, let me reiterate my delegation’s
condemnation of the attack on the Embassy of the
Russian Federation in Kabul, as well as the recent
attempted assassination of a Pakistani diplomat. The
international community’s presence in Afghanistan is
there to assist that important nation in rediscovering
its strength and capabilities. Attacks on diplomatic
missions and their agents are unacceptable. Providing
terrorist groups with a safe haven will not benefit the
Taliban and cannot and must not be countenanced.

Almost a year and a half ago, fateful events took
place in Afghanistan that drastically changed the
course of history in that long-suffering country. Twenty
years of war concluded with the rise to power of the
Taliban and the hasty retreat of foreign troops. Instead
of enjoying their long-awaited peace, the Afghan people
were hit with a humanitarian and economic crisis on an
unprecedented scale, in addition to other long-standing
problems and sanctions. Meanwhile, the sorry results
of the inglorious international campaign, including the
numerous war crimes committed by United States and
NATO forces, are being carefully swept under the rug
as though they had never happened, with some going
so far as to threaten sanctions. However, plenty of
evidence of those crimes has been collected. Russia’s
Foreign Affairs Ministry has prepared a white paper on
it that can be found on the Ministry’s website. We are
ready to share its contents with anyone who wants.

Finally, it is Ghana’s desire to see Afghanistan
become a peaceful, stable, prosperous and responsible
nation capable of addressing the socioeconomic
aspirations of its people. We therefore call for an end to
the senseless violence that we see there and reiterate our
belief that all efforts by the Taliban should be directed
towards the pursuit of inclusive and sustainable peace,
which is central to achieving the development that
they desire. Only the Afghan people can assure the
rebuilding of their country and chart the course of their
future. We stand ready to support them in reclaiming a
path to their destiny.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
Ms. Roza Otunbayeva, for her assessment of the
situation in Afghanistan, and to welcome her to the
Security Council Chamber for the first time in her
current capacity. The role of her Mission is all the
more significant in the current circumstances. We also
listened attentively to the head of the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
Mr. Martin Griffiths; the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011) on the Taliban, Mrs. Ruchira Kamboj; and the
civil-society representative, Ms. Mahbouba Seraj. We
are pleased that the countries of the region are also able
to participate in today’s discussion.
We regret the news today of a major fire in the
Salang mountain tunnel in Afghanistan, with at least 30
people killed and another 30 injured and with updates
on the victims still coming in. We express our sincere
condolences to the Afghan people for this tragedy.
22/33

At the same time, we are seeing our Western
colleagues, led by the United States, continue to evade
their responsibility and pass the buck by blaming the
Taliban for the current deteriorating situation in the
country. They lack the courage to acknowledge the
reality that has developed since 15 August 2021 and the
fact that the country’s de facto authorities are indeed
at its helm, making it objectively impossible to resolve
Afghanistan’s problems without cooperating with them.
The current internal political situation in
Afghanistan is truly difficult, with worrisome security
risks. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)Khorasan Province terrorist group, which has emerged
and grown in influence in the country over the past
20 years, is deliberately fanning the flames of the
situation with increasing acts of terrorism victimizing
representatives of religious and ethnic minorities,
including women and children. There is also a
concerning new trend of attacks on embassies and their
employees. Against that backdrop, we cannot fail to
notice another vile incursion of militants that recently
took place in a hotel in Kabul where Chinese tourists
were staying. ISIL clearly aims to instil an atmosphere
of fear and demonstrate the inability of the Taliban
authorities to control what is happening. In particular,
we consider that a threat to the security of the staff of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
and the humanitarian workers working on the ground.
22-76293

20/12/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

The narcotics problem is also of concern. It is clear
that the efforts of the de facto authorities to curb this
threat are inadequate. Given the widespread hunger
and poverty in the country, it is important to create
conditions that will help farmers. Afghanistan needs
support not just in words but through action, with
the participation of the international community and
partners in the region.
We are also continuing to closely follow the
socioeconomic situation in the country. We note the
importance of the adoption of resolution 2615 (2021),
aimed at expanding channels for the provision of
humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan without
preconditions. However, it is clear that those measures
have not been enough. Western donors remain
uninterested in extending assistance beyond basic needs
and early-recovery programmes. They loudly proclaim
the importance of helping the Afghan people, including
women and girls, while categorically rejecting the
slightest opportunity to contribute to the country’s
development, including by rebuilding schools and
hospitals and constructing roads connecting provinces
and cities with agricultural areas. In that context, the
situation regarding the unfreezing of assets seems
particularly outrageous. The attempts by the United
States and other major donors to use Afghan funds as a
pretext for pursuing their own agenda are immoral. The
creation of obstacles and artificial conditions will lead
nowhere. We call for the immediate return of the stolen
funds to the Afghan people, including the women and
girls about whom our colleagues have spoken today.
It seems that the United States and its partners have
failed to see that their methods of influencing regimes
that they do not like through unilateral sanctions,
political and economic pressure and endless ultimatums
have long ago ceased to have any effect and lead only
to the growing belief that countries must find their own
path to self-sufficient development without expecting
Western financial assistance. We can see that Kabul
also understands that there is no alternative to that path
for Afghanistan.
In order to build a lasting peace in Afghanistan, it
remains imperative to continue a pragmatic dialogue
with the new authorities. It is necessary to patiently
work with the Afghan people to build a State that is
politically and ethnically inclusive, free of terrorism and
narcotics and economically stable and developed, while
it respects and safeguards the rights of all its citizens,
including religious and ethnic minorities, women and

S/PV.9227

girls. The country requires international support in all
those areas. The effectiveness of the activities of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan also
depends on adherence to a comprehensive approach.
Russia has consistently advocated developing
cooperation with Afghanistan on issues involving a
comprehensive settlement. Our Embassy in Kabul
continues to operate. Together with our regional partners,
we are working to develop a common approach to the
situation in Afghanistan. That is also the purpose of the
Moscow format, the most recent meeting of which was
attended by the invited representatives of Qatar, Türkiye,
the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia and held in
Moscow on 16 November. At the meeting, participants
representing Russia, China, Pakistan, Iran, India,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and
Uzbekistan discussed all the relevant issues, including
the prospects for economic development in the country
and the surrounding region. A united call was made for
unfreezing all blocked assets. We also firmly called on
the United States and NATO to compensate Afghans
for the damage incurred over the years.
We note the potential of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization mechanism to coordinate efforts to
broaden Afghanistan’s economic integration within
economic structures in the region, as well as to promote
security and stability in the country. A periodic
comparison of positions also takes place within the
framework of other regional structures, including the
Collective Security Treaty Organization.
Through
humanitarian
and
socioeconomic
channels, since November 2021, 108 tons of
humanitarian shipments, including food — flour,
vegetable oil, tea, sugar, rice and canned milk — and
basic goods, such as blankets and medicines, were
delivered to Kabul. In March, during the visit of a
Russian inter-agency delegation to Kabul, 17 tons of
medicines were delivered to the Afghan side. In July,
in responding to the consequences of the earthquake
in the south-eastern part of the country, humanitarian
aid in the amount of 40 tons of medicines, basic goods
and food were delivered to Kabul. In October, another
65 tons of relief supplies were delivered. At the same
time, active steps are being taken to develop trade and
economic cooperation between our countries. We intend
to continue providing assistance to the Afghan people.

22-7629323/33

S/PV.9227

The situation in Afghanistan

Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Roza Otunbayeva, and UnderSecretary-General Martin Griffiths for their briefings.
I welcome the participation of Ms. Mahbouba Seraj at
this meeting and thank her.
I would like to address three points.
First, the human rights situation continues to
deteriorate in Afghanistan. Women and girls continue to
be denied their most basic rights and are systematically
excluded from public spaces. Four hundred and fiftyfour days have elapsed since girls were denied access
to secondary school. More than 1 million girls have
been intentionally deprived of an education. The latest
measures, such as the exclusion of women from Kabul’s
parks, public baths and stadiums, further restrict their
freedom of movement. We are also deeply concerned
about today’s reports of the possible exclusion of
women from universities. Scenes of repeated floggings,
stonings and other public punishments, as well as
the public execution of a man in the city of Farah on
7 December, in defiance of basic rights, are particularly
shocking. The same is true of the increasingly severe
restrictions on the freedoms of opinion, expression
and assembly. We cannot allow ourselves to become
inured to the daily violations of human rights, for
which the Taliban are, and must be held, responsible.
Let us remember that the country’s economy cannot be
revived if Afghan women are deprived of education,
work and their freedom of movement.
Secondly, the security situation remains very
worrisome. We have seen an increase in deadly attacks
in Afghanistan. Recent developments, the continued
presence of Al-Qaida and Da’esh’s resurgence confirm
our fears. Those groups have already found refuge
in Afghanistan. We are also following very closely
developments in the narcotics situation — be it opium or
methamphetamines — and its impact on the security of
the region. In that regard, we recall the critical role of the
work of he United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
particularly in support of Afghanistan’s neighbours.

20/12/2022

the implementation of which remains unrealized.
Compliance is an unconditional prerequisite for any
form of international recognition and is critical to
improving the living conditions of the Afghan people.
France stands ready to support the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in
fulfilling its mandate, support the women and men
who work alongside the Afghan people, in particular
in defence of human rights, and meet the basic needs of
the population. France remains committed to providing
humanitarian aid. At the national level, since August
2021, we have disbursed €123.5 million in aid for
projects that are currently under way and an additional
€100,000 in aid to the victims of severe weather events.
We continue our support for the French Medical
Institute for Mothers and Children in Kabul. The
European Union, together with all its member States,
has also raised more than €1 billion since the beginning
of 2022 and an additional €520 million in March. We
will therefore remain committed to helping the Afghan
people and to maintain the framework of UNAMA to
work to that end.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of India.
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Roza Otunbayeva and Under-SecretaryGeneral Martin Griffiths for their briefings. I would
also like to thank Ms. Mahbouba Seraj for her remarks,
and I welcome the presence of the Foreign Minister of
Norway at this briefing.

Thirdly — and this is my last point — France
will remain committed to standing by the Afghan
population by providing humanitarian aid and defending
fundamental freedoms, in particular women’s rights.

India has direct stakes in ensuring the return of
peace and stability to the country, given its position
as a contiguous neighbour and long-standing partner
of Afghanistan, as well as our strong historical and
civilizational linkages to the Afghan people. Our
approach to Afghanistan, as always, will be guided by
our historical friendship and special relationship with
the people of Afghanistan. We are deeply concerned
about the unfolding humanitarian situation in
Afghanistan. In response to the humanitarian needs of
the Afghan people and the urgent appeals made by the
United Nations, India has dispatched several shipments
of humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan, and we are
committed to continue our help to the Afghan people
going forward as well.

The Taliban cannot shirk their responsibilities. It is
up to them to respect the demands of the international
community, as set out in resolution 2593 (2021),

We supported the adoption of resolution 2615
(2021) in December 2021 to provide a humanitarian
carveout. We were happy to hear today from the Under-

24/33

22-76293

20/12/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

Secretary-General that the carveout has been effective
in mitigating the impact of the humanitarian crisis. It
is also important to recognize that the international
community continues to have some concerns about
the situation in Afghanistan, and we heard from our
briefers today what those concerns are. India’s main
priorities in Afghanistan include providing immediate
humanitarian assistance for the Afghan people, the
formation of a truly inclusive and representative
Government, combating terrorism and drug trafficking
and preserving the rights of women, children and
minorities. Those benchmarks are also set forth by
resolution 2593 (2021), which guides the international
community’s approach to Afghanistan.
We are closely monitoring the security situation
in Afghanistan and are actively engaged with
the international community on issues related to
Afghanistan. Terrorist attacks have targeted public
spaces, such as places of worship and educational
institutions, especially those of minorities, as well as
diplomatic premises. That is a concerning trend. The
collective approach of the international community
has been articulated in resolution 2593 (2021). It
unequivocally demands that the territory of Afghanistan
should not be used for sheltering, training, planning or
financing terrorist acts, specifically terrorist individuals
and entities proscribed by the Security Council,
including Lashkar-e-Tayyiba and Jaish-e-Mohammed.
Closely linked to the issue of terrorism is the menace
of drug trafficking. It is important for us to strengthen
international cooperation to disrupt and dismantle the
trafficking networks.
On the political front, India continues to call for an
inclusive dispensation in Afghanistan that represents all
segments of Afghan society. A broad-based, inclusive
and representative formation is necessary for long-term
peace and stability in Afghanistan and, in turn, for
economic recovery and development.
In conclusion, this will probably be India’s last
statement on Afghanistan during its tenure as a member
on the Council. However, as a close neighbour of ours,
Afghanistan will continue to remain in our hearts and
we will continue to speak out in support of the Afghan
people. The days when Afghanistan was used by others
for so-called strategic depth are over. Such skewed
approaches have only brought misery to the people
of Afghanistan and mayhem in the region. Peace and
stability in Afghanistan are critical imperatives for
which we all need to collectively strive. India will

S/PV.9227

continue to play its role in pursuit of that objective. The
interests of the Afghan people will continue to be at the
core of our efforts today and always.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the United States has asked
for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I take
the floor a second time to make a brief statement in
response to breaking news reports from Afghanistan.
We understand that the Taliban’s so-called Ministry of
Higher Education has just issued a decision banning
women from public and private universities. The United
States condemns in the strongest terms that absolutely
indefensible position. The Taliban cannot expect to be
a legitimate member of the international community
until they respect the rights of all Afghans, especially
the human rights and fundamental freedoms of women
and girls. We will continue to work with the Security
Council to speak with one voice on this issue.
The President: The representative of the
United Kingdom has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I take the floor, first, to join the United States in
condemning the announcement by the Taliban
banning women’s tertiary, or university, education.
That is another egregious curtailment of women’s
rights and a deep and profound disappointment for
every single female student affected. It is also another
step by the Taliban away from a self-reliant and
prosperous Afghanistan.
Secondly, we have heard again today attempts
to point the finger at the West for the situation in
Afghanistan. Rather than politicizing the plight and
suffering of ordinary Afghans, those finger-pointers
may want to focus instead on bolstering their support
to the United Nations chronically underfunded
humanitarian appeal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Faiq (Afghanistan): At the outset, I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening us here today,
and I congratulate India on its successful leadership of
the Security Council this month. I also thank Special
Representative of Secretary-General Otunbayeva

22-7629325/33

S/PV.9227

The situation in Afghanistan

for her briefing, as well as Under-Secretary-General
Martin Griffiths, for his comprehensive remarks about
the humanitarian situation in Afghanistan. I also want
to extend special thanks to Ms. Mahbouba Seraj for
her loud and clear messages on behalf of the women of
Afghanistan and her frank and candid briefing about
the situation in the country. My thanks also go to the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2022/916).
Allow me to express my appreciation to the outgoing
members of the Council — particularly Norway as the
penholder of Afghanistan file — for their constant and
persistent support to and solidarity with the people
of Afghanistan. I also want to take this opportunity
to support and welcome in advance the expression
of interest by the United Arab Emirates and Japan to
take over as co-penholders of Afghanistan file. I also
express my condolences and prayers to the families of
the victims of the incident that happened on Saturday
in Salang, of which exact number of fatalities is not yet
confirmed owing to the restrictions on the media.
I regret to begin my remarks with the very
unfortunate news about the directive just announced
by the Taliban banning all women from attending
universities throughout Afghanistan. As if the situation
were not already dire enough, that announcement now
marks a new law in violation of the most fundamental
and universal human rights of all of humankind.
Today we are meeting once again in this Chamber
to assess the situation in Afghanistan. Yet still, after 16
months since the Taliban’s forced takeover of power,
there is no hope for a positive change and progress
in the overall social, economic, security and political
situation in Afghanistan. That is largely due to the
Taliban’s failure to address the current crisis, break
the impasse and engage constructively to respond to
national and international calls for a fair, responsible,
inclusive system of governance, policies that respect
human rights and dignity, the rightful inclusion of
women in all aspects of society and counter-terrorism
efforts — all things that they promised to the world and
the people of Afghanistan.
Instead, the de facto authorities have returned to
the draconian, cruel and inhumane practices of their
previous rule. Last month, they ordered Afghan judges
to enforce their hardline interpretation of sharia law,
including flogging, amputation and public executions.
Last week, the Taliban publicly flogged more than a
dozen men and women whom they had deemed guilty
26/33

20/12/2022

of moral crimes in Ghor, Parwan and Farah provinces.
One such crime involved a woman going shopping
alone, without a male chaperone. In Farah province,
the de facto authorities recently carried out the
execution of an alleged murderer in front of hundreds
of spectators. Moreover, there is no transparency in
the judicial system to support the rights of individuals
accused of such crimes. The judicial and legal system
that had been reformed and improved since 2003 is no
longer functional. The Taliban speak about making
amendments to various laws of the country, but they
have not been able to publish any official gazette
introducing new laws.
They also continue to suppress the freedom of
speech and of the media through arbitrary arrests and
detentions, particularly targeting women and other
critics protesting the hardline oppressive measures.
By the same token, credible reports have informed us
of the detention and torture of thousands of people,
particularly of former security forces and specific
ethnic groups accused of having connections with
armed groups and the Northern Resistance Front. There
have also been reports of collective punishment, as well
as forced displacements of people from their houses and
farms in some provinces such as Sar-e Pol, Baghlan,
Badakhshan and Panjshir.
Above all, despite the repeated assurances
over the past 16 months, girls across Afghanistan
remain barred from receiving their secondary school
education, and women are refused their fundamental
rights to employment and political participation.
Respecting the foundational elements of human rights
and embracing the political, social and civil rights of
all Afghans, including the participation of women and
girls in all facets of society, should be a non-negotiable
prerequisite for any engagement. Let me reiterate that
the oppression of people, including women, is not
embedded in Afghan culture, and neither is it a tenet
of Islam. It is a component of the Taliban’s extremist
ideology, and it must not be allowed to continue.
The Taliban are also redesigning school
curriculums, removing modern culture and art and
increasing religious studies with radical ideologies in
their stead. This is seriously concerning as it will shape
the behaviours and beliefs of future generations and
lead to radicalization and extremism. In addition, it is
an attempt to systematically eliminate historic, social
and cultural values. In a recent public statement, the
22-76293

20/12/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.9227

Taliban acting Minister for Higher Education stated
that the academic achievement of a Taliban should be
based on the number of explosive mines he has placed.

rising, and the influx of refugees and migrants continues.
There are reports of young people committing suicide
owing to poverty and economic problems.

Furthermore, in the current system of governance,
there is no inclusiveness in political or technical
positions. The Taliban are not willing to hire people
with professional and technical backgrounds for
Government positions. Almost all of the very technical
positions are distributed among Taliban members, who
only have knowledge of religion and share the same
ideologies. Educated young people, including former
civil servants and professionals, are either dismissed or
unemployed. The Taliban’s policies are forcing human
capital to leave the country.

While the donors continue to cover the costs
of essential services and provide humanitarian aid,
the Taliban are consolidating their rule by collecting
national revenue. There is no accountability and
transparency with regard to the use of these domestic
incomes and revenues. There are reports in some
provinces of the poor quality of the humanitarian
aid distributed to the people, and it is reported that
the Taliban are using their influence to divert aid to
particular provinces according to their own whims.
This can and should be avoided through strict use of
monitoring and reporting mechanisms by donors and
the United Nations country team.

Meanwhile, the security situation in Afghanistan
continues to deteriorate. Concerns that Afghanistan
will become a safe haven for violent extremists have not
been addressed, and the frequency and sophistication
of attacks by terrorist groups such as Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province are rising.
Diplomatic staff and premises, public places such as
educational centres and places of worship are subject
to targeted terrorist attacks, and religious and ethnic
minorities including Hazaras, Sikhs and Hindus, as
well as foreign nationals, are not safe. Just last week,
in a terrorist attack on a Kabul hotel whose guests
are mostly foreigners, civilians, including Chinese
nationals, lost their lives.
The crimes of kidnapping and targeted and
mysterious killings of former security forces are on the
rise in the big cities. Many of these incidents are not
widely known because of censorship and restrictions
on media. The culture of impunity must be ended,
and the perpetrators of these heinous human rights
crimes must be held accountable. The United Nations
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in
Afghanistan and the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan have a responsibility to monitor and
report to the Security Council.
The humanitarian and economic situation remains
concerning and is far from recovery. Despite the
alleged increase of domestic revenue and some positive
economic activity, mainly by the private sector, the
number of people in need of humanitarian assistance is
increasing from 24 to 28 million people, as reflected in
the report of the Secretary-General. The poverty rate is

Humanitarian assistance is more important than
ever in this winter season, and we must ensure both
the quality of the aid being provided and the equal
and unhindered distribution of the aid to the most
vulnerable groups across the country. We are grateful
for the diligent and continued efforts of donor countries
and other international partners to provide funding and
humanitarian support to the people of Afghanistan,
including the recent Security Council resolutions
allowing for the continuation of humanitarian
assistance to Afghanistan (resolution 2626 (2022))
and the exemption of humanitarian aid from sanctions
(resolution 2615 (2021)). We also welcome the transfer
of $3.5 billion in frozen assets to the newly established
Fund for the Afghan People, and we hope that these
funds, the national reserves of Afghanistan, will
be used by a legitimate government with strict and
transparent monitoring for the long-term benefit of the
Afghan people, not for humanitarian aid.
While aid is a critical necessity and a priority in the
short term, it is merely a bandage on a bullet wound.
It is not a sustainable solution to the problems that the
people of Afghanistan face. We must commit ourselves
to finding a long-term solution that will reduce the need
for aid in future through an accountable and legitimate
system of governance. I would like to reiterate, however,
that any type of development cooperation requires a
legitimate and representative system in Afghanistan,
one that embraces the will and ownership of the
people and ensures transparency and effectiveness
in all aspects of national development planning and
budget execution.

22-7629327/33

S/PV.9227

The situation in Afghanistan

Against that backdrop, the current status quo
and the uncertainty about the future has frustrated
the Afghan people, the region and the international
community. It is time that the international community,
regional countries, international donors and Afghans
within the country and abroad come together to resume
political settlement talks. This dialogue should aim
for political stability, national unity and a permanent
peace in a stable and democratic Afghanistan. We must
have a renewed focus on the political component of the
crisis, in addition to efforts aimed at addressing the
humanitarian situation and the issue of human rights.
Lessons learned from the Doha process should help
us create the blueprint of a new process for Afghan
talks, and the main goal should be to ensure that the
Afghan peoples’ interests are placed front and centre.
We must remember that Afghans will welcome the
engagement only of those political figures who are not
among the corrupt and criminal members of the former
Governments of Afghanistan. These talks should
include Afghan figures who are politically active,
credible and well known for their clean backgrounds.
We have a mandate as members of the United Nations
to make sure that we are not strengthening a system
that is taking Afghanistan backwards.
Moreover, we call on the Security Council to
display the unity and consensus that is needed in the
way forward for the restoration of peace and stability
in the country. In addition, I would like to call on
the Secretary-General to take immediate action on
addressing the situation in Afghanistan. One proposal
for consideration might be the appointment of a highlevel panel or group of eminent persons to come up
with a holistic, comprehensive and sustainable solution
to the ongoing crisis in Afghanistan.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that only a genuine
national dialogue that embraces the will and aspirations
of the people can lead us toward a truly representative
and inclusive future. The United Nations must take the
lead in facilitating and generating this dialogue. The
support and consensus of the international community,
and the Security Council in particular, is vital to
achieving this objective.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Jalil Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
the Indian delegation for organizing today’s meeting
as well as for Ambassador Kamboj’s briefing as the
28/33

20/12/2022

Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011). I also thank Ms. Roza
Otunbayeva, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, and Mr. Martin Griffiths, Under-SecretaryGeneral, for their updated and informative briefings. I
also thank Ms. Seraj for her briefing.
Despite the efforts of the United Nations, the current
situation in Afghanistan is challenging. The most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/916) indicates
that 28.3 million Afghans will require humanitarian
and protection assistance in 2023, up from 24.4 million
in 2022 and 18.4 million at the beginning of 2021.
Meanwhile, the de facto authorities have failed to keep
their pledges, in particular to establish an inclusive and
representative Government.
With regard to the economic situation, the
Secretary-General’s report states that the de facto
authorities have so far implemented positive steps,
including anti-corruption efforts, which can serve as a
basis for a stable and recovered economic condition in
the years ahead.
While humanitarian assistance is vital for
Afghanistan, it is not a long-term solution, and the
country’s economy must take priority. If the Afghan
economy’s revival is conditional or political, the Afghan
people will suffer and be harmed. In the meanwhile,
the humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan should not be
overlooked or overshadowed by other conflicts.
As we have often emphasized, frozen assets belong
to the people and must be unconditionally returned in
order to help the Afghan economy. Regrettably, rather
than accepting responsibility for its reckless withdrawal,
the United States has resorted to unfounded grounds
to justify its unlawful acts, including the continued
blocking of assets that are critical for economic revival.
Sanction regimes, however, must not obstruct attempts
to rebuild the economy.
We support the efforts of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and
its contact with the de facto authorities to help the
Afghan people, particularly in terms of scaling up
the humanitarian response and striving to end the
economic calamity. At the same time, the de facto
authorities must uphold their international obligations,
particularly by ensuring that Afghan women and
girls have access to education. For the benefit of the
people, the international community must sustain its
engagement with Afghanistan.
22-76293

20/12/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

We would like to emphasize once more the serious
threat that the presence of Da’esh and Al-Qaida
affiliates in Afghanistan poses to the peace and security
of Afghanistan, its neighbours and the whole region.
Drug trafficking is another major problem. The
recent report of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime is concerning and alarming. According to
the report, opium cultivation has increased by 32 per
cent since the Taliban took control of Afghanistan, as
compared to the previous year.
It is a fact that if the international community
does not continue to support Afghanistan’s economic
recovery, the current situation will continue to create
a vulnerable environment where extremists, terrorists
and drug traffickers will be able to exploit and recruit
vulnerable people to further their destructive objectives.
Iran, as a neighbour that hosts millions of Afghans,
has used its expertise and resources to assist the
Afghan people in overcoming their difficulties. Iran
has generously provided the necessary assistance to
the Afghan people who have lived in Iran for more
than 40 years, despite receiving little support from the
international community and being subjected to severe
and brutal sanctions by the United States. At present,
Iran offers free education and training to all Afghan
students living in Iran. According to estimates, Iran
needs to provide $1 billion in annual subsidies to host
and shelter 5 million Afghans.
We have said time and again that Iran and other
neighbours should not bear the whole responsibility
of admitting Afghan refugees. On the basis of shared
responsibility, other countries, in particular those
that claim to support the human rights of Afghans,
especially women and girls, should accept refugees.
As emphasized by the Secretary-General in his
report, peace and stability must be established based
on the protection of all Afghans’ fundamental rights,
as well as an inclusive and democratic Government
that represents the people’s aspirations and interests,
and comprehensive security and counter-terrorism
assurances. Iran continues to support the United Nations
efforts to accomplish that goal for the sake of the
Afghan people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uzbekistan.

S/PV.9227

Mr. Abdullayev (Uzbekistan): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open briefing. I
also take the opportunity to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Otunbayeva, other
United Nations officials and Council members for their
informative statements.
I want to echo the statements with regard to the
worsening humanitarian situation in Afghanistan.
Indeed, the country is suffering from unprecedented
humanitarian calamity. According to the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), the
number of people in need of humanitarian assistance
has reached 24.4 million, which is 6 million more as
compared to 2021. More than 3 million Afghans are
suffering from starvation. In the near future, nearly
90 per cent of the population may fall into poverty.
At the same time, the de facto authorities have
succeeded in reducing the level of armed violence and
maintaining public order throughout the country. The
Kabul Administration is taking active measures aimed
at neutralizing the activities of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham, restoring the economy, ensuring
public services and developing trade and international
cooperation. UNAMA has played a big role in those
positive developments.
Despite the positive trends, the Taliban still show
no intention of creating an inclusive Government and
continue restricting the access of girls and women
to education. There is no justification for closing
universities to women, as we heard today. A number
of countries are reasonably concerned with potential
terrorist threats, as well as the acute deterioration of
the situation of women.
Under these circumstances, in our view, we must
continue to demand that the Afghan authorities fulfil
the key commitments, while intensifying a dialogue
with the interim Government. To that end, we propose
establishing, under United Nations auspices and with
its support, a high-level international negotiating
group on a settlement in Afghanistan — the ING. That
initiative was launched by the President of Uzbekistan
Mr. Shavkat Mirziyoyev, at the sixth Summit of the
Conference on Interaction and Confidence-building
Measures in Asia, held in Astana on 18 October. In that
regard, I would like to thank relevant Member States
for the principal support for that idea.

22-7629329/33

S/PV.9227

The situation in Afghanistan

20/12/2022

The ING is meant to be a unique platform for
dialogue with the new Afghan authorities in Kabul
and to convey to them both the demands of the world
community and their serious concerns regarding the
violation of international norms. The ultimate goal of
the ING is to negotiate with the Afghan authorities
for step-by-step fulfilment of the demands of the
world community and, ultimately, work out a precise
algorithm of actions to be taken by the sides.

We have provided emergency humanitarian aid to
the Afghan people on several occasions. In a couple
of days, a new humanitarian cargo shipment will be
sent to Afghanistan. Other success stories include the
restoration of work at Mazar-i-Sharif International
Airport, the biggest transportation hub in the north.
The educational centre in Termez provides training for
more than 40 Afghan specialists and more than 200
Afghan boys and girls.

In cooperation with UNAMA, the proposed ING
would develop a programme of measures on reciprocal
actions, including some incentives, as the Taliban
demonstrates verifiable progress. We also see a role
for UNAMA in the oversight of the implementation of
actions to be reciprocally agreed. Let me underscore
that the ING activities are not about making concessions
to the Taliban. It is about helping them to gradually
normalize their relations with the world community.

In conclusion, I want to highlight that the Afghan
people have never waged wars themselves. Instead, the
fire of war has always been brought to Afghan soil from
the outside. That is why the global community must
assume greater moral responsibility for the destiny of
the Afghan people and for the future of their country.
That is why we believe that, despite the existing negative
elements in the actions of the Taliban, the Afghan
people cannot be left to face existing challenges alone.
The country must not be allowed to become isolated
once again.

The initiative is well-thought-out and based on our
positive experience engaging with the Taliban since
the time they came to power. In particular, through
dialogue with the Taliban, we succeeded in having
schools for girls opened in the northern provinces. For
the first time in the past 25 years, we opened a land
route for the transit of goods to the seaports of Pakistan
and back through Afghanistan. Within 10 months this
year, about 600,000 tons of goods were transported
in both directions along that transit route without any
security incidents.
We have established partnership in counterterrorism, and now the Taliban are sharing their
information by warning us about potential security
risks, threats and terrorist attacks.
We have created a logistics hub in the border city
of Termez in order to deliver humanitarian aid, not
only to Afghanistan but also to other countries of the
region. The hub is now being actively used by various
United Nations agencies. In addition, the President
of Uzbekistan established a special humanitarian
support fund for Afghanistan in Termez in order to use
the hub’s potential. We call for the Council’s support
in granting that hub an international status under
United Nations auspices.
Uzbekistan will continue to provide all possible
support to the Afghan people in order to mitigate
their humanitarian situation, including the supply of
electricity at reduced rates.
30/33

We are open to deliberations and suggestions to
promote our initiative, as well as to further elaborate
it with interested Member States in order to seek their
principled support, as well as to identify a mandate
for the group and then launch a joint appeal to the
General Assembly. We also hope for broad support
from the Organization’s main organs, which would
ensure international recognition of the international
negotiating group as an effective political tool to
address the Afghan problem.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan): I commend the
presidency of India for convening this meeting.
On behalf of my country, I congratulate
Ms. Roza Otunbayeva on her appointment as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and wish her and her
dedicated team every success, strength and patience.
Her vast diplomatic experience, as well as her valuable
knowledge of the region, will further strengthen the role
of UNAMA and its place within the United Nations and
international processes.
We consider it important to maintain close
interaction with the de facto authorities of Afghanistan,
despite the absence of their official recognition, so as
22-76293

20/12/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

to seek remedies, with their cooperation, to the current
crises in the interests of the Afghan people. We believe
that taking into account the nature and specificity of the
de facto authorities of Afghanistan, UNAMA should
concentrate on the parts of its mandate that are least
objectionable to the new Government — education,
support for development and delivering humanitarian
assistance throughout the entire territory of the country.
That is extremely important now, as cold winter is the
most damaging factor for the population. The remaining
part of UNAMA’s mandate, can be addressed at a later
stage after establishing a more conducive environment
for its activities and attaining a better understanding
from the de facto Government.
Kazakhstan continues to provide humanitarian aid
to the people of Afghanistan and actively cooperates
with United Nations agencies, especially the World Food
Programme. We are ready to supply wheat and grain
and participate in various procurement projects, mainly
using the humanitarian hub in Termez, in Uzbekistan.
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan have
initiated and implemented a joint programme with the
European Union and the United Nations Development
Programme in order to educate Afghan students,
particularly women, in our respective universities.
In order to promote inclusive and comprehensive
sustainable development as a key cornerstone for peace
in the region, Central Asian countries are in favour of
establishing the United Nations Regional Centre on
Sustainable Development Goals for Central Asia and
Afghanistan in Almaty. When fully operational, the
Centre will streamline United Nations inter-agency
regional
and
interregional
coordination
and
management. It has the capacity to transform Central
Asia into a zone of peace and security, sustainable
development and prosperity, with a spillover effect
into Afghanistan.
The situation in Afghanistan is conducive to the
possible inflow of refugees, terrorist groups, drugs
and arms into our region. The current regional security
situation implies that, without proper international
efforts, the territory of Afghanistan could become a
hotbed for foreign terrorist fighters for the neighbouring
States and far beyond. Our nation is paying particular
attention to strengthening our borders and increasing
coordinated interaction among special services and law
enforcement agencies.

S/PV.9227

However, I would like to emphasize that we should
not limit international efforts to steps undertaken
exclusively by our region. The entire international
community, not just Central Asia, should realize
clearly that Central Asia could become a transit point
for threats to infiltrate further to countries adjacent
to the region and beyond. Hence, we need to apply
coordinated measures in order to tackle the issue
jointly with all stakeholders, Member States and
international organizations.
In conclusion, Kazakhstan pledges to be fully
engaged in multilateral action for stability, progress
and peace in Afghanistan.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Let me begin by first
congratulating Ambassador Kamboj and the Indian
delegation on their skilful guidance of the Security
Council during the current month. Pakistan welcomes
the discussion on Afghanistan, and we would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his latest report
(S/2022/916), as well as Special Representative
Otunbayeva and Under-Secretary-General Martin
Griffiths for their briefings. We also welcome the
briefings from the citizens of Afghanistan.
Afghanistan is our immediate neighbour. Our
contiguity is physical, not aggressively aspirational.
We share deep bonds of faith, ethnicity and history
with Afghanistan. Pakistan has suffered grievously
over the past four decades from the fallout of foreign
interventions and civil war in Afghanistan. Peace and
stability in Afghanistan is a political and strategic
compulsion for Pakistan.
We are deeply concerned about the challenging
situation in Afghanistan outlined in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. Yet we continue to believe that
engagement with the interim Afghan Government
is the best option to promote peace and stability in
Afghanistan and the region and to realize the shared
objectives of the international community — respect
for human rights, especially women’s rights, inclusive
governance and the elimination of terrorism within and
from Afghanistan.
Coercion and isolation have not proved successful
in the past. They will prove to be counterproductive
now and in future, as we have just learned. We need

22-7629331/33

S/PV.9227

The situation in Afghanistan

20/12/2022

a coherent and practical plan in order to realize the
objectives of the international community through
patient engagement with the interim Government.

to Afghanistan. The international banking system and
international companies should not be discouraged
from supporting those connectivity projects.

The collapse of the Afghan economy is due to the
cut-off of external economic and financial support on
which Afghanistan had become dependent for 75 per
cent of its economic activity. Our first priority must
remain to reverse the current humanitarian crisis in
Afghanistan when 95 per cent of the population exists
in extreme poverty.

During her recent visit to Kabul, Pakistan’s
Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, Ms. Hina Rabbani
Khar, conveyed our assurances that Pakistan would
continue to extend all possible humanitarian assistance
for Afghan refugees, trade prospects, transit access
and technical assistance to Afghanistan. However, she
also made it clear to the leaders of the Afghan interim
Government that we will not compromise on the issue of
women’s rights to education and work and other human
rights. During her visit, she met with the Afghanistan
Women’s Chamber of Commerce. We will encourage
the strengthening of ties between the respective
women’s chambers of commerce of our two countries.

We welcome resolution 2615 (2021), which provides
for a humanitarian carveout of the Council’s sanctions
regimes. We support the assistance being provided
through the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and other United Nations
and international agencies, as well as civil society
organizations, and commend their help to the Afghan
people, despite the difficult circumstances in which
they operate. We urge that the Secretary-General’s
$4.4 billion response plan be fully funded and that
the United Nations Development Programme’s special
window and other avenues to maintain economic and
financial activities be maintained and strengthened.
Secondly, we have to revive the Afghan economy,
especially its banking system. For that purpose, it is
imperative that the issue of international financial
transactions and Afghanistan’s frozen assets held abroad
be addressed. The Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC) has given some careful thought to help revive
the Afghan economy. The key is to inject the financial
assets of Afghanistan, especially the $7 billion that
is held abroad, into the Afghan financial system, and
thereby revive economic and commercial capacity. For
their part, the interim authorities have demonstrated
a capacity for efficient management to raise revenues
through trade and transit, as we just heard.
Thirdly, reconstruction projects must be restarted,
including the reconstruction of infrastructure
destroyed during the past 20 years of conflict.
Also, the implementation of the major connectivity
projects — such as the Central Asia-South Asia electricity
grid, the Uzbekistan railway and the TurkmenistanAfghanistan-Pakistan-India gas pipeline — which
are all shovel-ready and can be a central component
of an economic revival strategy for Afghanistan. All
of Afghanistan’s neighbours are willing to implement
those projects. Pakistan and China have also expressed
a desire to extend the China-Pakistan economic corridor
32/33

We will also continue, together with other OIC
countries to share best practices on women’s role in
Islamic countries, which are consistent with sharia
and which we will share with the interim Afghan
authorities in an effort to persuade them to turn onto the
right path. In that context, we are extremely disturbed
by the latest announcement of restrictions on higher
education for women in Afghanistan. But we continue
to believe that it is through measures of persuasion and
cooperation, and not coercion, that we can succeed
in overcoming the impediments to ensuring women’s
rights in Afghanistan. Those impediments are cultural,
not religious.
There is no credible challenge within Afghanistan
to the control of the Afghan interim Government. Yet
greater political inclusion will serve to advance the
goal of peace and stability in Afghanistan. The interim
authorities are obviously averse to sharing power
with their erstwhile adversaries. However, they would
benefit, including in improving governance, if they
could include the participation of Afghan experts who
possess the expertise required to transform Afghanistan
into a functioning modern State. A concerted effort to
bring that about can be part of the process of engagement
with the interim Government.
Obviously, a major concern for the international
community — and especially for Afghanistan’s
neighbours — is the rise of terrorist violence within
and from Afghanistan. While international media
attention has focused on a much-diminished Al-Qaida,
a major threat today emanates from the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan (ISIL-K) and the
22-76293

20/12/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

Tehreek-e-Taliban Pakistan (TTP). ISIL-K recently
launched attacks against the Russian Embassy, Chinese
personnel in Kabul and Pakistan’s Head of Mission,
in which he was injured and a security guard was
critically wounded. We have strongly condemned
that assassination attempt and called on the interim
Government to apprehend and punish the perpetrators.
ISIL-K, or Da’esh, remains a potent and growing
threat for two reasons: first, it continues to receive
funding from outside Afghanistan, and is thereby
equipped to attract recruits; and secondly, it offers an
alternate home to all those terrorist and other groups
that are opposed to the interim authorities in Kabul.
The international community needs to work in tandem
with the interim Government to eliminate those
ISIL-K/Da’esh advantages and to devise a strategy
to effectively neutralize its terrorism capabilities.
The TTP is perhaps the largest terrorist group within
Afghanistan. Its safe havens are located in Nangarhar
province, close to Pakistan’s borders. Pakistan continues
to suffer cross-border attacks by the TTP, which receives
financing and sponsorship from external sources. The
efforts of the interim Government to neutralize the
TTP, efforts in which we have participated, have not
succeeded. Pakistan reserves the right to take decisive
action to eliminate the terrorist threat posed by the TTP.
Pakistan values the role played by UNAMA as a
vehicle to promote peace and stability in Afghanistan
and to address the humanitarian, economic and
security challenges facing the people of Afghanistan.
UNAMA’s mandate can be achieved effectively
only through continued engagement with the interim
Afghan Government, notwithstanding the difficulties
and challenges involved. UNAMA should in particular
support the interim Government’s efforts to collect
weapons and arms from various militias.
Afghanistan’s immediate neighbours have an
even more critical role in promoting stability and
economic revival through trade, regional cooperation
and political dialogue, while addressing the complex

S/PV.9227

security environment, including the threat of terrorism,
the problem of drug trafficking and smuggling and
border incidents provoked by ill-disciplined local
commanders. Pakistan is working on modalities to
prevent border incidents with the interim authorities. It
is essential for Afghanistan’s immediate neighbours to
maintain a unified approach, including through the six
neighbours platform and through initiatives such as that
from Uzbekistan, about which we just heard. We should
not allow spoilers to erode such regional cooperation.
The international community must also continue to
intensify its engagement with Afghanistan. Isolating the
interim authorities or remaining aloof from the situation
is not a winning strategy. Stabilizing Afghanistan
requires concerted international cooperation. Peace and
stability in Afghanistan requires cooperation among
all major Powers, despite the current tensions between
them. It needs the effective multilateralism that was
propagated so eloquently in the Council last week.
The President: The representative of the United
Arab Emirates has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I feel obliged to respond to what we just heard
about the recent Taliban decision to close universities
to women and girls in Afghanistan. We express our
deep disappointment about that unfair decision, and
we condemn it because it deals a fatal blow against
women and girls by permanently depriving them from
participating in public life and in any promising future
prospect. Therefore, we support the call for the Security
Council to discuss that decision in detail and to hear
from the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral about the reasons behind it whenever possible.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 1.50 p.m.

22-7629333/33
