A/71/410–S/2016/809

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
28 September 2016
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventy-first session
Agenda item 51
Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects

Security Council
Seventy-first year

Identical letters dated 22 September 2016 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the General Assembly and the
President of the Security Council
The African Union is the key regional partner of the United Nations in
confronting challenges to international peace and security. More than half of the
United Nations peacekeeping missions currently deployed are in Africa. Those
missions alone account for 83 per cent of all uniformed personnel deployed by the
United Nations and 86 per cent of the financial resources approved for United
Nations peacekeeping operations. The United Nations also provides considerable
support to the African Union Mission in Somalia, through the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia. In fact, the United Nations has provided support to most
of the operations mandated or authorized by the African Union since its
establishment in 2002. Four of those missions subsequently transitioned to United
Nations peacekeeping missions.
African Union missions have long suffered from a lack of predictable and
sustainable support, including in the area of financing. This was identified as a key
challenge in recent transitions, prompting my proposal to undertake, jointly with the
African Union, a review and assessment of available mechanisms to finance and
support African Union peace operations mandated by the Security Council. The
Peace and Security Council of the African Union welcomed that proposal in its
communiqué of 26 September 2015. Both the Security Council and the General
Assembly indicated, through the statement by the President of the Secu rity Council
of 25 November 2015 (S/PRST/2015/22) and General Assembly resolution 70/268
of 14 June 2016, that they looked forward to receiving the results of t he review.
The review examined external support provided to the 12 peace support
operations mandated or authorized by the African Union to date. It also examined
related considerations of doctrine, capability, safety and security, human rights and
accountability. I would be grateful if the report could be brought to the attention of
Member States in order to inform decision-making on issues related to support to

16-16788 (E)

121016

*1616788*

A/71/410
S/2016/809

African Union peace support operations and the broader partnership between the
two organizations in the area of peace and security. The report has also been brought
to the attention of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union by the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

2/34

16-16788

A/71/410
S/2016/809

Report of the joint African Union-United Nations review of
available mechanisms to finance and support African Union
peace support operations authorized by the United Nations
Security Council
I. Introduction
1.
The African Union, the United Nations and the wider international community
have long recognized that partnerships remain the most effective way to respond to
the multiple threats to peace and security in Africa. Over the past decade, this
resulted in a growing number of mechanisms reinforcing collaboration between the
two organizations and building on their respective comparative advantages in the
area of peace and security. 1 In 2014, the United Nations Security Council stressed
the importance of “further strengthening cooperation and developing effective
partnership with the African Union Peace and Security Council consistent with
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter, to address common collective security
challenges in Africa”. 2 Similarly, the African Union Peace and Security Council has
stated that “the African Union and United Nations are mutually dependent and have
a shared strategic interest in establishing a close working partnership ”. 3
2.
The changing character of armed conflict on the continent has increasingly led
the African Union and the United Nations to adapt their peace operations to meet
new and evolving challenges and threats. The principal drivers of Africa ’s recent
armed conflicts include contested government transitions, violent extremism and
inter-State contestation. The resulting conflicts have often been fought between
factionalized parties and characterized by large-scale violence against civilian
populations, including grave violations of human rights and humanitarian law; a rise
in the number of actors using asymmetric tactics, including targeting peacekeepers;
the growing influence of transnational organized criminal activity; and the complex
interrelationships between some State-based wars and various non-State armed
conflicts.
3.
Since 2003, as part of the African Peace and Security Architecture, the African
Union has led or authorized a dozen peace support operations in response to some
of those armed conflicts. While those operations showed the African Union ’s
political willingness to tackle major threats to peac e and security, they also suffered
from a number of recurrent capacity gaps and challenges, arising partly from the
Union’s limited finances. The United Nations, together with other external partners,
has provided support to most African Union peace suppor t operations. That support,
however, has always been ad hoc and, in the case of support provided by the United
Nations, authorized on a case-by-case basis by the United Nations Security Council.
The African Union has therefore repeatedly called for flexibl e, predictable and
sustainable funding for peace support operations, including through the utilization
of both African Union and United Nations assessed contributions. Following a high level open debate on the relationship between the United Nations and re gional
__________________
1

S/PRST/2010/21.
S/PRST/2014/27, fourth paragraph.
3
Common African Position on the United Nations Review of Peace Operations (PSC/PR/2(DII)).
2

16-16788

3/34

A/71/410
S/2016/809

organizations, the Security Council, in its resolution 1809 (2008), recognized the
need to enhance the predictability, sustainability and flexibility of financing
regional organizations when they undertook peacekeeping under a United Nations
mandate. In subsequent years, the United Nations Security Council reaffirmed tha t
view numerous times.
4.
The joint review’s principal purpose is to assess the available mechanisms to
finance and support peace support operations mandated or authorized by the African
Union to facilitate a common understanding of how the African Union-United
Nations partnership on peace operations has evolved along these dimensions and
identify and build on best practices. The Secretary-General originally proposed the
joint review in January 2015, following a lessons learned study of the transitions in
the Central African Republic and Mali (see S/2015/3). The High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations, in its report (A/70/95-S/2015/446), supported that
proposal, noting that the joint exercise was an opportunity to advance the goal of
improving the predictability, sustainability and flexibility of financing for African
Union peace operations. The Secretary-General indicated that he intended to
proceed with the review in his report on the future of United Nations peace
operations (A/70/357-S/2015/682), and this was subsequently endorsed by the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union in September 2015, 4 the United Nations
Security Council in November 2015 5 and the United Nations General Assembly in
June 2016. 6
5.
The present report begins with an overview of the African Union -United
Nations partnership on peace support operations. It then provides a survey and
assessment of past and present support provided to African Union peace support
operations. It subsequently offers an analysis of doctrinal considerations, the
African Union’s ongoing efforts to develop its capabilities, the safety and security
of peacekeepers, and human rights and accountability issues relevant to discussions
on support.

II. Evolution of the African Union-United Nations partnership
on peace support operations
6.
At its heart, the African Union-United Nations partnership on peace support
operations is a political relationship that reflects the spirit of Chapter VIII of the
Charter. It is founded on the shared desire of both organizations to maintain
international peace and security in Africa by developing timely solutions to crises.
When the Security Council authorizes the African Union’s peace support operations
to help to maintain international peace and security on its behalf, it sends a powerful
signal that the two organizations are working collaboratively to achieve shared
objectives. The partnership is essential, evolving, innovative and increasingly
successful.

__________________
4

PSC/AHG/COMM/2(DXLVII).
S/PRST/2015/22.
6
General Assembly resolution 70/268.
5

4/34

16-16788

A/71/410
S/2016/809

An essential partnership
7.
The African Union-United Nations partnership on peace support operations is
an essential part of meeting some of the most serious threats facing Afri ca’s States
and its peoples, as neither organization alone can address the challenges posed by
Africa’s multiple armed conflicts and political crises. Peacekeepers have been in
extremely high demand in Africa, with both the United Nations and the African
Union consistently deploying record numbers since mid -2007. Today, the United
Nations deploys more than 80 per cent of its peacekeepers to missions in Africa and,
over the past decade, afforded African issues more time in Security Council
discussions than any other region of the world. At the same time, the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union has authorized more than 80,000 uniformed
and civilian personnel in peace support operations. As at July 2016, African States
represented 20 of the top 30 contributors of uniformed personnel to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. It has been common for the African Union and the
regional economic communities and regional mechanisms to act as first responders
before transitioning to United Nations peacekeeping operations, as has occurred in
Burundi, the Central African Republic, Liberia, Mali and Sierra Leone.
An evolving partnership
8.
The African Union-United Nations partnership on peace support operations
continues to evolve. In the early 1990s the partnership involved attempts to ensure
coordination and cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity, the predecessor to the African Union, “should the latter decide to
launch a peacekeeping operation”. 7 With the establishment of the new African
Union, the partnership deepened, and in 2006 the United Nations embarked on its
largest and most sustained capacity-building programme for a regional organization,
the Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme, which included enhancing the African
Union’s ability to conduct peace support operations. In 2010, the United Nations
Office to the African Union (UNOAU) was established to deepen the level of
practical cooperation between the two organizations. Today, the African Union and
the United Nations work together in a strategic partnership based on regular joint
endeavours at headquarters and in the field to improve the effectiveness of the
delivery of peace support operations on the continent.
An innovative partnership
9.
The African Union-United Nations partnership on peace support operations
has been confronted with a range of unprecedented challenges, particularly the
crises in Somalia and the Sudan, leading the two organizations to pioneer new and
innovative mechanisms for cooperation. In January 2007, the Security Council
authorized the deployment of support packages funded through assessed
contributions, to augment the capabilities of the African Union Mission in the Sudan
(AMIS) in preparation for its transition to the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). In the same year, the United Nations established
the African Union Peacekeeping Support Team in Addis Ababa, at the request of the
then Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Alpha Konare, to support the
__________________
7

16-16788

General Assembly resolution 47/148, para. 5.

5/34

A/71/410
S/2016/809

African Union in building its capacity for peacekeeping operations. 8 UNOAU was
established in 2010 through the merger of the Team with the United Nations Liaison
Office and the United Nations planning team for the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM). 9 In 2009, the Security Council authorized the establishment of
the United Nations Support Office for AMISOM (UNSOA) to provide a logistical
support package to AMISOM. That support was expanded in 2012 to include
reimbursement for contingent-owned equipment, the only time to date that funding
has been provided directly to meet costs in a non-hybrid African Union mission.
10. The difficulties involved in sustaining AMISOM generated a series of calls at
the United Nations to enhance the African Union’s capacity to conduct peace
support operations. 10 In 2008, the United Nations established a panel, chaired by the
former Prime Minister of Italy, Romano Prodi, to consider the modalities of how to
support African Union peace operations. 11 Among other things, the panel, in its
report (A/63/666-S/2008/813), recommended “the use of United Nations-assessed
funding to support United Nations-authorized African Union peacekeeping
operations for a period of no longer than six months” and that “to qualify for such
support … the following two conditions should be met: (a) a case -by-case approval
by the Security Council and General Assembly; and (b) an agreement between the
African Union and the United Nations that the mission would transition to United
Nations management within six months” (ibid., para. 11). Neither the United
Nations Security Council nor the General Assembly to ok concrete action on the
recommendations in the report.
11. In the light of this, in January 2012, the African Union reiterated its call to the
United Nations to address in a systematic manner the issue of the predictability,
sustainability and flexibility of the funding of African Union peace support
operations undertaken with the consent of the Security Council, through the use of
United Nations assessed contributions. 12 The African Union has concomitantly
explored how to increase its own sources of finance for the organization, including
its peace support operations. In this respect, the Summit of the African Union
decided in 2015 to contribute 25 per cent of the cost of its peace and security
efforts, including African Union-led peace support operations, by 2020. 13 In January
2016, the Chairperson of the African Union Commission appointed a High
Representative for the Peace Fund, and on the basis of his report, the African Union
Assembly took a historic decision in July 2016 to institute a levy of 0.2 per cent on
eligible imports into the African continent in order to finance the Union, including
its peace and security activities, to enter into effect from 2017.
An increasingly effective partnership
12. Despite the many challenges, the African Union-United Nations partnership
has already made significant progress in several areas. In a little over a decade,
strong cooperation between the two organizations on planning and supporting peace
__________________
8

General Assembly resolution 60/268.
General Assembly resolution 64/288.
10
S/PRST/2007/7 and General Assembly resolution 61/296.
11
Security Council resolution 1809 (2008).
12
PSC/PR/COMM.(CCCVII), para. 18.
13
Assembly/AU/Dec.561(XXIV) and Assembly/AU/Dec.577 (XXV).
9

6/34

16-16788

A/71/410
S/2016/809

operations has become the norm, although there is still considerab le need for further
improvement. Most fundamentally, however, the partnership has strengthened the
collective security system on which the Charter of the United Nations is based. The
developing cooperative mechanisms, the capacity-building, and increasingly joint
forms of analysis have facilitated a unity of effort across the African Union and
United Nations, maximizing their comparative advantages, and in so doing
increasing the likelihood that aligned global and regional responses to crises will
also become the norm.
13. Stronger partnerships between regional organizations and the United Nations
improve the prospects for quick, coherent and more decisive collective action to
prevent and address conflicts. There is already recognition that joint early analy sis,
information sharing and common understanding between the African Union and the
United Nations have led to joint early actions, which have averted conflicts or
prevented them from escalating, including in Burkina Faso, the Comoros and
Madagascar. Where preventive efforts failed, the two organizations have effectively
worked together to deploy peace support operations, including in Burundi, the
Central African Republic, Mali, Somalia and Darfur. There have also been
discussions on how the two organizations could cooperate on South Sudan.
Although their distinct yet complementary doctrines towards peace operations raise
challenges of coherence, coordination and interoperability, they also offer
opportunities based on each organization’s comparative advantages.

III. Survey of support to African peace support operations
A.

Typology of African peace support operations
14. African Union peace support operations can broadly be categorized as African
Union-mandated operations and African Union-authorized operations (see table 1).
For the former, the African Union is responsible for resource mobilization,
accountability, oversight and management. The exception is UNAMID, a joint
United Nations-African Union mission that is governed on the basis of politic al
cooperation between both organizations but funded through United Nations assessed
contributions and managed under United Nations administrative regulations and
rules. For the latter, troop- and police-contributing countries bear the primary
responsibility for meeting operational requirements.
Table 1
Peace support operations authorized or mandated by the African Union
Mission

Country

Years active

African Union Mission in Burundi

Burundi

2003-2004

African Union Mission in the Sudan

Sudan

2004-2007

African Union Observer Mission in the Comoros

Comoros

2004

African Union-mandated missions

16-16788

7/34

A/71/410
S/2016/809

Mission

Country

Years active

African Union Mission for Support to the
Elections in the Comoros

Comoros

2006

African Union Mission in Somalia

Somalia

2007-present

African Union Electoral and Security Assistance
Mission in the Comoros

Comoros

2007-2008

African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur

Sudan

2008-present

African-led International Support Mission in
Mali

Mali

2012-2013

African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic

Central African Republic

2013-2014

Operation Democracy in the Comoros

Comoros

2008

Regional Coordination Initiative for the
Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army

Central African Republic,
Democratic Republic of the
Congo, South Sudan, Uganda

2011-present

Multinational Joint Task Force

Cameroon, Chad, Niger, Nigeria

2015-present

African Union-authorized missions

15. African Union peace support operations vary considerably, based on the scope
of their mandates and the permissiveness of the security environments in which they
are deployed. The subsequent categories are important for disaggregating the
benefits and challenges associated with external support in ea ch case. Five of the
missions were mandated to carry out enforcement tasks that went well beyond those
traditionally undertaken by United Nations peacekeeping operations and were
deployed in much less permissive security environments than most United Natio ns
missions.

8/34

16-16788

A/71/410
S/2016/809

Table 2
Mandates and operating context of peace support operations
Scope of mandate
Peacekeeping tasks

Counter-terrorism/counter-insurgency/offensive
combat operations

High threata

MISCA

AFISMA
Build capacity of Malian defence and security
forces, restoration of State authority and reducing
threat from terrorist organizations, stabilization,
human rights, protection of civilians, create
conditions for humanitarian assistance
MNJTF
Neutralize the Boko Haram terrorist group

AMIB
Low/medium threat

Permissiveness of operating environment

AMISOM
Conduct offensive operations against Al-Shabaab,
restoration of State authority, ensure security of
electoral process, secure key supply routes

AMIS
MIOC
AMISEC
MAES

RCI-LRA/AU-RTF
Build capacity of affected countries, stabilize
affected areas, create conditions for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance, capturing/neutralizing
LRA combatants
Operation Democracy
Restore the authority of the Comoros Government

UNAMID
Abbreviations: AU-RTF, African Union Regional Task Force; AFISMA, African -led International Support Mission in Mali; AMIB,
African Union Mission in Burundi; AMIS, African Union Mission in the Sudan; AMISEC, African Union Mission for Support
to the Elections in the Comoros; AMISOM, African Union Mission in Somalia; LRA, Lord ’s Resistance Army; MAES, African
Union Electoral and Security Assistance Mission in the Comoros; MIOC, African Union Observer Mission in the Comoros;
MISCA, African-led International Support Mission in the Central African Republic; MNJTF, Multinational Joint Task Force;
RCI-LRA, Regional Coordination Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord ’s Resistance Army; UNAMID, African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
a
A high-threat environment corresponds to situations with active fighting, high risk from mines/improvised explosive
devices/unexploded ordnance, targeted attack against international forces, etc.

16-16788

9/34

A/71/410
S/2016/809

B.

Recurrent capability gaps
16. Although the African Union has been willing to undertake more challenging
tasks and deploy in higher-risk environments compared with most United Nations
peacekeeping operations, the effectiveness of its peace support operations has been
undermined by several recurrent capability gaps. They include limited staffing,
deficiencies in equipment, inadequate logistics and financial constraints. The
African Union’s limited ability to finance its own operations has been a persistent
challenge. This has led to reliance on external sources of finance that lack
predictability and often come with caveats on how the funds can be spent. This, in
turn, reduces the African Union’s flexibility. As a result, the timing of transitions
has sometimes been dictated by resource and capability gaps in addition to political
imperatives, instead of progress in implementing mission mandates.
17. The African Union Commission’s Peace Support Operations Division, which is
responsible for the planning, deployment, management and liquidation of peace
support operations, currently has only 79 of the 207 staff proposed by a United
Nations study team in 2008, of which only 1 is on a regular contract. The rest are a
combination of staff on short-term contracts and seconded officers. Only two are
police and seven are civilian staff; the remainder are military staff. Limited
headquarters capacity reduces the African Union’s ability to provide and exercise
strategic direction over its missions. The regional planning elements that are
expected to support the African Union, especially during mission start-ups, are
likewise understaffed. There were also persistent challenges in identifying,
recruiting and deploying civilians in African missions, although those are being
addressed through recent changes in the recruitment process.
18. One of the most profound challenges faced by African Union peace support
operations remains the capacity gaps of some troop- and police-contributing
countries. The African Union has been more willing than the United Nations to
deploy forces to situations of ongoing high-intensity conflict, including in
non-permissive environments. However, their military and police contingents
sometimes do not deploy with the requisite training or the major equipment and
self-sustainment capabilities expected and required to deliver on their mandates.
19. The African Union’s limited access to strategic lift capabilities has also
hampered its ability to deploy peacekeepers in a timely manner. Although some
Member States are able to transport their troops into the theatre of operation, the
African Union has usually relied on external partners to fill the gap. In many cases,
missions also lack required mission-level assets, such as information and
communications systems or key enablers such as engineering, a viation, medical and
intelligence capabilities required for the type of high -tempo operations that the
African Union has increasingly undertaken. Without those, African missions lack
sufficient coordination, mobility and responsiveness to deliver on their mandates.
Sometimes, this has undermined the credibility of missions.
20. Particularly in the case of AMISOM, offensive operations have given rise to
challenges of command and control. In part, this stems from limited capacity in
multinational force headquarters, but such challenges do not arise from capability
gaps alone. Lack of unified command and control undermines the ability of force
commanders to utilize the forces at their disposal efficiently, since they do not have

10/34

16-16788

A/71/410
S/2016/809

the flexibility to employ the forces in a manner that allows for quick, decisive
actions that exploit the enemy’s vulnerabilities and prevent the escalation of crises,
provide deterrence and consolidate gains. Weak command and control also limits the
ability of force commanders to effectively ensure discipline and accountability for
violations of international humanitarian law and international human rights law.
This is of particular concern, as offensive operations involve greater risk of
violations of international human rights, humanitarian and refugee law.
21. The African Union has learned valuable lessons from its peace support
operations and has been developing its doctrines, policies and processes to improve
its capabilities in this area. To improve the efficiency of its peace supp ort operations
and in order to ensure smooth transitions to United Nations peacekeeping missions
when they occur, the African Union has developed various policies and standard
operating procedures for the civilian, police and military components of its mis sions
that are closely aligned with those of the United Nations. They are intended to
promote standardization, interoperability, professionalism and accountability at the
African Union Commission, as well as in its field missions. In addition, significant
efforts are under way to strengthen the administrative, procurement and financial
practices of the African Union and to align them with global best practices.
22. In order to enable peace support operations to function more effectively,
adjustments have been made to allow for faster recruitment processes to ensure that
the required personnel are recruited and deployed into missions in a timely manner.
In addition, the new African Standby Capacity roster (created in 2015) offers the
opportunity to identify, pre-screen and prepare civilians for deployment to missions
in a timely manner. With regard to the police component, the African Union has
embarked on a new process of pre-certifying formed police units to ensure that they
possess the requisite capabilities. There has also been an increase in the financial
contributions made by African Union member States to peace and security, which
have enabled them to pay for 53 per cent of the salaries of the staff of the Peace and
Security Department.

C.

Survey of support to peace support operations
African Union Mission in Burundi
23. The African Union Mission in Burundi (AMIB), the first African Union peace
support operation, was launched in April 2003 and was deployed for just under a
year before it was replaced by the United Nations Operation in Burundi (ONUB) on
1 June 2004. South Africa, the lead troop-contributing country, was able to sustain
its own deployment and shoulder the majority of the support requirements for
AMIB, although the other troop-contributing countries benefited from assistance
from outside partners to deploy. The European Union provided funding to cover the
operational costs of troops and provide allowances for military observers, while the
World Bank provided assistance to disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
efforts. Non-African Union partner countries also provided financial support. The
United Nations provided limited support to AMIB in the form of experts deployed
to assist in the development of concepts of operations and assist in the areas of
public information, headquarters administration and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration.

16-16788

11/34

A/71/410
S/2016/809

African Union Mission in the Sudan
24. The African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) was launched in May 2004 to
monitor the Humanitarian Ceasefire Agreement in Darfur. However, its focus soon
shifted to protecting civilians, supporting the delivery of humanitarian assistance
and facilitating the return of refugees and internally displaced persons. Many
shortfalls became evident early in the deployment of the mission, requiring
considerable external assistance to overcome them. To address mission -level
logistics shortfalls, partner countries engaged third -party logistics providers to build
and maintain camps, maintain AMIS vehicles and communications equipment,
supply water and rations, provide laundry services and rent fixed - and rotary-wing
aircraft. The European Union used its African Peace Facility to fund allowances for
military observers, stipends for troops, salaries for civilia n staff and rations and
fuel. The United Nations supported AMIS through an assistance cell established in
Addis Ababa, which facilitated the deployment of technical experts in the areas of
planning, logistics, communications and transport. The United Natio ns Mission in
the Sudan (UNMIS) supported AMIS in the development of military and police
concepts of operations. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) also
facilitated the training of 184 African Union officers in strategic and operational level planning and supported the establishment of the AMIS Joint Operations
Centre.
25. Significant assistance was also required to support the deployment of AMIS
contingents, many of which lacked the necessary equipment or self -sustainment.
Partner countries donated vehicles, armoured personnel carriers and
communications equipment to meet critical equipment shortfalls, and NATO, in its
first deployment in Africa, provided strategic airlift, transporting approximately
31,500 troops between June 2005 and December 2007.
26. By 2006, it was clear that AMIS was struggling to implement its mandate and
to protect civilians in Darfur owing to capacity constraints. On 15 May, shortly after
the signing of the Darfur Peace Agreement, the African Union Peace and Security
Council decided that concrete steps needed to be taken to transition AMIS to a
United Nations peacekeeping operation. Although the Government of the Sudan
accepted the need to enhance the capabilities on the ground, it did not accept the
deployment of a large multidimensional United Nations peacekeeping mission.
Ultimately, a compromise was reached in late 2006 whereby the United Nations
would sequentially deploy a “light support package” and a “heavy support package”
to support AMIS prior to the deployment of a follow-on mission, the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). The costs of the light and
heavy packages were covered through the UNMIS budget for the 2006/07 financial
period.
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
27. UNAMID, the first ever and only hybrid African Union -United Nations
operation, was established on 31 July 2007 and took over from AMIS on 1 January
2008. The United Nations took the leading operational role in its day-to-day
management. During the start-up of UNAMID, donors provided some support for its
initial deployment, mainly through the provision of equipment and training of

12/34

16-16788

A/71/410
S/2016/809

former AMIS contingents, coordinated through the Friends of UNAMID
mechanism.
28. The mission’s average annual requirements, which are met through United
Nations assessed contributions, amount to approximately $1.4 billion. The mandate
of UNAMID is derived from both the African Union Peace and Security Council
and the United Nations Security Council, and selection of the senior mission
leadership is done jointly by the Commission and the Secretariat, in compliance
with the guidance that the mission “should have a predominantly African character
and the troops should, as far as possible, be sourced from African countries”. 14 The
mandate of UNAMID has not changed significantly since the mission’s inception
owing in part to the consultative nature of the Hybrid Operation.
29. The Joint Support and Coordination Mechanism, based in Addis Ababa, was
created to assist with day-to-day working-level coordination with the African Union,
and is now co-located with the Peace and Security Department in support of the
joint operational and strategic oversight of UNAMID. In addition, the Tripartite
Mechanism was established at the onset of UNAMID to facilitate its deployment,
focused mainly on operational and support issues, including access restrictions,
issuance of visas, and customs clearance between the United Nations, the African
Union and the Government of the Sudan. The Mechanism has met for technical level meetings in Khartoum and strategic-level meetings attended by senior officials
in Khartoum, Addis Ababa and New York. Since January 2016, the agenda of the
Tripartite Mechanism has also included the mission’s exit strategy.
African Union Mission in Somalia
30. The Peace and Security Council of the African Union mandated the
deployment of AMISOM on 19 January 2007. Its mandate was subsequently
endorsed by the United Nations Security Council in its resolution 1744 (2007). A
small United Nations planning team was established in Addis Ababa, initially with
10 planners, to support the African Union Commission. Under its most recent
mandate, AMISOM is responsible for a number of combat-related tasks including
conducting offensive operations against Al-Shabaab and securing key supply routes.
31. AMISOM has benefited from an array of support provided by the United
Nations, ranging from technical assistance to a logistical support package. Since
2013, the United Nations Security Council has requested the Secretary -General to
continue to provide technical, management and expert advice to the African Union
in the planning and deployment of AMISOM through UNOAU, including on the
implementation of the AMISOM strategic concept and the AMISOM concept of
operations. UNSOA was established in 2009 to deliver a logistical support package
to AMISOM. UNSOA support was originally limited to the provisio n of equipment
and services such as accommodation, rations, water, fuel, armoured vehicles,
helicopters, vehicle maintenance, communications, some enhancement of key
logistics facilities, medical treatment and evacuation services. As the mandate of
AMISOM expanded, so did the support provided through UNSOA. Starting in 2010,
it also provided public information assistance and, in 2011, catering equipment and
training, sanitation and cleaning materials, furniture and stationery and counter__________________
14

16-16788

Security Council resolution 1769 (2007), seventh preambular paragraph.

13/34

A/71/410
S/2016/809

improvised explosive device and explosive ordnance disposal activities. Initially,
UNSOA support specifically excluded the provision of direct payments to the
African Union or AMISOM troop-contributing countries, but in 2012, UNSOA
support was expanded to include reimbursement for contingent-owned equipment,
with some caveats. 15 Following a strategic review in 2015, UNSOA was replaced by
the United Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS) and its support to
AMISOM expanded to include maintenance of equipment and provision of selfsustainment reimbursement to troop- and police-contributing countries. In addition,
the United Nations has provided human rights training and technical assistance to
AMISOM and its contingents from the earliest days of the mission.
32. As the responsibilities of the United Nations in support of AMISOM
increased, so did the financial requirements. Partners provided considerable
amounts of assistance to AMISOM, either bilaterally or through the United Nations
trust fund established pursuant to resolution 1863 (2009). The European Union
provided substantial financial support through its African Peace Facility, primarily
to pay for troop and police allowances, salaries for civilian staff and the operational
costs of AMISOM offices in Nairobi and Mogadishu. Numerous donors provided
funds to the AMISOM trust fund, although in the early days of the mission most of
the funds were earmarked for non-lethal assistance. Before the deployment of
UNSOA, logistical support was provided by a third-party provider contracted by a
partner country. To meet equipment gaps in AMISOM contingents, a number of
partner countries have donated or lent equipment, whether to AMISOM or to
individual troop-contributing countries. Partners also provided predeployment
training to some AMISOM contingents, and one, the United States of America,
implemented a support programme that provided counter -terrorism training and
personal protective equipment to enhance the ability of AMISOM troops to fight AlShabaab. In addition, advisers have been provided by the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States to AMISOM in such areas as
intelligence, communications and infrastructure since 2010 and 2011, respectively.
33. A senior leadership coordination forum has been established to ensure that
senior leaders in the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and
AMISOM agree on common strategic priorities, which can be translat ed into
coordinated operational-level planning, supported by UNSOS. This is intended to
allow the prioritization of the support provided by UNSOS to AMISOM and
UNSOM, which will be measured against quantifiable performance indicators, as
well as wider coordination between AMISOM and UNSOM in their respective
activities.
African-led International Support Mission in Mali
34. When the African Union deployed the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali (AFISMA) in Mali in 2013, it requested a logistical support
package along the lines of UNSOA, a request that was rejected by the Security
Council. The Council, however, in its resolution 2085 (2012), requested the
Secretary-General to establish a trust fund to support AFISMA. That reso lution also
established the United Nations Office in Mali (UNOM) to provide, inter alia ,
__________________
15

14/34

Security Council resolution 2036 (2012).

16-16788

A/71/410
S/2016/809

“support to the planning, deployment and operations of AFISMA ”. A small planning
element was deployed as part of UNOM. UNOAU and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) provided planning
support to AFISMA within the framework of the Mali Integrated Task Force.
OHCHR also provided technical assistance and training. Monies from the trust fund
were intended to be utilized to provide critical equipment to AFISMA troops and
police, although long procurement lead times resulted in the arrival of most of the
equipment after AFISMA had already transitioned to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). The trust
fund was also used to implement a humanitarian mine action project in coordination
with AFISMA.
35. During the deployment of AFISMA, several countries provided bilateral
assistance, either to AFISMA or to its troop-contributing countries. Several partners
provided planning officers to AFISMA headquarters and liaison officers to AFISMA
units. Support was also provided for the development of the harmonized joint
concept of operations. Partner countries helped to address critical gaps in strategi c
lift, equipment and self-sustainment capabilities among AFISMA troop-contributing
countries. The French Operation Serval (January 2013-July 2014) was critical not
only in supporting AFISMA contingents in northern Mali but also in providing a
security umbrella that facilitated the delivery of international assistance. In general,
bilateral partners were more interested and able to provide “one-off” assistance, as
opposed to taking on ongoing support commitments.
36. AFISMA benefited from considerable external financial assistance. The
European Union used its African Peace Facility to provide funds for troop
allowances and to strengthen the capacity of the Economic Community of West
African States. Notably, some African countries pledged $50 million to suppo rt both
AFISMA and the Malian national security forces, although an estimated $10 million
was received by the time AFISMA transitioned into MINUSMA in July 2013.
Partners from outside Africa also provided funds to the AFISMA trust fund.
African-led International Support Mission in the Central African Republic
37. The African-led International Support Mission in the Central African Republic
(MISCA) was established in October 2013 and had similar requirements as
AFISMA. The United Nations, through UNOAU, provided technical expertise for
the pre-planning assessment missions to the Central African Republic and the
strategic-level planning for MISCA. The United Nations also participated in African
Union-led assessment missions starting in April 2013 and joint transition planning
missions from February 2014. Following the presentation to the Security Council of
detailed options for international support to MISCA on 15 November 2013, the
United Nations deployed a support team to provide technical assistance to the
Mission. After the Council authorized the deployment of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) in April 2014, the support team served as the nucleus of the transition
team. Much of the United Nations support was delivered through the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic, which was already
on the ground and was subsumed into MINUSCA. The United Nations also helped
to strengthen the capacity of MISCA to effectively fulfil its protection of civilians

16-16788

15/34

A/71/410
S/2016/809

mandate by helping to set up information-sharing mechanisms, shaping the MISCA
operational response to identified protection issues and occasionally undertaking
joint protection actions.
38. A trust fund was established in December 2013, and the funds received were
used primarily for communications and information technology requirements,
although some were also used to procure catering and kitchen equipment. Much of
the equipment came from the United Nations strategic deployment stocks in the
United Nations Global Service Centre in Brindisi, Italy, although some of the
equipment did not arrive until after MINUSCA had deployed.
39. Partners deployed military and civilian experts to support MISCA, pri marily in
the areas of command and control, mission administration and information and
communications technology. The MISCA strategic concept was developed jointly by
the African Union and the Economic Community of Central African States with
support from experts provided by other partners. The European Union provided
funds for troop and police allowances, salaries for civilian personnel and
operational costs such as facilities and infrastructure, transport and medical services
through its African Peace Facility. Considerable assistance was required from
various partners to meet critical equipment and self-sustainment capability shortfalls
among MISCA troop-contributing countries. The French Operation Sangaris
provided medical assistance, including access to a level II field hospital and medical
evacuation support, and tactical airlift.
40. During the transition period but before the rehatting and transfer of authority
from MISCA to MINUSCA in September 2014, MINUSCA provided training to
MISCA personnel in the areas of human rights, child protection, sexual and gender based violence, safe disposal of unexploded ordnance, and weapons and
ammunition management. It also trained 30 new staff officers deployed to MISCA
headquarters. In parallel, African Union human rights observers who were deployed
in the Central African Republic received United Nations training on human rights
standards and methodologies, as well as technical support for their monitoring and
reporting activities.
Regional Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord’s
Resistance Army
41. The United Nations also provides support to the Regional Cooperation
Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army established in late
2011, which includes the African Union Regional Task Force, a multinational
military force mandated to neutralize the threat posed by the Lord ’s Resistance
Army (LRA) in the affected areas. While the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa is mandated to coordinate the implementation of the re gional strategy
to address the threat and impact of LRA, UNOAU provided support in such areas as
planning and public information. Other United Nations missions in the region also
provide assistance, including support to the establishment of the Initiative ’s joint
operations centre, information sharing and providing logistical support within their
existing mandates and resources. The Department of Political Affairs of the United
Nations Secretariat provided financial support for meetings of the Initiative ’s Joint
Coordination Mechanism.

16/34

16-16788

A/71/410
S/2016/809

42. The United States supports the Initiative through the contribution of special
forces and military advisers and in such areas as logistics, intelligence, training,
equipment and tactical airlift. It also provides bilateral assistance to United Nations
missions in the region to strengthen efforts in LRA -affected areas. The European
Union provides funds for the Joint Coordination Mechanism secretariat, the
organization of meetings and the payment of staff allowances.
Multinational Joint Task Force
43. The Multinational Joint Task Force was established by members of the Lake
Chad Basin Commission and Benin in 2015 and mandated to, inter alia, neutralize
Boko Haram. The United Nations Secretariat facilitated access by the A frican Union
Commission to vendors on the same terms and conditions available to existing
United Nations systems contracts for the acquisition of vehicles, communications
equipment, personal protective equipment and medical equipment. UNOAU
provides technical support through expertise to the African Union in its efforts to
fully operationalize the headquarters of the Task Force. At the request of the African
Union, OHCHR temporarily deployed a human rights adviser to support the African
Union’s Task Force start-up team.
44. To date, most of the costs associated with the deployment of Task Force troops
have been borne by its troop-contributing countries. Additional funds are being
provided by the European Union, through its African Peace Facility, to support the
Task Force strategic and sector headquarters, including payment for costs related to
stipends for staff officers, command and control systems, communications,
intelligence and medical support. Other partners provide bilateral assistance through
training, equipment and logistical support to the Task Force troop -contributing
countries; assign advisers to the Task Force cooperation and liaison cell; as well as
support the operation through information sharing. The United States also provided
strategic lift for communications equipment transferred to the Task Force after the
closure of MISCA.
African Union missions in the Comoros
45. The four African Union missions in the Comoros, namely the African Union
Observer Mission in the Comoros (MIOC, 2004), African Union Mission for
Support to the Elections in the Comoros (AMISEC, 2006), African Union Electoral
and Security Assistance Mission in the Comoros (MAES, 2007 -2008) and Operation
Democracy (2008), are notable in that no support was requested of or requ ired from
the United Nations. Many of the troop-contributing countries for each of those
missions, most notably South Africa, which was the main contributor to AMISEC
and MAES, bore most of the costs of their own deployments or were supported by
other African countries. For example, Libya supported the deployment of Sudanese
troops to Operation Democracy. The European Union provided funds to support the
deployment of troops by meeting costs related to allowances, rations, medical
support and insurance for MAES. External partners also provided support to
Operation Democracy in the form of logistical support and sealift to the Tanzanian
contingent.

16-16788

17/34

A/71/410
S/2016/809

D.

Assessment of different types of support provided
Technical assistance
46. Planning capacity for African Union peace support operations, both at the
headquarters level and in the field, has routinely required external support.
Technical assistance from both the United Nations and other partners, particularly in
the form of planning support, was provided to the African Union in the planning for
AMIS through the Integrated Task Force on Darfur. Partners provided technical
expertise for mission planning as part of the African Union ’s integrated task forces
for most of the subsequent African peace support operations. That support usually
helped to develop plans and concepts of operations and improve mission
administration and command and control systems.
47. Technical assistance, however, was not without its own challenges. Frequently,
external planners provided by the United Nations and other bilateral partners
significantly outnumbered African Union planners, undermining African ownership
of planning processes. Nor were external planners always well sighted on the
problems facing missions. At times, competing demands also undermined the
effectiveness of United Nations technical support. In the Central African Republic,
the same team that assisted MISCA also later formed the core of the MINUSCA
planning team. While this was an efficient means of using limited r esources, it
nevertheless diluted the team’s ability to focus on meeting African Union
requirements effectively during the transition phase. Initially, joint assessment and
planning processes in UNAMID were found to be time -consuming exercises that
undermined the rapid deployment of the Mission. However, this improved in
subsequent missions. The lessons learned exercise following the Central African
Republic and Mali transitions emphasized the importance of early engagement by
the two organizations in joint assessments and planning. Joint assessment teams
have also been regularly used in Somalia for the planning and development of
concepts of operations.
48. Technical expertise for planning, deployment and operationalization of
protection mandates has required support from the United Nations at both the
headquarters and field levels. To date, however, overall support to the African Union
in the area of human rights and humanitarian protection has been somewhat ad hoc
and limited, despite joint identification of existing gaps. In many cases, support was
provided sporadically and late and integrated only as an afterthought, as opposed to
being built into the early stages of the planning and deployment of African Union
operations. At times, that lack of coordination created tension due to differing
expectations, which could have been avoided had a joint planning and preventive
approach been adopted. In many cases, technical support on human rights was
provided thanks to extrabudgetary contributions or the use of e xisting resources.
That approach has proved unsustainable. It has allowed for neither predictable
support in those areas nor the development of an adequate joint strategy to
systematically address human rights-related gaps in the African Union and its peace
support operations.

18/34

16-16788

A/71/410
S/2016/809

United Nations-provided support packages
49. A United Nations “support package” is a broad term used to describe the
mandated deployment of a United Nations presence on the ground to provide a
range of United Nations planning and mission support capabilities to fill critical
gaps in an African Union peace support operation. The term was originally used in
the AMIS context for the light and heavy support packages and subsequently in the
context of support provided to AMISOM by UNSOA and UNSOS. Support
packages, primarily in the form of equipment, were also provided to AFISMA and
MISCA through trust funds. Support packages have proved to be a flexible
framework through which different types of mission support services are delivered.
Historically, United Nations peacekeeping operations have served as the benchmark
against which such services are delivered. Support packages also facilitate the
application of United Nations accountability and reporting mechanisms so that the
African Union Commission has needed to have only minimal capacity to manage
those tasks. Importantly, support packages have evolved significantly over time,
incorporating a high level of innovation in uniquely non-permissive environments.
The Security Council has recognized the positive contributions of UNSOA to
supporting the gains made by AMISOM and has underscored that such contributions
reflect a deepened partnership between the United Nations, the African Union and
Member States.
50. However, support packages often struggle to meet requirements significantly
different from those of most United Nations peacekeeping mi ssions. In such cases,
the assumptions underpinning mission support to United Nations peacekeeping
operations do not reflect the requirements of some African Union missions. In
situations where missions are engaged in combat operations, security risks are
higher and equipment suffers much greater wear and tear than in more static
peacekeeping operations. The consumption rate by such missions of consumables,
ranging from ammunition to medical supplies, is also significantly higher than in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. In non-permissive operating environments,
third-party logistics support providers are often able to deliver flexible and
responsive solutions. In fact, the United Nations also relies heavily on third -party
contracted logistics providers in Somalia to deliver support to AMISOM, as the
security environment precludes the deployment of United Nations civilian staff
close to the front line.
51. Missions undertaking kinetic operations, particularly in non -permissive
environments, also generally suffer much higher casualties than most peacekeeping
missions. In Somalia, for example, the casualties sustained by AMISOM have on
several occasions overwhelmed not only the capacity of the Mission and UNSOA
but also many of the intensive care units throughout the region. Currently, the
United Nations also faces related challenges in Mali, where it struggles to ensure
timely medical evacuations, suggesting that current support models are insufficient
to meet the requirements of even its own peacekeeping operations.
Hybrid model
52. The hybrid model, as applied in the Darfur context, takes advantage of the
respective roles of the African Union and the United Nations with respect to the
Sudan. The African Union spearheads the political process in supp ort of peace in

16-16788

19/34

A/71/410
S/2016/809

Darfur and the Two Areas, through the engagement of the African Union High -level
Implementation Panel on the Sudan and South Sudan and the Peace and Security
Council. The United Nations supports the operations of UNAMID, which is focused
on the protection of civilians, mitigation of intercommunal violence, and dialogue
and reconciliation on the ground. Notwithstanding challenges related to the
management and oversight of the Mission by two organizations, the model has
brought together the resources of both entities in response to the significant
obstacles that remain in Darfur, including continued fighting and violence, lack of
freedom of movement, and other impediments.
Partner-provided logistical support
53. For a number of African Union peace support operations, logistical support
was provided by partners, either directly by their military forces or by companies
contracted by them. This included strategic lift to contingents, logistics support,
medical support and the contracting of third-party logistics providers for AMIS and
AMISOM. In many cases, such support was able to capitalize on existing
arrangements established by partners to support their own military activities in
Africa, therefore allowing them to respond rapidly to requirements from African
Union missions.
54. In general, partners were more willing to directly provide one -off support,
such as strategic lift and equipment procurement for military and police contingents.
For ongoing requirements, partners preferred to contract third-party companies. The
logistical support provided by those companies has proved to be very flexible and
responsive; in AMIS, for example, the contractor in question was originally
responsible only for handling camp construction and management for AMIS, but
when the need arose it was able to very quickly expand the range of services
provided to include medical support and the rental and operation of fixed -wing
aircraft for the mission.
Training and equipment support
55. A common feature of all African Union peace support operations is the
capability gaps within their uniformed components. Nearly every African Union
operation has suffered from a shortage of enablers such as engineers, medical and
military aviation units and intelligence capabilities. More fundamentally, the troops
deployed were often poorly trained and ill equipped. A joint inspection of AMIS
conducted in September 2007 found that its units lacked the expected equipment
and were reliant on donor-contracted support. Such shortfalls persisted under
UNAMID. Similarly, most MISCA and AFISMA military and police contingents did
not meet basic equipment standards, and despite the granting of grace periods of six
and four months, respectively, most units in both the Central African Republi c and
Mali still had equipment, operational and self-sustainment capabilities below the
minimum essential requirements long after they were rehatted. Some AMISOM
contingents also suffered from similar problems. In both UNAMID and AFISMA,
many of the troops deployed did not have the expertise or equipment required to
operate in the desert environments that formed the majority of their areas of
responsibility.

20/34

16-16788

A/71/410
S/2016/809

56. Efforts to enhance the capabilities of units once they are already deployed in a
mission area have been extremely labour- and resource-intensive for mission
support components. Their effectiveness in ensuring that units are actually able to
undertake and sustain the tasks expected of them has been limited. Partners spend a
considerable amount of money to provide equipment to help to address shortfalls.
However, the donation of equipment often brings beneficiary units up to equipment
standards only on paper. In the Central African Republic, Mali and Darfur,
contingents were often unfamiliar with how to operate, let alone maintain and
repair, donated equipment.
57. Indeed, many of the equipment and training shortfalls faced by some African
troop-contributing countries are recurrent in nature and cannot be effectively
remedied once a unit has deployed to the mission area. Training provided by troopand police-contributing countries is often tailored to national requirements and does
not encompass the full spectrum of skills required in contemporary peace support
operations. However, some peacekeeping training centres in Africa have signed
memorandums of understanding with the African Union to support it in improving
the training of troops and individuals deploying to peace support operations. Some
bilateral partners also provide predeployment training to African units, although
there is often a lack of visibility as to whether the units trained or equipment
donated are subsequently deployed to peace operations. Some partners recognize
those shortcomings and currently focus on developing institutional capac ity in such
areas as logistics. The United Nations has also provided training to troops, including
those slated to be rehatted into United Nations peacekeeping operations. In the
Central African Republic, for example, the United Nations provided training i n such
areas as human rights, child protection and sexual and gender -based violence,
although it was of limited effectiveness.
Financing
58. The following mechanisms have been used in the past to finance African
Union peace support operations: (a) African Union assessed contributions; (b) the
bearing of costs by African Union troop- and police-contributing countries;
(c) voluntary contributions; (d) support packages financed through United Nations
assessed contributions; and (e) a combination of the above.
59. To date, however, African Union peace support operations have relied heavily
on voluntary contributions. Voluntary contributions have included direct bilateral
contributions, such as the extensive support provided by the European Union
through its African Peace Facility, as well as through contributions provided to trust
funds. While donor financing through trust funds may not always be predictable or
sustainable and has not been able to cover all requirements of peace support
operations in the past, trust funds have been a flexible means of meeting targeted
requirements, particularly when used to supplement other types of support. Many of
the delays experienced in the past with providing support through United Nations
trust funds have less to do with the management of the trust fund and more with the
lengthy United Nations procurement lead times. Donor coordination can also be
challenging, and effective use of trust funds requires a strong donor coordination
capacity.

16-16788

21/34

A/71/410
S/2016/809

60. Reliance on externally provided funding undermines ownership by the African
Union and poses risks to missions, especially where mission design might be
constrained by financial considerations. Most fundamentally, where missions are
entirely reliant on external funding, the withdrawal of that funding can cripple them.
In the case of AMISOM, where the European Union provides assistance in funding
troop stipends, the African Union Commission has reported that delays in the
dispersal of funds, as well as the reallocation of funds to support other activities,
have affected the morale of AMISOM troops. In a number of cases, funds provided
to trust funds managed by the United Nations were not used to address priority areas
identified by the African Union. In many cases, this was due to ea rmarks and
caveats applied by partners, many of which reflected the political priorities of
partners, while others stemmed from the need to meet national fiduciary controls.
Some of the issues related to expectations management and prioritization could be
addressed if funds were to be provided to African Union -managed trust funds
instead of United Nations-managed trust funds, as this would give the African
Union greater control over the funds and visibility of any caveats imposed. To do
so, however, the African Union would need to improve its financial governance
structures and procurement systems.

IV. Related considerations
A.

Mandates and doctrine
61. African Union and United Nations missions have sometimes carried out
different types of mandated tasks. Specifically, the African Union has proved
willing to engage in counter-insurgency and counter-terrorism operations that the
United Nations remains reluctant to undertake as part of its peacekeeping
operations. Those differences have provided opportunities to share burdens and
develop pragmatic responses to crises based on each organization ’s comparative
advantages.
Primacy of politics
62. It is important to note that both organizations recognize what the High -level
Panel on Peace Operations called the “primacy of politics”: that it is political
solutions that end conflicts and not simply the deployment of more peacekeepers
(A/70/95-S/2015/446, para. 43). Consequently, peace operations are effective when
they are part of a clear and viable political strategy to resolve the crisis in question.
It also means that support for African Union operations requires a frank dialogue
between the two organizations, that is, the Secretariat, the Commission and the
respective memberships, on the nature of the conflict, an integrated political
response and the role of the peace operation. These are key aspects of the draft Joint
Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security between the two
organizations, which is in the process of being developed. The political leadership
of the peace process may vary on a case-by-case basis, based on the comparative
advantages of the stakeholders, but evolving arrangements for supporting African
Union missions present an opportunity to strengthen political coordination and
coherence, including more predictable and systematic engagement between the
United Nations Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council.

22/34

16-16788

A/71/410
S/2016/809

Comparing African Union and United Nations doctrines
63. The African Union and the United Nations have both taken steps to develop
relevant peace operations doctrine. However, recent Security Council mandates
have resulted in ambiguity and confusion as to the meaning of key concepts, such a s
impartiality and stabilization, and have generated debates over whether United
Nations peacekeepers should undertake counter-terrorism activities and how they
can counter asymmetric threats.
64. The African Union draft doctrine on peace support operations was developed
around the six scenarios envisaged for the African Standby Force, which range from
military advice to a political mission, and from small observer deployments to
traditional and multidimensional peacekeeping missions, robust peacekeeping an d
military intervention to stop atrocity crimes. Scenarios 1 to 5 involve missions that
largely conform to the basic principles of United Nations peacekeeping, whereas
scenario 6 involves military intervention to stop atrocity crimes. While the doctrine
defines African peace support operations as distinct from fighting war, in practice,
African Union missions in Mali and Somalia have explicitly designated enemy
groups. So too have the Regional Coordination Initiative for the Elimination of the
Lord’s Resistance Army and the Multinational Joint Task Force. Those operations
fall outside the current scenarios but are in accordance with the Constitutive Act of
the African Union and other normative and legal frameworks.
Table 3
Conflict and mission scenarios of the African Standby Force
Scenario

Description

1

African Union/regional military advice to a political mission

2

African Union/regional observer mission co-deployed with United Nations
mission

3

Stand-alone African Union/regional observer mission

4

African Union/regional peacekeeping force for Chapter VI and preventative
deployment missions

5

African Union peacekeeping force for complex multidimensional
peacekeeping mission

6

African Union intervention (e.g. genocide situations where international
community does not act promptly)

65. In contrast, the 2008 “capstone doctrine” states, and United Nations Member
States have repeatedly reaffirmed, that United Nations peacekeeping is based on
three basic interrelated and mutually reinforcing principles: consent of the main
parties to the conflict, including the host country Government; impartial
implementation of mandates without favour or prejudice to any party; and non -use
of force except in self-defence and defence of the mandate. United Nations

16-16788

23/34

A/71/410
S/2016/809

peacekeeping operations have for the most part deployed after a ceasefire or
political agreement is established to assist in its implementation.
66. However, several recent United Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa
have stretched those basic principles. Several United Nations missions have
engaged in offensive military operations, most notably the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 16
although the United Nations Security Council has emphasized the exceptional
nature of such practices. In addition, the fact that United Nations peacekeepers have
been mandated, in certain cases, to support government forces and to facilitate the
extension of State authority in contested regions has meant that the Organization has
moved beyond its traditional approach on impartiality. Moreover, the tr aditional
practice of excluding troop- and police-contributing countries from neighbouring
countries with potential interests in the conflict has been eroded. Such examples
suggest that the mandating practices of the Council are no longer fully aligned wit h
the capstone doctrine. As the High-level Panel on Peace Operations noted, while the
basic principles of United Nations peacekeeping remain important for operations
engaged in observing ceasefires and implementing peace agreements, they “should
never be used as an excuse for failure to protect civilians or defend the mission
proactively” (A/70/95-S/2015/446, para. 125).
Operational and legal considerations for supporting combat operations
67. Where the United Nations has provided various types of support to African
missions undertaking combat operations, new considerations have arisen. There has
been very little practice, and doctrinal issues are not fully resolved. It is possible
that operations providing certain types of support to such operations could result in
the United Nations peacekeeping operation being considered a party to an armed
conflict, with possible consequences for the legal status of the operation and its
members.
68. In accordance with the United Nations human rights due diligence policy on
United Nations support to non-United Nations security forces (A/67/775S/2013/110, annex), United Nations support cannot be provided where there are
substantial grounds for believing that there is a real risk of the recipient committing
grave violations of international humanitarian, human rights or refugee law and
where the relevant authorities fail to take the necessary corrective or mitigating
measures. Given the difficulty of appropriately investigating and prosecuting
perpetrators of grave violations of international humanitarian, human rights or
refugee law in combat operations, significant investment should be made in
measures and mechanisms to prevent such violations.
69. In addition, existing United Nations administrative frameworks struggle to
meet the requirements of current United Nations peacekeeping missions. For the
United Nations to effectively support African Union peace support operations,
especially those engaged in peace enforcement or military counter -terrorism
activities, significant changes to its existing administrative processes, policies and
procedures are required. Moreover, supporting combat operations undertaken by
multinational regional forces authorized by the African Union, such as the Regional
__________________
16

24/34

See Security Council resolution 2098 (2013), para. 12 (b).

16-16788

A/71/410
S/2016/809

Coordination Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord ’s Resistance Army and the
Multinational Joint Task Force, may give rise to further challenges. In such
missions, States can simultaneously be troop-contributing countries and host States.
Supporting such regional operations would entail helping national security forces
defeat designated enemies on their home territory, a clear break from some of the
fundamental assumptions that underpin United Nations mission support. It would
also break new ground if those regional forces operated without a unified system of
command and control exercised from a designated multinational force headquarters.
This would also raise a number of significant challenges to the effective
implementation of the human rights due diligence policy.
70. Finally, where offensive military operations are necessary, debate continues
over whether they are best conducted within or alongside an existing United Nations
peacekeeping operation. To date, none of the peace support operations mandated or
authorized by the African Union have been deployed alongside a United Nations
peacekeeping operation except during brief transition periods, but there have been
cases where African forces have deployed alongside a United Nations special
political mission. The idea of deploying parallel United Nations and African
regional forces has been discussed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (2013),
Mali (2015) and South Sudan (2014 and 2016). So far, proposals for parallel forces
have either stalled or resulted in the additional personnel being integrated into the
command and control structure of the existing United Nations peacekeeping
operations, although there may be both advantages and disadvan tages to deploying
parallel operations in the same operational theatre.

B.

Safety and security
71. Safety and security considerations related to the provision of support are
particularly relevant, since the African Union regularly requests United Nations
assistance for peace support operations deployed in non -permissive environments.
In two recent examples, the Central African Republic and Mali, the number of
hostile acts against United Nations peacekeepers immediately increased following
the transfer of authority from African Union peace support operations to United
Nations peacekeeping missions. Two factors that contributed to that spike were the
inherent safety and security challenges in those missions and the lack of sufficient
security infrastructure in place prior to the transfer of authority.
72. Safety and security are critical considerations for any organization, both for
supporting the effective execution of mandates and in fulfilling its duty of care to its
personnel. After the bombing of the Canal Hotel in Baghdad in August 2003, which
resulted in the deaths of 22 United Nations personnel, the United Nations took steps
to enhance its policies and procedures related to safety and security. The United
Nations security management system, led by the Department of Safety and Security
of the Secretariat and coordinated through the Inter -Agency Security Management
Network, is intended to protect personnel while enabling operations. The African
Union is not covered under the system and does not have an analogous system that
defines how it addresses the safety and security of its civilian staff. However, with
the support of UNOAU, the African Union started undertaking security assessments
of its office and accommodation facilities as part of its miss ion start-up process in

16-16788

25/34

A/71/410
S/2016/809

the Central African Republic and Mali; established basic operating security
standards, which are similar to the minimum operating security standards used by
the United Nations; and is currently developing a security plan for AMISOM.
UNOAU is currently facilitating discussions on a memorandum of understanding
between the African Union and the Department on modalities for cooperation
between the two entities in the areas of safety and security.
73. Two main factors affect the safety and security of United Nations personnel
deployed in support of or alongside African Union peace support operations: the
first, and more intuitive, is the general permissiveness of the operating environment.
Areas where there is active fighting, asymmetric threats against the United Nations
or a high level of criminality are inherently more dangerous for personnel. The
second is the range of mandated tasks undertaken by a mission. Where a peace
support operation is mandated to perform tasks that fall outside the basic principles
underpinning United Nations peacekeeping missions, the safety and security of both
the operation and any United Nations personnel supporting it may be affected.
74. The United Nations has measures in place to mitigate risks to allow it to “stay
and deliver”. Through its programme criticality framework, it has a decision -making
tool for determining the acceptable level of risk in undertaking different activities. A
number of measures can be undertaken to mitigate some of the security ris ks of
United Nations personnel deployed in support of African Union peace support
operations. The first is ensuring that mission planning, including for mission
support, is underpinned by a comprehensive understanding of the security situation.
Similarly, a robust information collection and analysis capacity is required within
missions to help them to monitor and counter threats to mission personnel and
maintain situational awareness. The absence of a strong capability along those lines
in AMIS and AMISOM, for example, reduced the ability of the missions to protect
themselves and civilians. Equally important is the need to support the African Union
in developing its own security management systems in line with global best
practices to ensure that the safety and security risks to both African Union and
United Nations personnel deployed in support of African Union missions are
reduced.
75. Sufficient protection capabilities are also required. In a United Nations
peacekeeping mission, most of the requirements for physical security are met by the
military and police components of the mission. However, United Nations civilian
personnel deployed in support of or alongside an African Union peace support
operation may be unlikely to have their own force protection cap acity and may have
to rely on the African Union for protection. For their part, African Union troops may
not always be sufficient to protect United Nations personnel in more challenging
security situations. In Somalia, for example, UNSOA and UNSOM relied o n private
security inside the AMISOM protected area in Mogadishu to provide an additional
layer of protection for its personnel prior to the deployment of a United Nations
guard unit to UNSOM in 2014. Ultimately, measures such as private security
companies are not a panacea for the safety and security challenges faced by the
United Nations in supporting African Union peace support operations.
76. Mitigation measures may facilitate the deployment of a United Nations
civilian presence in an inherently non-permissive environment where security
threats are general and not directly aimed at the United Nations. However, recent

26/34

16-16788

A/71/410
S/2016/809

experience in Somalia and elsewhere demonstrates that there are practical limits to
the support that a United Nations presence can provide when the United Nations
itself is targeted owing to its support for a weak host Government or a regional
mission with a counter-insurgency or counter-terrorism mandate.

C.

Accountability
77. As part of its call for the United Nations to forge a visio n for a stronger global
and regional partnership for peace and security, the High -level Panel on Peace
Operations envisioned a framework for partnership that would include “modalities
for capacity enhancement and burden-sharing, as well as mechanisms for
monitoring and accountability” (A/70/95-S/2015/446, para. 61 (c)). For both the
African Union and the United Nations, the trust and buy-in of member States and
partners depends on accountability mechanisms that ensure compliance with
governing legal norms and principles and the proper use of resources towards the
implementation of the mandate. Whereas those mechanisms have been developed in
the United Nations over multiple decades, the African Union has not yet estab lished
systematic accountability mechanisms for its peace support operations, beyond
financial management issues.
78. In the area of finance and administration, United Nations peacekeeping
operations are governed by extremely detailed financial and staffi ng regulations and
rules (ST/SGB/2013/4 and ST/SGB/2016/1, respectively). Moreover, the budgetary
committees of the General Assembly play a key role in shaping the mission, closely
scrutinizing proposed budgets and holding missions to account for their
implementation. Historically, African Union rules have been less stringent and the
level of scrutiny significantly lower. However, the African Union has recently t aken
steps to improve accountability and transparency through revisions to its staffing
and financial rules, including through the introduction of programme audits and
budget performance reports. The European Union and the World Bank are currently
supporting those efforts to bring African Union financial and procurement systems
up to international standards.
79. In the area of operational readiness, the United Nations has mechanisms for
holding troop- and police-contributing countries to account for the performance of
contingents, including an operational readiness assurance framework and the
contingent-owned equipment and personnel reimbursement systems. The latter
currently includes elements related to on-the-ground performance and capability. By
contrast, standardization of troop preparation and training or “fit for purpose”
criteria for equipment and enablers have yet to be designed in the African Union.
80. In the area of command and control, United Nations policy outlines the roles
of the Security Council, Secretariat departments and the civilian and military
leadership in theatre, at the strategic, operational and tactical levels, including the
control of military enabling units, responsibility for safety and security and
reporting. However, the United Nations has also experienced many challenges in
ensuring compliance with command and control arrangements or preventing troop contributing countries from placing caveats on their operations. Moreover, it is no
surprise that troop-contributing countries are particularly reluctant to relinquish

16-16788

27/34

A/71/410
S/2016/809

operational control over their contingents in the non -permissive environments in
which the African Union often deploys.
81. In the area of international human rights and humanitarian law, the African
Union, like the United Nations, is obliged to comply with international human rights
and humanitarian standards, including in relation to sexual exploitation and abuse
and other serious international crimes. Where violations of international human
rights or humanitarian law amount to crimes under domestic or international law,
the individual criminal responsibility of the alleged perpetrators must be
investigated and established, including on the basis of command or superior
responsibility. Impunity cannot be tolerated. As in the case of United Nations peace
operations, there has been a general lack of accountability for serious crimes and
violations of international human rights and humanitarian law committed by
peacekeepers in African Union operations. The United Nations is currently
developing policies and mechanisms and cooperating with national and international
judicial bodies to improve accountability in its operations. African Union operations
have yet to develop such policies and mechanisms.
82. Regarding the conduct of personnel, there have been significant failures in
both African Union and United Nations operations with respect to high numbers of
allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse. Recognizing the complications arising
from the different responsibilities of mission leadership and national contingents,
the Security Council adopted resolution 2272 (2016), focusing on the responsibility
of contributing countries to investigate allegations and hold their per sonnel
accountable. In that resolution, the Council also urged all non -United Nations forces
authorized under a Council mandate to take adequate measures to prevent and
combat impunity for sexual exploitation and abuse. The Secretary -General has
developed operational guidance that includes standards for force generation in
relation to conduct and human rights. He has indicated his intention to reflect
expectations in relation to his zero tolerance policy in cooperation agreements with
the African Union (A/70/729, para. 82) and has started to issue public reports to
tackle the issue. The African Union has made some progress in this regard,
including in the development of policies and the hiring of a chief ethics offi cer, but
has limited dedicated capacity in this area.
83. Inevitably, the aforementioned issues have affected the performance and
conduct of African Union operations and hence the level of confidence of African
Union member States, contributing countries and partners therein. Improvements in
accountability are therefore needed irrespective of the modalities for financing
African Union peace support operations.
Reporting and oversight
84. In the case of operations funded by the United Nations, accounta bility
mechanisms are not merely good practice; such operations have an obligation to
comply with specific United Nations resolutions, regulations, rules and ethical
standards and international human rights and humanitarian standards. With respect
to financial and administrative rules, the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions and the General Assembly review budget implementation for
United Nations operations through the consideration of budget performance reports
and reports of the Board of Auditors. To date, the use of assessed contributions for

28/34

16-16788

A/71/410
S/2016/809

African Union operations has applied only to the model of a hybrid operation
(UNAMID) or “support package” (AMIS, AMISOM) in which United Nations
accountability and reporting mechanisms automatically applied to the activities
undertaken by United Nations personnel. Such an arrangement has obviated the
need for the African Union Commission to build its capacity to manage budgets and
report on spending or to go through the United Nations budgetary process. In the
case of an African Union operation benefiting from financial support without a
strong United Nations presence in theatre, the African Union would need t o undergo
a significant strengthening of its capacity to undertake the United Nations budgetary
process.
85. However, it is also important to acknowledge a key tension between two
different forms of accountability: accountability for mandate delivery and
accountability for compliance with United Nations administrative and financial
procedures. As numerous reviews since the Brahimi report have noted, United
Nations rules and systems are out of sync with the complex and fast -paced nature of
contemporary field operations. Despite the unpredictability and urgency of most
peacekeeping environments, United Nations peacekeeping budgets are developed a
year in advance and missions have limited ability to redeploy resources. Civilian
recruitment and procurement processes regularly take between 6 and 12 months to
complete. In response to the report of the High-level Panel on Peace Operations, the
Secretary-General has initiated a multi-year review of administrative processes,
policies and procedures with a view to making them fit for purpose for the field.
Implementing such reforms will require political will on the part of Member States.
This is especially the case for African Union operations, given that the African
Union has been more willing to deploy at a much faster pace than the United
Nations and often in more difficult environments.
86. For United Nations operations, the Secretary-General must also submit to the
Security Council substantive reports encompassing all aspects of the mandate and
evolution of the situation. In many cases where the Council has authorized
non-United Nations forces, such as those undertaken by the European Union and
NATO, there has also been a practice of regular reporting. The inconsistent record
of reporting on AMISOM has been a source of frustration in this regard and reflects
a gap that needs to be addressed. All the more so, since reporting and monitoring are
not only matters of accountability but also essential for encouraging a constructive
dialogue between the African Union and United Nations.

D.

Human rights due diligence policy
87. The nature of African Union peace support operations, especially of high intensity ones, has often posed challenges in terms of planning and conducting them
in compliance with international human rights, humanitarian and refugee standards.
The African Union has little capacity at its headquarters to devise and implement
effective measures and mechanisms to reduce the risk of and address human rights
violations in its peace support operations.
88. There is a higher risk of human rights and international humanitarian law
violations in the context of counter-terrorism or peace enforcement operations. The
consequences of such violations may be even more damaging to the ultimate

16-16788

29/34

A/71/410
S/2016/809

success of such operations than for peacekeeping operations. This is particularly
true for counter-terrorism activities, as collateral damage is likely to promote and
encourage resentment towards security forces and increase sympathy for, and
possibly recruitment by, terrorist groups, therefore increasing the overall threat to
the mission.
89. Support by United Nations entities to non-United Nations security forces must
be consistent with the Organization’s purposes and principles, as set out in the
Charter of the United Nations, and with its obligations under international law to
respect, promote and encourage respect for international humanitarian, human rights
and refugee law. Consistent with those obligations, United Nations support cannot
be provided where there are substantial grounds for believing that there is a real risk
of the receiving entities committing grave violations of international humanitarian,
human rights or refugee law and where the relevant authorities fail to take the
necessary corrective or mitigating measures. This is reflected in the human rights
due diligence policy, promulgated by the Secretary-General in 2011 and welcomed
by the Security Council and the General Assembly.
90. The United Nations experience in implementing the human rights due
diligence policy when supporting African Union missions has so far been limited to
AFISMA, MISCA and AMISOM. In the case of AFISMA and MISCA, the policy
was only partially implemented, owing to the time sensitivity of support to the two
missions and their relatively short duration. With regard to AMISOM, mechanisms
under the policy are currently in place and cover, inter alia, training, selection and
screening of troops, monitoring and accountability. On monitoring, the AMISOM
Civilian Casualty Tracking, Analysis and Response Cell, primarily a preventive
internal monitoring tool, has yielded improvements but has yet to be fully staffed.
91. The United Nations system has been approached to provide support to the
Multinational Joint Task Force, which raises the challenge of application of the
human rights due diligence policy in the context of multinational forces. Although
the African Union authorized the Task Force, it has limited control over its
operations, and hence institutionalized African Union -United Nations partnership
arrangements are of limited utility. The lack of relevant United Nations field
presence in the specific theatre of operations is also an important obstacle because it
does not allow for a proper human rights monitoring and reporting mechanism as
required under the policy.
92. The experience of applying the human rights due diligence policy has
generated important lessons for future support to African Union peace support
operations. First, operations engaged in counter-terrorism or counter-insurgency
tasks pose additional challenges for application of the policy, both because of
weaknesses in command and control and the limited United Nations presence on the
ground. Second, policy implementation provides a space to support the compliance
of African Union peace operations with international human rights and humanitarian
standards. However, this works best when the measures and mechanisms to ensure
African Union missions’ compliance with such standards are integrated as early as
possible in the planning process, which requires a strong partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations. In particular, information regarding the
selection of contributing countries and other issues that may influence the human
rights dimensions of operations needs to be communicated to the United Nations as

30/34

16-16788

A/71/410
S/2016/809

early as possible in the planning phase to ensure that potential constraints on United
Nations support can be identified and addressed.

V. Concluding observations
93. The African Union-United Nations partnership on peace operations remains
essential to responding to common challenges posed by armed conflicts in Africa.
Faced with unprecedented threats to international peace and security on the
continent, the partnership has evolved in innovative ways, wit h both organizations
willing to develop pragmatic solutions to contemporary challenges. Over the past
decade, the partnership produced a range of collaborative instruments to ensure joint
analysis and planning and to facilitate the alignment of regional an d global
responses to crisis situations in Africa. This is crucial because peace operations are
likely to be most effective when subregional, continental and global responses are
part of a coherent political strategy aimed at defusing the crisis.
94. In almost all of the cases surveyed in the present report, the African Union and
the United Nations shared similar strategic objectives and developed innovative
solutions in order to better pursue their shared objectives. The African Union enjoys
relative doctrinal flexibility and has deployed missions with a wide range of
mandated tasks, including enforcement operations designed to defeat particular
spoiler groups that pose a threat to the political process. However, the African
Union’s willingness to deploy a wide range of peace support operations has been
undermined by a lack of capacity in key areas. At the strategic level, staffing levels
in the African Union Commission have been grossly inadequate, in each case, for
the effective management of most peace support operations. At the operational
level, most African missions have suffered from inadequate staffing. In addition,
significant capacity gaps have been apparent in some troop - and police-contributing
countries, which sometimes deploy without the capabilities necessary to be
operationally effective. The African Union was able to undertake a number of
smaller-scale peace support operations characterized by clear mandates and clear
objectives without significant levels of external support. However, more com plex
missions have relied heavily on external partners for support, weakening
predictability and ownership. Consequently, it is clear that the African Union must
continue to build its capacity to plan, finance, sustain and oversee its own missions,
so that it can operate expeditiously and fulfil the expectations of its membership.
95. With regard to assistance provided by partners, the review noted that different
partners provided different types of support to African missions. Bilateral partners
were generally most interested in providing financial support and technical
assistance to missions in such areas as planning, or one-off support to troop- and
police-contributing countries in such areas as strategic airlift and equipment. While
the amount of bilateral financial assistance was considerable (more than €1.6 billion
provided through the European Union African Peace Facility alone until the end of
2015), it proved to be unpredictable and unsustainable over the long term.
Moreover, reliance on external sources of funding undermined African ownership
and created risks for missions, as the priorities of donors might not be aligned with
those of the African Union. On the other hand, logistical support provided directly
or contracted by partners proved flexible and responsive in AMIS and the early

16-16788

31/34

A/71/410
S/2016/809

stages of AMISOM, when no United Nations support was mandated. However, it is
never ideal for a military operation to rely on external sources for its logistical
requirements. Bilateral partners also frequently provid ed training and equipment to
meet immediate capability gaps, although the review observed that such support was
often ineffective at improving the capability of contingents once they had been
deployed. In many cases, contingents were unable to effectively operate or maintain
partner-provided equipment.
96. The review found that the United Nations had provided assistance to most
African Union peace support operations. This ranged from technical assistance and
various types of mission support tasks to, in the case of UNAMID, the overall
management of a hybrid operation. The support provided by the United Nations was
different for each mission and, in some cases, had undergone distinct phases. One
model in particular, the logistical support package delivered b y an in situ United
Nations presence, proved to be a flexible and robust framework through which a
range of mission support services could be provided by the United Nations, under
United Nations regulations, rules and accountability systems. United Nations
support systems were found to be best suited for meeting requirements that were
most similar to those of peacekeeping operations. However, existing administrative
processes, policies and procedures struggled to provide support to a new generation
of United Nations peacekeeping missions and were inadequate to meet the
requirements of kinetic operations deployed in non-permissive environments, as was
the case with many African Union peace support operations.
97. Regarding financial support, the review noted that United Nations-managed
trust funds proved useful when supplementing other sources of financing, but were
not very successful as the primary means of meeting the costs of support to African
Union operations, as they did not provide a reliable funding stream. By contrast,
United Nations assessed contributions were an effective means of funding support
requirements to African missions in the instances where they were provided.
However, reliance on United Nations-managed funds, as with all external funding,
carried risks for African Union ownership, which must be weighed by African
Union member States. As at 30 June 2016, more than $15 billion in United Nations
assessed contributions had been used to finance the light and heavy support
packages for AMIS and the budgets for UNAMID, UNSOA and UNSOS.
98. Throughout the review, such issues as safety and security, accountability
systems and human rights repeatedly emerged as key considerations that were not
always fully understood by stakeholders. In particular, United Nations-provided
support could not be seen separately from human rights considerations. The kinetic
peace operations conducted by the African Union generally involved greater risks of
international humanitarian law and human rights violations. The protection of
human rights needed to be integrated into their mandates at the early stages. They
required stronger mechanisms to prevent and address international humanitarian law
and human rights violations, as well as independent and effective monitoring
mechanisms. The African Union had developed or was developing mechanisms to
assess and mitigate the risks but still lacked the capacity and expertise, at both the
headquarters and mission levels, to effectively implement them.

32/34

16-16788

A/71/410
S/2016/809

99.

Six general observations have emerged from the findings of the review:
• Access to the United Nations assessed contributions has provided a reliable,
predictable and sustainable means of financing the support requirements of
African Union peace support operations. Moreover, the considerable
innovation shown by the United Nations in supporting the African Union
missions in Somalia and the Sudan through assessed contributions
demonstrates the potential flexibility of this option.
• The African Union has often acted as an effective first responder to crises
before the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping operation. In such
situations, ensuring smooth transitions is likely to remain a crucial part of
stabilizing future crisis zones and requires the two organization s to engage in
joint planning and analysis from the start. Such deployments, which are most
similar to United Nations peacekeeping operations, offer the most
straightforward scenario for the provision of support by the United Nations
and can build upon the lessons already learned from the transitions in the
Central African Republic and Mali.
• In recent years, both the African Union and the United Nations have
increasingly deployed into environments that require greater levels of
mobility, situational awareness and force protection. The United Nations must
therefore revise its own internal administrative processes, policies and
procedures to better support modern field operations, whether its own or those
of the African Union.
• The African Union needs to strengthen its own administrative and operational
frameworks, including by defining its own mission support model. This will in
turn guide the United Nations in tailoring its support to African Union peace
support operations.
• The Secretary-General has stated that the United Nations should not engage in
counter-terrorism activities, and the High-level Panel on Peace Operations
concluded that United Nations peacekeeping operations were not suited to
engage in military counter-terrorism operations. However, the United Nations
has been requested to provide support to African Union peace support
operations undertaking counter-terrorism operations. Given the constraints of
the existing policies and support mechanisms highlighted in the review, the
United Nations must determine the extent to which it can support
multinational operations authorized by the African Union engaged in counter terrorism and counter-insurgency activities and the structures and measures
that must be in place to deliver such support.
• The broad range of tasks that African peace support operations have been
authorized to undertake means that no single support model and no single
actor can adequately deliver the full range of necessary capabilities. It is
therefore important that multiple, complementary support options remain
available to the African Union. As the case of Somalia demonstrates, if African
Union peace support operations are required to conduct offensive operations,
multiple support mechanisms that build on the comparative ad vantages of the
United Nations, bilateral partners and the European Union will be required.

16-16788

33/34

A/71/410
S/2016/809

100. The joint review focused on the operational and financial support provided to
African Union peace support operations. However, the African Union-United
Nations partnership in peace and security is much broader and includes joint efforts
on conflict prevention, mediation and peacebuilding. Further strengthening of
African Union-United Nations capacities to develop these other components of the
partnership will be essential in order to make it more effective.
101. The lessons learned from the past 13 years have demonstrated that more
decisive and concrete actions are required by the international community to make
full use of all the instruments at its disposal. T he two organizations should be proud
of the pragmatism and innovation that have guided their collaboration ov er the
years. The African Union-United Nations partnership is essential, evolving,
innovative and increasingly effective. A division of labour has emerged in which the
African Union has increasingly taken on tasks that the United Nations has not been
able or willing to undertake. However, the African Union is not yet able to tackle
those tasks alone. It is encouraging that the African Union continues to take steps
towards financing a greater proportion of its own operations, but it is also critical
that African peace support operations authorized by the United Nations Security
Council have the support required to effectively address increasingly compl ex
mandates in increasingly challenging environments.
102. Finally, the benefits of collaboration are not merely operational but also
political. Peace operations are effective when they are part of a clear political
strategy and not only when they have the right support. Political solutions to peace
and security challenges are most effective when global and regional responses are
aligned. This is the ultimate objective of a strong African Union-United Nations
partnership.

34/34

16-16788
