A /70/PV.93

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

93rd plenary meeting

Wednesday, 27 April 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Denmark)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 15 and 116 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium
Summit
Draft resolution (A/70/L.43)
The President: Members will recall that, under
agenda items 15 and 116, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 70/1, entitled “Transforming our world: the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”, at its 4th
plenary meeting, on 25 September 2015.
Members will also recall that the Assembly
considered, in a joint debate, agenda items 15, 116 and
123 at its 52nd plenary meeting, on 13 November 2015.
Members will further recall that, under agenda items 15
and 116, the General Assembly adopted decision 70/539
at its 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015.
The importance of the draft resolution before us
today (A/70/L.43) cannot be overstated. On a daily
basis we receive reports of innocent lives sacrificed
in the course of senseless conflicts. For a number
of years now, we have been struggling to respond
effectively to a global humanitarian and refugee crisis
of historic proportions — caused in large part by
political instability and protracted conflicts. Improving
the United Nations capacity to build peace is therefore

16-11838 (E)

not just fundamental to mitigating such crises or to
achieving the 17 Sustainable Development Goals; it is
part of our moral responsibility to the millions who are
being denied the most basic rights and opportunities
in life.
Today, the General Assembly will take action on
the outcome of the 2015 review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture, contained in draft resolution
A/70/L.43. In keeping with established practice from
2005 and 2010, the Security Council will simultaneously
adopt a substantially identical draft resolution, thus
emphasizing the unique and innovative nature of the
peacebuilding architecture of the United Nations.
Allow me, first of all, to recognize and thank the
two co-facilitators — Ambassador Gaspar Martins
of Angola and Ambassador Bird of Australia — for
facilitating this process so ably and efficiently. I also
thank the Advisory Group of Experts, under the skilful
chairmanship of Mr. Gert Rosenthal, for its report
(see A/69/968), as well as the Secretariat for their
substantial support provided to the review process.
Finally, I want to thank all Member States for their
constructive engagement and for securing a substantive
outcome that holds great promise for the future work of
the Organization in that field.
Through those draft resolutions, we seek to build on
the aspirations of the resolutions of 2005, which created
what is now called the peacebuilding architecture. Back
then, expectations were high that those resolutions could
address some of the weaknesses that have undermined
United Nations efforts to consolidate peace. In 2010,

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1611838*

A/70/PV.93

27/04/2016

however, it was found that the hopes that accompanied
the founding resolutions had yet to be realized. With
today’s substantial and detailed draft resolutions in the
General Assembly and the Security Council, we are
taking a decisive step forward.
The
draft
resolutions
reflect
important
developments in our common understanding of how
best to approach peacebuilding and conflict prevention.
They seek to reduce fragmentation, including by
enhancing the Peacebuilding Commission’s role as a
bridge between the Assembly and the Council. They
further underline the importance of partnerships, not
least with regional organizations. And they stress
national ownership and inclusiveness as vital, which
should include the strengthening of the participation of
women and other stakeholders.
Immediately following the adoption of the draft
resolution this morning, the General Assembly will
debate the annual reports of both the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund. That will
present an important opportunity to discuss how best
to secure predictable and sustained financing for
peacebuilding, a point stressed in the draft resolution
and a matter that is of critical importance to the future
of the Peacebuilding Fund.
As it is known, the review of the peacebuilding
architecture is one of three major reviews taking place
this year in the area of peace and security, together with
the review of peace operations and the global study on
the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000). And, in less than two weeks’ time, my second
high-level thematic debate will seek to draw out the
synergies from across those three processes, as well as
other related reviews.
It is my hope that this event will allow Governments
and other leading actors in this field to engage in an
open and honest discussion on how the United Nations
can best play its role in maintaining international peace
and security, both today and in future. I am very pleased
that many Ministers for Foreign Affairs have already
confirmed their attendance at the May event, and I look
forward to the full engagement of all Member States.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/70/L.43, entitled “Review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture”.
I give the
the Secretariat.
2/31

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with
draft resolution A/70/L.43, entitled “Review of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture”, I wish
to put on record the following statement of financial
implications on behalf of the Secretary-General, in
accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly.
In paragraph 29 of draft resolution A/70/L.43,
the General Assembly would decide to convene at
its seventy-second session, under the agenda item
“Peacebuilding and Sustaining Peace”, a high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on efforts undertaken
and opportunities to strengthen the United Nations
work on sustaining peace, on a date and in a format to
be decided by the President of the General Assembly.
Pursuant to the request contained in paragraph
29, in the absence of the modalities for the meeting,
it is not possible at the present time to estimate the
potential cost implications of the requirements for
meetings and documentation. When the decision on
the modalities, format and organization of the meeting
has been taken, the Secretary-General will submit
the budgetary implications of such requirements, in
accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly.
Accordingly, the adoption of draft resolution
A/70/L.43 would not give rise to any budgetary
implications under the programme budget for the
biennium 2016-2017.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to adopt draft resolution A/70/L.43?
Draft resolution A/70/L.43 was adopted (resolution
70/262).
The President: I call on the representative of
Thailand, who wishes to speak in explanation of
position on the resolution just adopted. I remind him
that explanations of position are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Pawutiyapong (Thailand): The Kingdom
of Thailand welcomes today’s adoption of resolution
70/262, on the review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture, as well as the adoption of
the identical Security Council resolution 2282 (2016).
Thailand has long advocated a comprehensive approach
to peacebuilding that encompasses peace and security,
sustainable development and human rights components.
16-11838

27/04/2016

We therefore believe that it is both symbolic and of
practical significance that the General Assembly and
the Security Council act together with a unified voice
on this important matter.

A/70/PV.93

Commission in order to present the annual report of the
Commission on its ninth session (A/70/714).

Resolution 70/262 is a well-balanced text that
reflects the key themes and recommendations of
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture (A/69/968). It offers a
broad definition of the concept of “sustaining peace”,
which is both a goal and a process, a shared task and
responsibility, as well as involving coordinated and
sustained engagement in all stages of conflict.

Let me first congratulate the facilitators,
Ambassador Gaspar Martins and Ambassador Bird,
as well as all members of the General Assembly, on
the adoption of resolution 70/262, on the review of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture. That has
been a truly remarkable achievement, and one which
will — if implemented — not only help enhance the
work of the Commission, but also strengthen our
collective ability to sustain peace, as said earlier by the
President of the Assembly.

We are particularly pleased that the resolution
highlights the interconnectedness between sustaining
peace and sustainable and inclusive development,
and the inclusive and meaningful participation of
women and youth. Equally important, the resolution
recognizes the need for predictable and sustained
financing for peacebuilding activities, which is crucial
for the implementation.

I will now turn to the task at hand, namely, to
present the activities and outline the achievements of
the Peacebuilding Commission over the past year. I
wish to pay tribute to my fellow Commission Chairs,
as well as the representatives of the countries on the
Commission’s agenda and all the members of the
Commission, for their contribution to what was a
productive and active year.

I also wish to express my delegation’s appreciation
to the co-facilitators of the intergovernmental
negotiations, the Permanent Representatives of Angola
and Australia, as well as their able teams, for their
tireless efforts over the three-month-long process of
bridging differing views and positions, which has now
enabled Members to forge a consensus. Finally, with
the resolution providing a framework and guidance for
the whole United Nations system and Member States
on the future of the United Nations peacebuilding
efforts, let us commit ourselves to prompt and effective
implementation of its provisions.

The ninth session of the Peacebuilding Commission
coincided with the first phase of the review of the
peacebuilding architecture, which inspired the work
of the Commission. Over the past year, we have taken
important steps to improve the effectiveness and
flexibility of the Commission, thereby striving to
further enhance the relevance of our work, broaden
the scope of our reach and improve the accountability
of the Commission. That includes adopting more
transparent and strategic working methods and a
more flexible agenda, and increasing inclusivity,
including improving partnerships with regional and
subregional organizations.

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
15 and agenda item 116.
Agenda items 31 and 110
Report of the Peacebuilding Commission (A/70/714)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
Peacebuilding Fund (A/70/715)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden in his capacity as former
Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I am very pleased to be here
today on behalf of the members of the Peacebuilding

Let me highlight three particular areas of progress
from the annual report and also convey some reflections
on how this work can be built on and pursued in light of
the review and the resolution just adopted.
First, with regard to the flexibility and effectiveness
of the work of the Commission, it was able during its
ninth session to leverage its inherent flexibility so as
to convene regional and country-specific discussions
concerning situations beyond the Commission’s
established agenda. The Organizational Committee has
had opportunities to discuss peacebuilding needs and
lessons learned in several contexts, such as the peace
process in Papua New Guinea, the elections in Burkina
Faso and financing for peacebuilding in Somalia.

16-118383/31

A/70/PV.93

Going forward, that work can, and should be, further
leveraged. In my view, there is great scope for the
Commission to keep evolving, and the recently adopted
resolution gives the Commission a clear mandate to
diversify its working methods in support of sustaining
peace beyond specific country configurations.
Secondly, on regional issues, the Commission has,
over the past year, moved to highlight thematic and
regional issues of relevance to its work. For example, it
has drawn attention to the peacebuilding needs within
the framework of the Ebola recovery, building on the
successful work of my predecessor, Ambassador de
Aguiar Patriota of Brazil. A Peacebuilding Commission
Chair’s trip to West Africa was undertaken, and I
participated in the World Bank Spring Meeting and the
high-level International Ebola Recovery Conference
here in New York, with a view to drawing the attention
of the international community and the international
financing institutions to the peacebuilding aspects
of the Ebola situation in West Africa. Furthermore,
a regional discussion on trends in and threats to
peacebuilding was convened at the beginning of this
year with the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, in order to identify
conflict-prevention priorities in the West Africa region.
It is encouraging that the Commission is already
building on what was started during previous sessions
in the form of additional regional discussions, which
were convened already this month. The Commission
can use the momentum from the reviews further
in order to deepen and institutionalize cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations, both in
the Commission as a whole and in country-specific
work. The fundamental peacebuilding and conflictprevention work carried out in particular by the
regional economic communities is something that the
Commission can better link with as part of its advocacy
work and accompaniment. In a similar vein, the
Commission is well placed to listen to and incorporate
local perspectives and bring such understandings and
approaches to peacebuilding to the fore.
Thirdly, regarding inclusivity, few bodies at the
United Nations have such a mandate to interact with
and draw upon the expertise of such a wide range of
actors as does the Commission. During the ninth
session, the Commission worked to advance interaction
with a more diverse group of actors. The drafting of
a gender strategy for the Peacebuilding Commission
was initiated, which will help the Commission to
4/31

27/04/2016

systematize the way it works on gender issues and to put
the empowerment of women at the core of its mission.
A special session was organized to discuss how to
advance the youth, peace and security agenda, and to
champion youth participation in sustainable peace.
That is another agenda that I hope the Commission can
continue to champion, building on the momentum of
Security Council resolution 2250 (2015).
Beyond the three topics that I have had a chance
to touch upon, there are, of course, many more
achievements that deserve the attention of this body,
not least within the country-specific configurations of
the Commission, as the annual report makes clear. It
is also important to note that many of the areas that
I have highlighted are clearly captured in the forward
agenda of the annual report, which charts the work for
the tenth session. I am confident that the Commission
will continue to evolve under the able stewardship
and chairmanship of the Ambassador of Kenya,
Mr. Macharia Kamau.
Before concluding, I would like to dedicate a
special word of thanks to Assistant Secretary-General
Oscar Fernandez-Taranco of the Peacebuilding Support
Office, and all of his staff, for their very steadfast
support throughout the ninth session and their neverending determination to advance the peacebuilding
agenda of the United Nations.
I would now like to take this opportunity to very
briefly make a few additional remarks in my national
capacity on the occasion of the adoption of resolution
70/262, on the review of the peacebuilding architecture.
We align ourselves, of course, with the statement to be
delivered shortly on behalf of the European Union.
It is not often that the General Assembly turns
bold reports into equally bold resolutions. In the
case of resolution 70/262, it has done just that. The
co-facilitators of the resolution promised to take an
ambitious approach that took into account all elements
of the report (A/69/968), and they have delivered. The
text that we just adopted is the most comprehensive
resolution to date on peacebuilding in the United
Nations. Similarly, it is one of the most comprehensive
resolutions to date on conflict prevention, since it not
only advances the normative agenda, but also propels a
road map for the United Nations system.
Resolution 70/262 redefines how we think about
and act on peacebuilding. By agreeing on a new
definition of “sustaining peace”, we are moving away
16-11838

27/04/2016

from post-conflict peacebuilding and putting conflict
prevention at the core of our action. It also means that
we agree on the importance of inclusivity and the need
to take into account the views of all segments of society
in such endeavours. We acknowledge the need for
concrete integration in practice between security and
development, the need to break down silos within the
system, and we underline the inherently political nature
of sustaining peace. We now have an agenda that goes
beyond the United Nations peacebuilding architecture.
It is an agenda for the whole United Nations system and
its Member States. It is now up to us to act on it.
For Sweden, three priority areas in the review have
been: financing, partnerships and prevention, and we
are committed to take a leading role also in the followup and operationalizing of the review outcome in those
areas. As donors, I believe we need to examine how
to ensure better funding of peacebuilding activities, in
particular in the United Nations system. By decreasing
fragmentation, encouraging a joint and collective
approach to conflict prevention, we can enable a more
effective tackling of the root causes of conflict. More
predictable and sustained financing is required. I am
glad to announce that Sweden will co-host a high-level
pledging conference for the Peacebuilding Fund in the
margins of the ministerial week in September here in
New York in order to take forward that commitment
for sustained financing of the resolution that we have
just adopted.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya in his capacity as Chairperson
of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Mr. Kamau (Kenya), Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission: First of all, I would like
to thank the President of the General Assembly for
convening this very important debate and for the
manner with which he has been conducting the affairs
of the General Assembly.
Today, Security Council resolution 2282 (2016) and
General Assembly resolution 70/262 were adopted in
the area of peacebuilding. I would like to recognize
the Ambassador of Angola and the Ambassador of
Australia for their strong work and the leadership
that they provided in getting us to where we needed
to be in order to adopt those resolutions. I would also
like to extend my congratulations to the previous
speaker, Ambassador Skoog, for his chairmanship of
the Peacebuilding Commission in 2015. His vision

A/70/PV.93

and commitment were instrumental in bringing the
Commission to discuss new country situations and to
work in a much more flexible manner that is consistent
with all our ambitions for peace in the world.
Today, I speak at a critical moment in the United
Nations peace and security review process, given the
resolutions that have just been adopted. We have before
us an opportunity not only to start thinking about
peacebuilding differently, but also to implement peace
differently. I will touch on some of the issues that the
previous speaker, Ambassador Skoog, highlighted. One
of my priorities, as contained in my letter of intent, as
Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission this
year, is to build on the successes of my predecessor.
That includes the forward agenda contained in the
report of the Peacebuilding Commission on its ninth
session (A/70/714) and the report of the Working Group
on Lessons Learned.
Ten years ago, the Security Council and the General
Assembly created the Peacebuilding Commission as a
unique intergovernmental advisory body for advocacy
in order to sustain political attention and mobilize
resources, and as a platform to bring together various
actors in peacebuilding efforts. Today, we have in
front of us the product of many bilateral, multilateral
and plenary negotiations. However, we are faced with
a particular question: what are the implications of
those resolutions for the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission going forward? And what will be the
impact that the Peacebuilding Commission and its
configurations have in country situations?
Throughout the negotiations on the milestone
resolutions that the General Assembly and Security
Council have just adopted, it was clear that Member
States wanted to have a better-functioning and more
effective Peacebuilding Commission. I believe that the
outcome of that process gives us the opportunity to
fully utilize the Commission as a unique advisory body.
It will allow the Commission to effectively play its role
in sustaining peace; to remain relevant and consistent
with the underlying principles that motivated its
creation; and to formulate specific, strategic, targeted
and practical advice in our advisory function and
our interactions with the General Assembly and the
Security Council. I would like to highlight some of the
objectives of the new peacebuilding architecture.
First and foremost, a change in mindset is needed
in order to reflect today’s realities and expectations.

16-118385/31

A/70/PV.93

Secondly, “sustaining peace” should be understood in
the broadest possible terms and should be integrated at
all stages, including when addressing the root causes of
conflict, escalation and the continuation or recurrence
of conflict, and in the prevention of outbreaks. Thirdly,
with regard to the primacy of politics, peacebuilding is
an inherently political process, and political leadership
is central in sustaining nationally led development
programmes and responding to the root causes of
conflict. We must always strive to avoid resorting to
force or military intervention. Fourthly, as was stated
by Ambassador Skoog, inclusiveness and the equal
participation of all, particularly women and youth, in
peacebuilding efforts cannot be overemphasized.
I will continue to work with the Peacebuilding
Commission’s Organizational Committee and Member
States within and outside the Commission’s current
engagement in order to immediately begin to implement
the recommendations contained in the resolutions we
have adopted. The Commission will need to address
several key areas.
First, the Commission must evolve a more flexible
convening platform, available to all countries that
seek support with regard to achieving sustainable
peace. Secondly, the Commission must strengthen its
engagement with the principal organs, particularly the
Security Council — but also the General Assembly — in
order to promote coherence across the range of work
of the United Nations. Thirdly, the Commission should
build stronger links with key partners, such as the
international financial institutions and regional and
subregional organizations, including the African Union,
the European Union, as well as civil society. Fourthly,
the Commission should explore ways to improve its
communication and visibility within and outside the
United Nations system.
In order to achieve those goals, the Commission
will review and diversify its working methods and
rules of procedure, as stated in resolution 70/262. I
have personally identified priority areas that I intend
to take forward under my chairmanship. Of course, it is
also my hope that we will continue to receive ongoing
support and guidance from the Peacebuilding Support
Office under the leadership of the Assistant SecretaryGeneral, Oscar Fernandez-Taranco.
Again, as was stated by the previous speaker, in
considering regional and cross-cutting issues related to
sustaining peace, on 6 April the Commission convened
6/31

27/04/2016

an informal meeting on the subregional dimensions
of peacebuilding in West Africa. That was in followup to a related meeting held on 18 January under the
chairpersonship of Ambassador Skoog. Similarly, in
order to encourage regular exchanges of views and joint
initiatives with the relevant regional and subregional
organizations, there are now ongoing arrangements to
visit Central Africa, East Africa and the Horn of Africa
during the course of this year as well. Those joint efforts
and regular exchanges need to go beyond the countries
of the current Commission configurations.
Moreover, the forward agenda of the annual report
of the Commission highlighted important priorities for
the work of the Commission during the course of this
year. Among them are a follow-up to the Ebola outbreak.
I intend to visit the three countries affected — Sierra
Leone, Liberia and Guinea — so as to assess the impact
of the outbreak on peacebuilding.
The second priority is the finalization of the
implementation of a gender perspective in the
Commission’s country-specific engagement and the
efforts to continue highlighting the role of youth in
peaceful societies.
The third priority is the preparation for the
2016 annual session, which will address a very
important issue entitled “Transitions as a challenge
to consolidating peace and security: The role of the
Peacebuilding Commission in diplomacy and political
accompaniment”. The annual session will present an
important opportunity for the Commission to discuss,
with key partners, a number of policy issues aimed at
assisting countries undergoing transition. We hope to
hear from a number of countries that have gone through
that experience.
Finally, the resolution we have just adopted
is categorical on the need to operationalize the
links between the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the work of the Commission. The
resolution also encourages the Commission to enhance
synergies between the Peacebuilding Fund and the
Peacebuilding Commission. It is important to ensure
predictable and sustainable funding at all the stages
of the peacebuilding effort. The Peacebuilding Fund
has proved to be a unique instrument in addressing
key peacebuilding priorities. I would like to urge all
Member States to contribute — and those who are not
currently contributing to join in contributing — to the
Fund. It is with that in mind that Kenya has decided to
16-11838

27/04/2016

co-host, with Sweden and others, as well as any other
delegation that wishes to join us, a Peacebuilding Fund
pledging conference on the margins of the opening of
the seventy-first session of the General Assembly.
I urge those here, for the sake of fostering greater
peace in our world, to embrace the outcome of the
resolutions and reviews adopted and endorsed today by
the Assembly and the Council, so as to show greater
ambition, flexibility, creativity and innovation in
seeking peaceful solutions to the challenges that we
face in securing peace in our world.
The President: I give the floor to the observer of
the European Union.
Mr. Vrailas (European Union): I speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
The candidate countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, and Serbia, the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.
I thank you, Sir, for having convened today’s
important meeting to adopt resolution 70/262, on the
review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture
in conjunction with the debate revolving around the
annual report of the Peacebuilding Commission on its
ninth session (A/70/714) and the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the Peacebuilding Fund (A/70/715). This
represents an excellent occasion to take stock of the
achievements made over the past 12 months.
The EU welcomes the identical resolutions adopted
today on the review of the peacebuilding architecture
here in the General Assembly and in the Security
Council (resolution 2282 (2016)). They are the most
comprehensive resolutions on peacebuilding that the
United Nations has adopted so far, and their adoption
marks the end of an intense review process that started
with the work of the Advisory Group of Experts. In
that regard we would like to thank the co-facilitators,
Ambassador Bird of Australia and Ambassador Gaspar
Martins of Angola, and their respective teams for their
skilful steering and conclusion of the negotiations.
We would also like to pay tribute to the work
of the Advisory Group of Experts and its Chair,
Ambassador Gert Rosenthal, and once again express
our appreciation for the comprehensiveness of the
report that it has produced (see A/69/968). The EU fully

A/70/PV.93

subscribed to the report’s conclusion that a change in
mindset is needed. Peacebuilding should no longer be
seen as a post-conflict activity, because the challenge of
sustaining peace runs across the complete cycle of our
engagement. Today, we are faced with a rising number
of violent conflicts in the world. The failure to sustain
peace is part of the reason that we are faced with this
challenge. In fact, 90 per cent of conflict onsets in the
first decade of the twenty-first century took place in
contexts that had experienced conflict before. Given
that recurrent nature of violent conflict, sustaining
peace equals conflict prevention in many cases.
The need for a change in mindset has guided the EU’s
actions during the negotiations in the intergovernmental
phase of the review, and we are pleased to see that the
concept of “sustaining peace” is now clearly defined
and that the resolution acknowledges that it involves all
stages of the cycle of conflict and should flow through
all three pillars of United Nations engagement.
Too often it is thought that the peace process
has ended when a peace agreement has been reached
or elections are held marking the end of a formally
agreed transition phase. In fact, continued support for
the dialogue and mediation processes remains very
important, as the failure to support dialogue on and
provide political accompaniment to the implementation
of peace agreements are part of the reasons for the
worrisome trend of recurrent conflict.
We welcome the high-level thematic debate of
the General Assembly focused on the United Nations,
peace and security, which the President of the General
Assembly is holding in May to address key challenges
to international peace and security and to examine how
to strengthen the role, coherence and performance of
the United Nations architecture in the field of peace and
security, including peacebuilding. We also welcome the
invitation to the Economic and Social Council to pursue
its cooperation with the Peacebuilding Commission,
which should take into account the follow-up and
review process for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, including the role of the high-level
political forum on sustainable development.
A key requirement for effective peacebuilding in
practically any context is to address the nexus between
security and development. A basic premise is that
peacebuilding should be done at the country level and
always adjusted to the specific country context. To be
truly effective in its responses to assist fragile States,

16-118387/31

A/70/PV.93

the United Nations system needs to work in a more
integrated, flexible and coordinated fashion — at both
the country and the Headquarters level — and give
more weight to prevention and early-warning tools. The
resolution clearly acknowledges that issue and stresses
the importance of joint analyses and effective strategic
planning across the United Nations system in its longterm engagement in conflict-affected countries.
We also welcome the recognition that peacebuilding
is an inherently political process that should be carried
out on the basis of a long-term vision and a holistic
approach. It should address the structural causes of
conflict, as well as contemporary risks of recurrence;
provide for inclusive and participatory political
processes; build strong and effective institutions,
capable of addressing the root causes of conflict; and
be responsive to people’s needs. It should promote
inclusive national ownership, including Government,
opposition and civil society, and a bottom-up approach.
We are pleased to note the recognition of the importance
of women’s leadership and participation in conflict
prevention and resolution.
The EU also welcomes the clear restatement of
the tasks of the Peacebuilding Commission, as well
as the encouragement to review and diversify its
working methods in order to enhance its efficiency
and flexibility in support of sustaining peace. Close
strategic and operational partnerships between
the United Nations and international, regional and
subregional organizations and international financial
institutions are also required in order to address the
challenge of sustaining peace. That is clearly stressed
in the resolution, and we welcome the call on the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Secretary-General
to work to increase synergies and, in particular, to
explore options to strengthen collaboration between
the United Nations and the World Bank in conflictaffected countries.
For its part, the EU is keen to continue its work
in increasing partnership with the United Nations,
including on the ground. The EU and the United
Nations have built a strong and continuously evolving
partnership on crisis management. The EU is
increasingly collaborating with the United Nations on
conflict analysis. Such initiatives not only support a
shared understanding of structural and contemporary
conflict drivers, they also encourage dialogue and
foster partnership among those working on the ground.
The EU, the United Nations and the World Bank are also
8/31

27/04/2016

reinvigorating their partnership on post-conflict needs
assessment, aiming to improve their focus on analysing
and identifying what is needed for peacebuilding — and
hence renaming those assessments as recovery and
peacebuilding assessments.
Turning now to the two annual reports before us
today, both are comprehensive documents illustrating
the complexity of peacebuilding challenges.
We appreciate the efforts by the Organizational
Committee and the Peacebuilding Support Office to
provide an assessment of the Commission’s work in
pursuing its forward agenda for 2015. The EU welcomes
the wider focus of the Commission, which goes beyond
the countries on its agenda; we see, for example, the
engagement of the Organizational Committee with
Somalia, Burkina Faso and Papua New Guinea. We also
welcome its work with regard to Ebola recovery efforts.
We applaud the successful organization of the Annual
Session of the Peacebuilding Commission around the
theme of sustainable financing for peacebuilding.
The EU has also been a full member of all
country-specific configurations of the Peacebuilding
Commission since their inception and is trying to
provide the best support possible for their success.
There is a clear role for the Commission when it
engages with countries undergoing transition. It needs
to be able to respond better to challenges identified
by Special Representatives of the Secretary-General,
resident coordinators and other actors. In so doing,
it can significantly contribute to the One United
Nations initiative.
Turning to the performance of the country-specific
configurations over the past year, there is some good
progress to report, while many challenges remain to be
tackled. That is particularly the case for Burundi, where
the dynamics have, unfortunately, taken a negative
turn and illustrate the need for additional preventive
measures, political attention and engagement to prevent
a recurrence of violent conflict.
We commend the efforts of all configuration Chairs.
In our view, the Commission still has a role to play in all
those countries, perhaps through more flexible forms
of engagement. Other country or regional situations
could also be addressed through such flexible “group
of friends”-type formats with a clear link to the field.
The EU is engaged in peacebuilding activities
in many countries through our broad and long-term
16-11838

27/04/2016

engagement in political dialogue, development,
economic cooperation, trade and other instruments.
That is why the EU has fully participated in the
Commission’s work since its establishment.
The Peacebuilding Fund has achieved significant
results, but the Fund is a small-scale strategic fund
that has to be followed by longer-term commitments
from other financing sources, which may be bilateral
or multilateral, including multilateral and regional
development banks. For its part, the EU has already
engaged in joint funding for peacebuilding projects
via our Instrument contributing to Stability and Peace,
and stands ready to explore further opportunities for
joint funding. With regard to securing more predictable
financing for peacebuilding, the EU believes that it is
important to address the silo approach of the donor
community. We stand ready to discuss options on
financing at the seventy-second session of the General
Assembly on the basis of proposals to be made by the
Secretary-General.
Before concluding my statement, I would like to
extend my gratitude to the former Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Olof Skoog of
Sweden, whom I would like to thank for his leadership,
commitment and the excellent work he has done. We
also look forward to working hand in hand with the new
Chairperson, Ambassador Macharia Kamau of Kenya,
the Commission membership and the Peacebuilding
Support Office so as to move things forward.
Ms. Bird (Australia): Let me start by thanking
Ambassadors Olof Skoog and Macharia Kamau for
their statements and by acknowledging the important
work undertaken by the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Peacebuilding Fund in 2015.
The work of the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Fund is fundamental to our efforts to build sustainable
peace across the globe. Innovations undertaken in 2015
by the Commission, including the adoption of more
flexible and strategic working methods, a focus on
inclusivity, and strengthened partnerships with regional
and subregional organizations, are to be commended.
We encourage the Commission to continue to engage
flexibly with countries — particularly those supported
through the Fund. In that regard, we acknowledge the
Commission’s constructive engagement with Papua
New Guinea in 2015, and note the positive work being
done this year with respect to Sri Lanka.

A/70/PV.93

Australia also welcomes the priority given by the
Commission in 2015 to gender issues and the financing
of peacebuilding. Its work to highlight peacebuilding
as part of the Ebola recovery response was a key
achievement and testament to its value as a forum for
considering cross-cutting issues.
We also acknowledge the important work
undertaken through the Peacebuilding Fund during
2015. As a flexible, catalytic, rapid-response pooled
fund, the Peacebuilding Fund has demonstrated its
value in promoting coherence in crisis response, and in
that regard, we also acknowledge the importance of the
Multi-Partner Trust Fund.
At the Peacebuilding Fund meeting attention was
drawn to the first-time allocation of 15 per cent of
funds to gender equality and women’s empowerment
initiatives. We call for that milestone to be built on,
including through the mainstreaming of gender
throughout United Nations peacebuilding efforts, and
initiatives such as the Global Acceleration Instrument
on women’s engagement in peace and security and
humanitarian affairs.
Finally, Australia would like to recognize the
important work of the Fund across the African region,
as well as in Asia and the Pacific. Initiatives to support
understanding and implementation of the Bougainville
Peace Agreement in Papua New Guinea are particularly
welcome, and we look forward to the Fund providing
further support in the Pacific region.
Australia welcomes the parallel adoption today
of the comprehensive General Assembly resolution
70/262 and Security Council resolution 2282 (2016)
on United Nations peacebuilding. As co-facilitator,
with the Permanent Representative of Angola, of
the intergovernmental phase of the review of the
peacebuilding architecture, we thank Member States
for the constructive spirit in which consultations were
held, which we believe reflects the high level of support
for the United Nations embarking on a new approach
to sustaining peace. We would also like to thank the
Advisory Group of Experts — ably led by Ambassador
Gert Rosenthal — for its comprehensive report (see
A/69/968), upon which the resolutions were based.
Time and again the world has borne witness to
the difficulties of achieving lasting peace. Even when
violence ceases, relapses into conflict have been all too
common. The need for a new international approach
to sustaining peace is clear, and with the adoption of

16-118389/31

A/70/PV.93

today’s resolutions, the United Nations system has
committed to putting that objective, i.e., sustaining
peace, and conflict prevention in particular, at the
centre of its peace and security efforts.
Through the resolutions just adopted we are
collectively affirming our common view that sustaining
peace is a shared responsibility of the whole United
Nations system and that it is fundamental to all of the
United Nations peace and security, development, and
human rights engagements. We are acknowledging
that inclusive, nationally led responses that engage all
segments of the population — including women, youth
and civil society — are essential. We are stressing
the importance of the United Nations enhancing its
operational and strategic partnerships, including with
regional and subregional organizations, and international
financial institutions. We are calling for strengthened
joint analysis and strategic planning across the United
Nations system, which are critical, including through the
upcoming quadrennial comprehensive policy review.
We are emphasizing the need for greater coherence
among the Assembly, the Security Council, and the
Economic and Social Council. And we are clarifying the
potential of the Peacebuilding Commission to support
sustainable peace — particularly in bringing sustained
international attention to conflict-affected States,
and in playing a bridging role so as to bring greater
coordination and coherence between the various organs
of the United Nations. The Commission’s review of its
working methods and rules of procedure, with a view
to better supporting peacebuilding priorities, including
conflict prevention and gender-sensitive peacebuilding,
will be vital.
The potentially transformative impact of today’s
resolutions is clear and consistent with many of the
critical recommendations of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations, and the Global Study on
Women, Peace and Security. However, we must also
acknowledge the importance of the sustained and
predictable funding of United Nations peacebuilding
for achieving that potential. Without continuity
of funding, all of today’s normative developments
will be meaningless. To that end, Australia looks
forward to receiving a range of comprehensive and
innovative options aimed at stabilizing United Nations
peacebuilding financing at the seventy-second session
of the General Assembly, as part of the follow-up report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
resolutions adopted.
10/31

27/04/2016

As we mark today the adoption of the peacebuilding
resolutions, the hard work begins now, of course. It
is imperative that the United Nations system, with
the support of the international community, look
to implement those resolutions fully. Australia is
committed to supporting that work and to continuing
our close cooperation with others in such efforts.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Today, the General
Assembly has adopted resolution 70/262 on the review
of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture. A
similar resolution was just adopted unanimously by the
Security Council (resolution 2282 (2016)) this morning.
It was a great honour for my country, Angola, and
for myself to act, jointly with Ambassador Gillian
Elizabeth Bird, Permanent Representative of Australia,
as co-facilitator of the intergovernmental phase of the
peacebuilding architecture review process. I would like
to take this occasion to thank and praise Ambassador
Bird for the excellent cooperation extended to me and to
my delegation. I would also like to thank the Advisory
Group of Experts, coordinated by Ambassador Gert
Rosenthal, for drafting the Group’s comprehensive
report on United Nations peacebuilding (see A/69/968),
which set the basis for the resolution that we have
just adopted.
A word of appreciation is also due to the
Peacebuilding Commission troika, namely, Ambassador
Macharia Kamau, Permanent Representative of Kenya,
Ambassador Olof Skoog, Permanent Representative
of Sweden, and Ambassador Oh Joon, Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Korea. Their support
throughout the whole process was an invaluable and
significant contribution that enabled us to overcome
all hurdles in negotiating the resolution just adopted.
I thank them all wholeheartedly. Last but not least,
we acknowledge and commend the work of the
experts of the Member States and the secretariat of
the review, especially the Peacebuilding Support
Office, whose commitment was pivotal in allowing for
today’s conclusion.
The extensive support for the resolution that we have
just adopted reflects the transparency and inclusivity to
which the co-facilitators were committed, including in
consultations with the regional groups and throughout
the negotiating process.
The assessment conducted by the Advisory
Group of Experts concluded that, in its 10 years of
existence, the peacebuilding architecture has not been
16-11838

27/04/2016

A/70/PV.93

sufficiently able to fulfil its potential and overcome
all the challenges it faced. The Advisory Group also
concluded that in order to improve that performance
and increase effectiveness, a new approach was needed.
The Group’s assessment pointed out the challenges
facing the peacebuilding architecture, the reforms
needed in the Secretariat’s methods of work and in its
interaction with Member States. The Advisory Group
further recalled how peace and security, development
and human rights were approached by the United
Nations system as separate silos, instead of through an
approach combining those three pillars, which represent
the foundation of international peace and security.

adequate, predictable and sustained funding for
peacebuilding activities, including through voluntary
and assessed contributions.

The approach set out by today’s resolution changes
the dynamics of peacebuilding by putting the focus
on the three phases of the conflict cycle: preventing
the outbreak of conflict; taking measures to avoid the
escalation, prolongation and recurrence of conflict; and
encouraging Member States and the United Nations
to develop synergies in order to sustain peace. In fact,
the resolution that we have just adopted introduces the
concept of “sustaining peace” as the translation of the
General Assembly’s determination to address the root
causes of conflicts; assist the parties to a conflict to
end hostilities; ensure national reconciliation; and,
importantly, promote, at the national level, the three
pillars of the United Nations, supporting Member
States’ efforts to build peaceful societies through
inclusive development.

Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): With today’s
adoption of resolution 70/262, on the review of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture, we have
a renewed opportunity to engage Member States, the
United Nations and other stakeholders collectively in a
global effort to build lasting peace. We concur with the
Permanent Representatives of Angola and Australia,
whom I wish to congratulate on their valuable work
in facilitating this intergovernmental process, that the
agreement we have arrived at today reflects the level
of ambition and scope of the recommendations of
the 2015 report of the Secretary-General’s Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture (A/69/968).

The resolution further recognizes the primary
role of national authorities in preventing conflict, the
invaluable support that the United Nations can provide
and the primary responsibility of the Security Council
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
It also considers the importance of strategic and
operational partnerships with international and regional
organizations, and takes into account the important role
of all segments of society, in particular civil society,
women and youth.
The role of the Peacebuilding Commission is
also reaffirmed, and Member States are called upon
to work to improve the Commission’s effectiveness,
efficiency and flexibility, ensure its revitalization
and coordination with the other bodies and agencies
of the United Nations system. The resolution also
provides guidance on the persistent challenge posed by
insufficient financial contributions to the Peacebuilding
Fund, inviting the Secretary-General to provide options
for consideration by Member States, aimed at ensuring

We believe that in adopting resolution 70/262,
the General Assembly and the Security Council are
building the foundations of a new commitment to and
mindset on ways to address conflict prevention and
resolution, a commitment that must be supported at
the national level and by every individual, and taking
into account the fact that we are all accountable to
future generations for building peaceful societies and
sustainable and sustaining peace.

It is fair to say that today’s resolution lives up to
the challenges we are facing, 10 years after the creation
of the Peacebuilding Commission. The findings of the
Advisory Group of Experts, under the able chairship
of Ambassador Gert Rosenthal, have paved the way
for innovative ideas and measures to strengthen
peacebuilding initiatives, such as the concept of
sustaining peace; national ownership with inclusivity;
an emphasis on prevention and the need to address the
root causes of conflict; partnerships with regional and
subregional organizations; sustained financing; and
early engagement with conflict-affected countries. The
concept of sustaining peace, which encompasses the
dimension of conflict prevention, marks an evolution
from the original paradigm of peacebuilding, which
focused on addressing the needs of countries emerging
from conflict, as reflected in the outcome document of
the 2005 World Summit (resolution 60/1), resolution
60/180 and Security Council resolutions 1645 (2005)
and 1646 (2005).
Brazil has long emphasized that the assumption that
poverty leads to conflict is incorrect. We should not

16-1183811/31

A/70/PV.93

forget that, historically, the most violent and destructive
conflicts have been caused by well-developed
societies. At the same time, we have underscored that
the engagement of the United Nations with conflictaffected countries should go beyond providing aid
relief and addressing immediate needs but should rather
include activities that aim at promoting sustainable
development, poverty eradication, access to justice,
gender equality and respect for human rights, which are
precisely what the peacebuilding architecture provides
a framework for achieving, with the active engagement
of the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and the Security Council. Nor should we forget
that national authorities also share the responsibility
for drafting policies and identifying priorities and
activities for sustaining peace, and that inclusivity
is fundamental when forging a common vision of
society. In that regard, Brazil especially welcomes the
recognition of the role that women and young people
can play in the prevention and resolution of conflicts.
The General Assembly will also consider, under
agenda item 110, the report of the Secretary-General
(A/70/715) on the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF). As we
learned from the report, the PBF is faced with a shortage
of resources for the current year. It is true that the Fund’s
flexibility enables rapid responses to critical scenarios
when most donors withdraw their support, but the lack
of predictable financing is a fundamental challenge to
long-term peacebuilding efforts. In that regard, Brazil
welcomes the fact that the Secretary-General will report
to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session
on options to increase, restructure and better prioritize
funding allocated to peacebuilding activities, including
through assessed contributions. Brazil also values the
emphasis placed on the need for sustained financing for
peacebuilding activities, including by cooperating with
multilateral financial institutions such as the World
Bank and regional institutions.
I would like to add a few words about the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), whose activities will
also be considered in this meeting. As a former Chair
of the PBC, I am encouraged to note that the review
process has strengthened its bridging role among the
principal bodies of the United Nations system and has
acknowledged its convening power among various
stakeholders from within and outside the Organization.
Brazil also looks forward to implementation of the
provision that calls for including a gender perspective
in the work of the Peacebuilding Commission.
12/31

27/04/2016

Mr. Tommo Monthe (Cameroon), Vice-President,
took the Chair.
Despite the progress made today, I wish to highlight
the fact that for the Peacebuilding Commission to
realize its full potential more efficiently, its entire
membership should actively engage in its work. At the
moment, some Member States do not show the same
level of engagement with it by comparison to their
commitment to other bodies. It is extremely important
that the members of the Security Council, in particular,
take full ownership of the Commission and contribute
to improving the engagement of the United Nations
membership in general in promoting sustaining peace.
It is our understanding that by acknowledging the
importance of strong coordination and cooperation
between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission, the General Assembly is empowering the
PBC in its advisory capacity to the Security Council.
We expect the Council to take full advantage of the
provision in paragraph 7 of the resolution we have just
adopted by consensus.
Ms. Sughayar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I
would first like to express Jordan’s appreciation to
the delegations of Australia and Angola for their
outstanding role and hard work during the consultations
for the 2015 review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. I salute the efforts of all the Member States
that have participated so effectively and assiduously in
the negotiations over the past three months, particularly
Bangladesh, in its efforts as coordinator of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
The review of the peacebuilding architecture
has come at a very important moment, a time when
conflicts and their political, economic and humanitarian
consequences are escalating, and enables us to focus on
two fundamental objectives — preventing conflicts and
sustaining peace. Resolution 70/262, which we adopted
this morning, is a vital step and will be a cornerstone
of the peacebuilding architecture for the coming
years. It reflects Member States’ desire to achieve
those two objectives as a priority in strengthening
the peacebuilding system. That will require States
to demonstrate greater responsibility and national
ownership in order to maintain and sustain peace and
build confidence among communities. The costs of
conflicts, their recurrence in some States and regions
and the serious humanitarian and financial losses that
result can no longer be tolerated. We must investigate
the root causes of conflicts if we are to find the right
16-11838

27/04/2016

solutions to them. Our success in achieving sustaining
peace will depend on our joint commitment to taking
concrete steps on the ground in order to strengthen the
links between the three pillars of stability — human
rights, development and security.
The review and today’s resolution represent a
road map for implementing our need to sustain peace,
as well as for dealing with current challenges. Jordan
would like to stress some of the requirements for this,
the most important being, first, the ability to learn
from past lessons, to bridge the gaps that have affected
and undermined the efforts of the United Nations and
its involvement and response in countries in conflict.
The second is promoting consultations and positive
synergies between the Peacebuilding Commission,
Member States and regional organizations, and the
third is improving ways of sustaining peace in order
to give the impetus necessary for dealing with the
challenges of today, which do not disappear with the
end of conflict or violence.
We believe that women and young people are
important segments of society and important partners
in building peace. We therefore have a responsibility to
emphasize and focus on ensuring that young people and
women can play a positive role. Young people are in a
majority in States affected by conflict, and Jordan has
therefore focused on ensuring that today’s resolution
on the peacebuilding architecture refers to Security
Council resolution 2250 (2015), on youth, peace and
security, including the paragraph that underscores the
role of young people’s effective, viable participation
in sustaining peace, especially as the numbers of
conflicts increase.
Since the 2015 review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture has focused on collective
views in the United Nations and among Member
States, Jordan would like to reaffirm its willingness to
cooperate with its regional and international partners in
implementing the resolution. I would like to emphasize
that our ability to confront new challenges and ensure
that they do not develop into armed conflicts can be
maintained only through sustained, collective efforts
and the provision of the resources needed to help
countries in conflict.
Mr. Minah (Sierra Leone): It gives me great
pleasure to speak on behalf of the African caucus
within the Peacebuilding Commission. For us, as the
100th Member of the United Nations, on this day of

A/70/PV.93

the fifty-fifth anniversary of our independence, it
seems fitting that this meeting is being held here today.
We as a country have been a prime beneficiary of
the peacebuilding efforts of the Organization. Africa
as a continent has been a crucible for many of the
peacebuilding experiments and events over the past
decade or so.
We welcome the twin adoptions today of resolution
70/262 and Security Council resolution 2282 (2016),
and we thank all who have played a part in helping
us to arrive where we are today. We are also grateful
for the efforts of the co-facilitators, our colleagues the
Permanent Representatives of Angola and Australia.
We welcome Ambassador Rosenthal and his Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture for their sterling work in bringing us to this
point. We would also like to pay tribute to the President
of the General Assembly for his guidance. As we look
forward to the forthcoming Kenyan chairmanship of the
Peacebuilding Commission, we thank Sweden and our
colleague Ambassador Olof Skoog for their leadership.
And we would like to recognize all who have sought
peace, built peace or who have fallen in the service of
peace. Today represents a further step in the evolution
of peacebuilding. We must embrace the challenge of
sustaining peace.
The unique convening power of the Peacebuilding
Commission was evident during the Ebola epidemic
that struck West Africa. Yet during that crisis we saw
the evolution and perhaps the growth of the interlocking
nature of regional and subregional organizations and
of the continental organization, the African Union. All
came to realize that while Sierra Leone, Liberia and
Guinea formed the epicentre of the Ebola crisis, the cause
and the fight belonged to all of us. Today’s resolution
represents a balance between ambition, pragmatism and
aspirations. It does not give everything we desire, but it
speaks to many of the concerns and aims that we hope
a renewed peacebuilding architecture will achieve. We
all now recognize how important it is to ensure that
the Commission speaks to fragile States rather than
at them. We all recognize the need for predictable and
sustainable financing for the Peacebuilding Fund. We
all recognize the Commission’s value as an advisory
link between the various institutions within the house
and various organizations outside it. We all recognize
that the issue of peacebuilding is indeed one for all
of us.

16-1183813/31

A/70/PV.93

On this day of Sierra Leone’s independence,
the President of the Republic of Sierra Leone, His
Excellency Mr. Ernest Bai Koroma, has said that our
country has been rightly lauded for how far it has come
and for its resilience in emerging from conflict into
a position of relative safety. But like our colleagues,
our sister countries within the Mano River Union
and Africa in general, we are in a state of fragility.
Peacebuilding does not encompass only the ending of
conflict; it also involves preventing conflict and being
mindful of the causes that may lead to it. In the quest to
sustain peace, there are tasks for the national, regional
and continental actors. On the national front, it is the
job of those governing to make sure that they build
a truly inclusive society that leaves no one out. It is
for the national actors to make sure that they address
the needs of all their citizens, not just the privileged
few. Regional and subregional actors can play an earlywarning role that may advise and inform the acts of the
continental organization, the African Union.
As the United Nations, it is of course in our interest
to maintain and sustain peace. The Security Council,
as we know, is primarily engaged with the maintenance
of international peace and security, but the Assembly
also has a role to play, and through the Peacebuilding
Commission we believe we can make our voice more
effective. We welcome all who have played a key role in
the negotiations leading to today’s resolutions, and we
are glad that the questions of synergies and coordination
are clearly covered in them.

27/04/2016

in a world of uncertainty. Never before has the cause
of peace seemed so much under siege. Today we have
taken a small step to help that cause, and in Africa we
will play our role. The African Union will combine its
efforts with those of all in this Organization to ensure
that the Commission, the Peacebuilding Fund and all
the constituent parts of the architecture are not only
enhanced but empowered.
In closing, I would like to commend all our
peacekeepers in the field and all who work here at
Headquarters to ensure that what we do and say
here always manages to have an effect on the least
advantaged of our citizens.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier on behalf of the European Union, and I would
like to add just a couple of brief remarks.
I would first like to express our gratitude for today’s
meeting, and in particular to thank the co-facilitators
for their tireless work, which has resulted in the strong,
balanced resolution 70/262, which we have all endorsed.
As the report of the Advisory Group of Experts
on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture
(A/69/968) has highlighted, however, there has been
underperformance in some areas, so I am very pleased
that today’s resolution grasps those issues.

In the wake of Ebola, we are also aware that the
gains of peacebuilding can be eroded if we take our eyes
off the ball. Today Sierra Leone is a country of relative
safety and much praised for its religious tolerance.
But as I have said, the road from fragility to stability
requires not only resilience on the part of the citizens
of a State but also the economic and peacebuilding
resilience that we must all help to create.

I would like to particularly highlight four points.
The first is the importance of sustaining peace as a
concept, which recognizes that we should look at the
whole cycle of a conflict rather than waiting until it is
raging to take action, as the Permanent Representative
of Sierra Leone has so eloquently just said. We must be
better at engaging earlier in support of prevention. We
must also stay the course, providing long-term financial
aid and diplomatic support to countries emerging from
conflict in order to help make sure that they do not
relapse into violence. That should not be controversial.

Today the Commission is rightly commended
for its work. Its past three Chairs have ensured that
its prominence is unquestioned. As I said earlier,
today’s resolution is a balance and, as with all
resolutions, a compromise. But the fact remains
that as with everything we do in this building,
implementation and continued commitment to the
cause remain paramount.There are concentric circles of
responsibilities — national, subregional, regional and
continental, but above all global. We are in a world of
pandemics, epidemics, terrorism and migration. We are

Secondly, we also welcome the focus on a more
coherent United Nations approach to sustaining peace
at the national level, with greater joint analysis and
collaboration within United Nations country teams and
with United Nations peacekeeping and special political
missions. Sustaining peace means not just ensuring that
all United Nations planning, policy and programming
is conflict-sensitive, but also that it actually works
to reduce conflict. UNICEF and the United Nations
Development Programme, which have so much to offer
in that area, are very much part of this.

14/31

16-11838

27/04/2016

Thirdly, the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
annual report (A/70/714) flags a range of good, important
work done over the past year under Ambassador
Skoog’s innovative chairship. We strongly agree,
however, with the resolution’s point that the PBC has to
be more flexible and agile in its structures in order to
better support countries affected by conflict, improve
the coherence of the work of the United Nations and
other regional and international bodies and provide the
Security Council with strategic and timely advice. That
advice is important and we will want to take account of
it in the Council. I agree with Ambassador Kamau that
this is an inherently political process.
Finally, the annual report and the resolution rightly
point to the excellent work of the Peacebuilding Fund
(PBF). The resolution makes it clear that more funding
is needed for the PBF, and we believe that we should
capitalize on that momentum. The United Kingdom is
currently the largest contributor to the Peacebuilding
Fund, but we would really welcome some competition
in that area. We are pleased to be joining Kenya
and Sweden in co-hosting a PBF pledging event at
the General Assembly in September, and we really
encourage all Member States to join us in supporting
their valuable work.
The United Kingdom itself has been a good friend
to peacebuilding activities in the United Nations.
We have committed a further $20 million this year
alone in various voluntary contributions aimed at
strengthening the capacity, coherence and delivery
of the peacebuilding work. The United Kingdom now
stands ready to work with Kenya, as Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, and all our other friends
and colleagues, to turn this resolution into swift and
practical action.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I am very pleased to be
addressing the General Assembly at this joint debate.
I would like to begin by congratulating Ambassador
Kamau of Kenya on his assumption of the chairmanship
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) for 2016. I
would also like to express my sincere appreciation
to Ambassador Skoog of Sweden for his excellent
leadership over the past year as Chair of the PBC, and
to all the Chairs of the country-specific configurations
for their efforts.
The year 2015 was a crucial one for United
Nations peacebuilding activity. The efforts of the PBC
coincided with the review process of the United Nations

A/70/PV.93

peacebuilding architecture. Japan welcomes the
simultaneous adoption today of important resolutions
by both the General Assembly (resolution 70/262)
and the Security Council (resolution 2282 (2016)).
I congratulate the co-facilitators, the Permanent
Representatives of Angola and Australia, and I am
sincerely grateful for their tireless efforts.
It is now important that we all implement the
resolution. Japan very much hopes that it will help the
PBC improve its performance of its intended function
as an advisory body to the principal organs of the
United Nations, especially the Security Council. Let
me illustrate that point with a specific example.
The strength of the PBC lies in the long-term
endeavours whereby it lays the groundwork for peace.
During my chairmanship of the PBC Working Group on
Lessons Learned, we tried to highlight those comparative
strengths. In 2015, the Working Group focused its
efforts on the importance of institution-building.
Throughout the discussion, we were firmly convinced
that strengthening core State institutions that provide
security, justice, public administration and basic social
services is fundamental to a successful transition
from a post-conflict situation to lasting peace. With a
view to providing input into the review process, such
lessons learned and the outstanding challenges were
summarized in the Working Group’s final report,
entitled “Institution-building: the challenges for the
United Nations system”. The main points were also
reflected in the PBC’s annual report (A/70/714), just
presented by Ambassador Skoog. The Working Group’s
report is an embodiment of the PBC’s mandated
advisory role, and I hope it will continue to be referred
to in future discussions.
I am pleased that the resolution refers to the
importance of institution-building. I also welcome the
fact that the Security Council expresses its intention to
regularly request, deliberate and draw on the specific,
strategic and targeted advice of the PBC, including
to assist with the longer-term perspective required
for sustaining peace, as stated in paragraph 8 of the
resolution. Let us now implement the resolution by
having the Security Council regularly invite the PBC
Chairs to meetings and request their advice. I will
do so during Japan’s forthcoming presidency of the
Council for the month of July if relevant agenda items
are discussed.

16-1183815/31

A/70/PV.93

Securing adequate resources for peacebuilding
and conflict prevention is crucial, as many previous
speakers have pointed out. There is no denying that the
Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) has proved to be an important
financial tool for that purpose. Recognizing both the
usefulness of the Fund and the current difficulties it is
facing, Japan contributed an additional $3.5 million to
it last month. That will bring our total contribution to
$46 million.
The comparative advantage of the PBF lies in
its ability to respond swiftly and flexibly. Japan has
consistently argued that this strength of the Fund needs
to be maintained and must not be undermined. This
position remains firmly intact. As the Assembly urges
in the resolution, Japan calls on other Member States to
consider making voluntary contributions to the Fund.
As President of the Security Council, Japan plans
to hold an open debate on peacebuilding in Africa in the
month of July. This open debate will build on the work
of the PBC during 2015, as well as on the resolution
just adopted. The open debate will provide an excellent
opportunity for us to discuss the challenges and
elevate our peacebuilding efforts even further in the
years ahead.
Let me conclude my statement by reaffirming
Japan’s strong commitment to peacebuilding.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): My delegation commends the
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador
Macharia Kamau, for his statement and his sterling
contribution to the work of the Commission.
The report before us (A/70/714) provides a useful
overview of the work of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) during its ninth session, and we welcome its
action-oriented
recommendations.
Peacebuilding
activities produce tangible results on the ground.
Improvement in the lives of ordinary people affected
by conflict is a time-tested yardstick that we can and do
use to evaluate this important work.
Pakistan has seen the result of the work undertaken
by the Peacebuilding Commission first hand, both as
a member of the Commission and as one of the top
troop contributors to countries where much of this
work takes place. This experience confirms our belief
that strengthening the peacebuilding architecture
and advancing the peacebuilding agenda are not just
important but imperative.
16/31

27/04/2016

The past year has been a seminal one for the
PBC. Beginning with the work of the Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture, we have all directed much effort to
strengthen and improve United Nations peacebuilding.
We commend the co-facilitators, the Permanent
Representatives of Angola and Australia, for steering
the process that led to adoption of resolution 70/262
on the review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture earlier today. The simultaneous adoption of
the resolution in the Security Council and the General
Assembly successfully brings to an end this review
process. Now it is time for implementation. We should
be able to see change on the ground, where it matters
most, in the form of a strengthened and effective
peacebuilding mechanism.
The resolution that we have just adopted is based
on two very important precepts: sustainable peace
and inclusivity. Lasting peace is possible only through
the prevention of conflict and addressing its root
causes. And inclusivity is the linchpin for sustainable
peace. This requires close partnership with national
stakeholders and respect for national priorities and
policies. An enhanced role for women and youth is also
critical and essential for success.
There are, as we all know, many silos in the
United Nations system, and different processes work
independently on interrelated issues. We must strive
to better utilize the work of the PBC. Enhancing its
interaction and advisory role with the principal organs
of the United Nations is therefore critical.
One of the principal achievements of the
Commission over the past couple of years was managing
the aftermath of the Ebola outbreak in Guinea, Liberia
and Sierra Leone. The PBC and the country-specific
configurations made a concerted endeavour to respond
to the peacebuilding-related aspects of the recovery
effort. The Ebola crisis exposed challenges related to
the consolidation of peace. The PBC’s nimbleness and
flexibility in responding to the Ebola crisis brought
about a more coherent response. Those are important
lessons for us to absorb for the future.
The report of the Secretary-General on the
Peacebuilding Fund (A/70/715), on the other hand,
paints a grim picture of waning finances limiting the
PBC’s ability to match demand. This shortcoming has
also been identified in the review process. Sufficient
and predictable resources will be required to support
16-11838

27/04/2016

early, high-risk peacebuilding and to promote systemwide coherence. The resolution also touches upon
this aspect. The PBC’s focus on domestic resource
mobilization is important, but enhancing international
financial support and ensuring its predictability is far
more critical.
The Peacebuilding Commission has a vital role in
conflict prevention, post-conflict peacebuilding and
the avoidance of any relapse of conflict. Investment
in equipping the PBC to match challenges is really
investing in our future. The review process that we
have just completed should breathe new life into the
PBC, making it more responsive and effective.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
the Permanent Representative of Sweden, Ambassador
Skoog, for his contribution over the past year as Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). I congratulate
the Permanent Representative of Kenya, Ambassador
Kamau, on his election as Chair of the PBC.
The General Assembly and the Security Council
have just adopted resolutions 70/262 and 2282 (2016),
respectively, on the review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture, establishing guidelines for
the future efforts of the United Nations in the field
of peacebuilding.
In late 2014, the General Assembly, at its sixty-ninth
session, and the Security Council jointly launched the
comprehensive review process of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture. Through their collective
efforts, States Members of the United Nations have
achieved a positive outcome in the comprehensive
review and, by summarizing their experiences of the
past 10 years, they have put forward ideas on how to
improve the work of peacebuilding. We would like to
work together with Member States to comprehensively
implement the relevant content of the resolution,
promote and improve United Nations efforts in the field
of peacebuilding and enable the United Nations to better
fulfil its responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security.
Peacebuilding is an innovative endeavour of the
United Nations in the field of peace and development.
Since its establishment in 2006, the organs of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture, which
include the PBC, the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) and the
Peacebuilding Support Office, have comprehensively
fulfilled the mandates entrusted to them by the
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions,

A/70/PV.93

actively coordinated the peacebuilding efforts of the
international community in post-conflict countries,
played an important role in achieving the common
objectives of the United Nations for world peace and
development, and implemented the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. China
wishes to focus on four points with regard to future
work in the area of peacebuilding.
First, it is imperative to adhere to the principle
of national ownership by the host country. In order to
achieve lasting peace and development in post-conflict
countries, the efforts of the countries concerned are
crucial. In developing and carrying out peacebuilding
efforts, the international community should respect the
sovereignty and ownership of the countries concerned
and provide constructive efforts in the light of their
needs and wills.
Secondly, it is essential to design and implement
policies in the light of the actual conditions on the
ground. The conditions of post-conflict countries vary
and countries have different needs at different times.
The priorities and programmes of peacebuilding should
be adapted to the actual conditions of the countries
concerned and be interfaced with their overall
development strategies, priority areas and objectives,
so as to ensure that the assistance provided will meet
their actual needs and achieve optimum results. China
encourages the PBF to pay to close attention to the
capacity-building of the countries concerned and to
comprehensively increase efficiency.
Thirdly, it is imperative to strengthen the integrated
approaches and coordination and improve efficiency.
Peacebuilding efforts span the political, social, security
and economic fields. They involve the participation of
Governments of the countries concerned, other relevant
countries, regional organizations, the United Nations
and international finance institutions. The PBC should
fully assume its role as an intergovernmental advisory
body, actively coordinate the peacebuilding efforts of
the international community, rationally manage its
resources and build complementarity in advantages.
Fourthly, it is crucial to pay great attention to
root causes and comprehensively advance the work
of peacebuilding. Peacebuilding should be aimed at
helping post-conflict countries achieve development
through their own efforts and promote lasting peace.
Peacebuilding should work in synergy with the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1)

16-1183817/31

A/70/PV.93

27/04/2016

and focus on addressing poverty, underdevelopment and
other major underlying issues that give rise to conflicts
and crises; comprehensively promote reconstruction
efforts in post-conflict countries in all sectors; and
promote coordinated socioeconomic development in
the countries concerned.

all conflict-prevention and resolution mechanisms.
We believe that such investments would prevent the
outbreak, escalation, continuation and recurrence of
conflicts. They would definitely be considerably less
expensive and more sustainable than merely reacting
to crises.

The President of China pointed out, during his
participation in the United Nations summit for the
adoption of the post-2015 development agenda on the
occasion of the Organization’s seventieth anniversary
(see A/70/PV.13), that we should further promote the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, fashion a new type of international relations
with win-win cooperation at its core and build a
community of common destiny for humankind. China
is ready to work together with other Member States to
promote the cause of United Nations peacebuilding and
peacekeeping and make greater contributions to that
endeavour.

The current review comes with a greater need for
the United Nations to have more effective coordination,
synergy of mandates and system-wide coherence across
the sectors of peace and security, development and
human rights. More positive outcomes also demand
closer collaboration with other intergovernmental
and international organizations for more streamlined
operations and implementation of policy directives.
Therefore, we believe that the original design and
interventions must be modified accordingly to suit
contemporary environments and the changing nature
of conflicts.

Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): I would like to convey
our warmest appreciation for the untiring efforts of
the Permanent Representative of Sweden as Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission in 2015 and wish the
Permanent Representative of Kenya every success in
his new role as current Chair of the Commission.
The Republic of Kazakhstan strongly supports
the work and commends the role of the Commission
over the past year, especially in implementing countryspecific activities, elaborating recommendations to
overcome the detrimental effects of the Ebola crisis,
and ensuring more structural integration of gender
aspects and investment in youth in achieving peace
and security.
This debate comes at a crucial moment, when
the review of the peacebuilding architecture is in
the final stage of its consideration. The adoption of
resolution 70/262 today will greatly enhance the work
of the Commission and consolidate the collective
efforts in sustaining peace and security. In this
regard, we specially commend the hard work of the
Permanent Representatives of Australia and Angola,
as co-facilitators of an inclusive intergovernmental
process. We would like to highlight several points that
are of relevance to increase the success and effectiveness
of the peacebuilding architecture.
Peacebuilding is not to be confined to the postconflict phase only, but also has to be integrated into
all United Nations efforts from the very start and into
18/31

It is critical for the United Nations system to
achieve a greater internal convergence of mandates
among its agencies and country teams on the ground,
together with regional structures and organizations. The
importance of enhanced partnerships with regional and
subregional organizations, as well as with international
financial institutions, cannot be overemphasized. All
measures must be coordinated with those of the special
representatives of the Secretary-General, the special
political missions and peacekeeping operations.
What is most critical is adequate and assured
financing to assess and mitigate the factors that trigger
conflicts. Steady monetary resources are needed for
building stable foundations of society in the postconflict phase, since development and peace are
two sides of the same coin. Therefore, the role of the
Peacebuilding Fund in helping to garner resources has
to be strengthened and the international community
must collectively seek ways to do so. We take this
opportunity to praise the launch of the Peacebuilding
Fund’s new cross-border initiative in the Central Asian
region, along the border of Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan, as
well as the allocation of over 15 per cent of investments
to support women’s empowerment.
Foreseeing future threats, President of Kazakhstan
Mr. Nursultan Nazarbayev, while addressing the
General Assembly during the general debate of its
seventieth session last year (see A/70/PV.13), proposed
the development of a global strategy that could
eliminate conflict for all times. It was also suggested
16-11838

27/04/2016

that part of national military expenditures be invested
in the Sustainable Development Goals Fund.
Kazakhstan
provides
humanitarian
and
development assistance to several crises areas. In
particular, we are working closely with the African
Union and its various councils and mechanisms to
ensure durable peace. Recently, Kazakhstan signed
the Third-Party Cost-Sharing Agreement with the
United Nations Development Programme with a view
to implementing the Africa-Kazakhstan Partnership for
Sustainable Development to benefit 45 countries in the
region.
To conclude, Kazakhstan stands ready always to
build the peacebuilding architecture in order to lay
solid foundations for regional and global stability.
Mrs. Arrieta Munguia (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Today, the General Assembly and the Security
Council have taken an important step forward with the
adoption of resolutions 70/262 and 2282 (2016), which
call for change in the way in which the Organization
seeks to establish peace. With time we have learned
that the old model of acting only when a crisis breaks
out is unsustainable. We have to build peace before,
during and after conflicts. We also know that if this
peace is to be sustainable, it must be carried out not
only from the top down and include the most influential
actors, but also from the bottom up and include and
listen to all segments of society. If it is to be more than
a mere peace on paper, it must be a peace that includes
development, security, justice and the institutions that
protect basic rights; it must speak to young people and
provide them with economic opportunities; and it must
not marginalize women. This entire process, which is
also an end in itself, is what we, States Members of the
United Nations, call “sustainable peace”.
Ten years after having established the peacebuilding
architecture, we are ready and we have powerful
instruments, such as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1) and the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda, to make the 360-degree turn that is
necessary to place human beings at the centre of this
peace and which goes to the root of conflicts. Mexico
supports not only a change at the epicentre of our
peacebuilding efforts from the reactive approach in
which we have been mired for years to a preventative
approach, but also the redefinition of the very
peacebuilding architecture within the Organization. We
believe that, in order to speak about sustainable peace,

A/70/PV.93

we must establish a true dialogue between the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council.
My delegation sees clear progress in the fact that
the resolutions we have adopted today reflect the desire
of Member States to go beyond the fragmentation of
these bodies, using the Peacebuilding Commission
as a bridge and making effective use of its role as a
intergovernmental advisory body. We also value the
fact that we are rethinking the working methods of
the Peacebuilding Commission and seeking flexibility
that would allow it to act more freely and in closer
proximity with the countries in conflict with a variety
of approaches that take into account the particular
context of a country or region.
Similarly, the issue of financial resources is a
fundamental part of any serious review process that
we undertake and will also be important for the future
of the peacebuilding architecture. While requests
and mandates, to do more, must be accompanied by
the corresponding resources, we also need strategic
planning, which would make it possible to have greater
efficiency and effectiveness in the Organization’s work.
In this respect, the analysis that the Secretary-General
will provide to the General Assembly on the financial
arrangements for this architecture and his proposals
for specific actions to shore up in both substance and
in form the peacebuilding architecture, which aims to
promote a peaceful world through inclusion, will also
be important. However, overcoming the inertia in the
design of critical road maps to achieve sustainable
peace will require efforts by everyone. That is why
Mexico is ready to continue and support this process,
which we are beginning today.
Lastly, Mexico would like to sincerely acknowledge
the work of the Advisory Group of Experts on the
Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture, which was
wisely led by Ambassador Gert Rosenthal and which
made it possible for us to use as a guideline from this
joint consideration a transformative concept, namely,
that of sustainable peace, under the concepts of
inclusiveness, prevention and in particular coherence
within the Organization. We also acknowledge the
efforts made by the Permanent Representatives of
Angola and Australia, who led our discussions with
empathy, patience and dedication.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): My delegation wishes to
thank the President of the General Assembly for his

16-1183819/31

A/70/PV.93

remarks regarding resolution 70/262, on the review of
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture. We also
express our deep appreciation to Ambassador Macharia
Kamau, Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
for his comprehensive presentation, and commend the
hard work of the previous Chair, Ambassador Olof
Skoog, who is also the new Vice-Chair together with
the Republic of Korea, along with all the Chairs of the
six country-specific configurations and the Working
Group on Lessons Learned. We would like to thank the
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacebuilding Support,
Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, along with his able team,
for their strong commitment to supporting the mandate
of the PBC and administering the Peacebuilding Fund.
Indonesia welcomes the adoption of the resolution,
entitled “Review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture”, which emphasizes the importance
of a comprehensive approach to sustaining peace,
especially through the prevention of conflict. This
resolution provides valuable substantive provisions for
the advancement of the United Nations peacebuilding
efforts. My delegation is pleased that various key
elements are reflected in the resolution, including the
importance of diversifying the PBC’s working methods,
the need for strong coordination between the Security
Council and the PBC, and the need for predictable and
sustained financing to United Nations peacebuilding
activities. We hope that its implementation will lead to
enhanced support on peacebuilding in a comprehensive
and coordinated manner for the countries that request it.
It would be remiss of me not to thank the Permanent
Representatives of Australia and Angola for their hard
work as the co-facilitators during the intergovernmental
negotiations on the draft resolution. We also thank
Bangladesh, as the Coordinator of the Non-Aligned
Movement Caucus of the Peacebuilding Commission,
as well as various parties and diplomats that have done
an excellent job in negotiating this resolution.
Regarding the PBC’s annual report (A/70/714),
Indonesia is pleased that the PBC’s key objectives during
its ninth session included adopting more transparent
working methods and a more flexible agenda, as well as
improving partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations. The PBC needs to continue to explore
ways to adopt more flexible and lighter working methods
to better adapt to current challenges on the ground.
On the advisory role of the Commission, we share
the view stated in the report that by providing context20/31

27/04/2016

specific and tailored advice, the PBC could ensure that
national priorities can be factored into the Security
Council’s mandate design and implementation. The
element of national priorities is crucial throughout
the whole United Nations engagement process with
host countries.
With regard to the 2015 annual session under the
theme of predictable financing for peacebuilding, we
note that fragmentation and pooled funding have been
among the aspects mentioned in the two sessions.
Guided by the needs identified by host countries,
the United Nations system and donors should try to
improve their coordination and timelines, as well as
avoid unnecessary duplication in their work.
Moreover, the significance of increased civilian
capacity-building support to the countries affected
or emerging from conflict cannot be emphasized
enough. Adequately resourced, as well as properly
governed, national institutions that serve citizens
with transparency and accountability are essential
to sustaining peace and sustaining peacebuilding
dividends. It is indeed important to ensure the
continuity of the unique dialogue conducted by relevant
actors from New York and the field, as well as from the
capitals, through the annual session.
We hope that with the new resolution, emphasizing
predictable and sustained financing to United Nations
peacebuilding activities, the Secretary-General,
with the support of Member States, would establish
more effective and predictable funding arrangements
for United Nations peacebuilding efforts. We take
note of the report by the Secretary-General on the
Peacebuilding Fund, which states that the Fund
will initiate new management procedures in 2016 to
ensure that available resources are used to maximum
advantage and to provide decision-makers with the
information necessary to make the case for sufficient
levels of predictable funding.
To effectively address conflicts, which have
increased threefold since 2007, and a number of present
situations that pose a risk of relapse, along with the
provision of adequate financial resources, sustained
effort at dialogue, mediation and conflict avoidance
will certainly be critical. Where the Security Council
will have to play its role deftly, the PBC advice to the
Council and its supporting role will also be crucial. After
the adoption of the new resolution, a strong hope has
manifested. It is now with all United Nations principal
16-11838

27/04/2016

organs, the PBC and other United Nations system actors
as to how effective and supportive they are willing to
be in fully realizing the aims of the resolution. For
its part, Indonesia will continue to contribute to all
meaningful efforts to further strengthen the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to extend my sincere thanks to
Ambassador Olof Skoog for his commitment as Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission in the past year and
to assure his successor, the Permanent Representative
of Kenya, of our full support.
I also want to thank the President of the General
Assembly for organizing today’s debate, which comes
at a propitious moment, as we have just adopted
resolution 70/262, entitled “Review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture”, which we welcome
and which incorporates many of the recommendations
contained in the report (see A/69/968) of the Advisory
Group of Experts. In that context, we are grateful to
Advisory Group’s Chair, Ambassador Gert Rosenthal,
and its other members for the quality of their work
and the level of ambition they have shown. We are
also grateful to the Permanent Representatives of the
Angola and Australia, who, together with their teams,
led negotiations to a positive outcome, namely, the
adoption of the resolution this morning.
Luxembourg fully aligns itself with the statement
of the observer of the European Union.
The identical resolutions adopted this morning
by the General Assembly and the Security Council
(resolution 2282 (2016)) cover many of the priorities
to which Luxembourg has been committed since the
establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission, and
more specifically as it fulfilled its mandate as Chair
of the Guinea country-specific configuration. Those
priorities reflect trends already under way within the
Peacebuilding Commission in recent years, including
those in the report (A/70/714) on its ninth session,
which we are discussing today.
Luxembourg strongly believes that the sustainability
of peace requires an integrated approach aimed at
preventing the outbreak, escalation, continuation and
recurrence of conflicts, and which brings together
Government authorities and other stakeholders at the
national level and enjoys the support of the international
community. We welcome the fact that the resolution
formally endorses such an approach, which should

A/70/PV.93

take the form of a long-term political process capable
of addressing the root causes of conflict, and that it
reaffirms the interdependence of the components of
such an integrated approach.
Such an approach must necessarily involve
development, peace and security, respect for human
rights as well as good governance, and support inclusive
national processes that take into account the needs of
all segments of society. That has also been what we
are trying to do in the Guinea country configuration,
while working in a spirit of national ownership with
the Guinean authorities and the various components
of Guinean society, development partners and regional
and subregional organizations, including the Economic
Community of West African States and the Mano River
Union. Accordingly, the Guinea country configuration,
which I have had the honour of chairing since its
establishment at the request of the Guinean authorities
in February 2011, focuses on national dialogue and an
inclusive approach.
The review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture that we have just completed recognizes
the need for a flexible approach in the way the
Peacebuilding Commission organizes its work. If we
want to maximize the value added that the Commission
can provide, we must give it the means to quickly grasp
national and regional contexts that are not on its agenda,
as well as thematic and cross-cutting issues, similar
to what was done in 2015 in terms of the transition in
Burkina Faso, the peace process in Papua New Guinea
and the challenges to peacebuilding in Somalia.
Such an approach was also successfully put into
practice in 2014 in connection with the Ebola epidemic.
The Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone country
configurations of the Peacebuilding Commission
were able to offer their platforms for the purposes
of mobilizing international attention, not only with
respect to the threat posed to public health but also with
respect to the stability of the countries concerned, and
beyond, to the stability of the West African region as a
whole. For its part, the Peacebuilding Fund was able to
play its role, extending the resources needed to face the
challenges to peace and security.
Without providing an exhaustive list, I would like
once again to refer to some aspects that for some time
now have been among the priorities of the Peacebuilding
Commission and whose relevance has been reaffirmed
today, namely, the need to take the gender perspective

16-1183821/31

A/70/PV.93

into account in peacebuilding efforts in a cross-cutting
manner and the need to recognize the role of young
people in preventing and ending conflict. Similarly, it
is important to mention the importance of transitional
justice as a key element in building peace and stability
and in laying the foundation for development.
The even more ambitious recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Group of
Experts, in particular with regard to increased
funding for peacebuilding activities and to improving
the predictability of funding, are certainly worth
implementing. However, we strongly believe that the
peacebuilding architecture put into place today through
the recent review is an important step forward. From
now on, it will be important to take full advantage of it.
The General Assembly can count on the commitment
and continuous support of Luxembourg to that end.
Mr. Ripkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): United Nations peacekeeping is one of
the most important tools for helping States settle
conflict, overcome the consequences of conflict and
prevent the resurgence of crises. We welcome the
simultaneous adoption today by the General Assembly
and the Security Council of resolutions reviewing
the peacebuilding architecture of the Organization
(resolution 70/262 and Security Council 2282 (2016)).
These resolutions should help United Nations bodies to
adapt to current realities in post-conflict countries and
increase their effectiveness.
We hope that the aims and objectives as outlined
by Member States for preserving peace will make
a positive contribution to the efforts to resolve and
prevent conflict. We believe it is imperative to
acknowledge, as established in the resolution, that the
responsibility for safeguarding peace is borne first and
foremost by national stakeholders. The United Nations
and international entities, when necessary and with
the agreement of the accepting parties, will provide
assistance, which should be focused on building the
capacity of afflicted countries to overcome conflict. We
believe that key to that perspective is the inclusiveness
of national political processes and the awareness of the
population’s general responsibility for peace.
The resolution adopted today specifies the
functions of the Peacebuilding Commission. It
is an intergovernmental consultative body and
therefore occupies an essential place in the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture. We call on the
22/31

27/04/2016

Organizational Committee to carry out a review of
its working methods. We hope that such a review will
serve to increase the effectiveness of the Commission’s
work in accordance with its mandate as set forth in
Security Council resolution 1645 (2005). We also hope
that it will increase the quality of the advice it provides
to the Security Council on the settlement of situations
in countries within the purview of both bodies.
Increasing the effectiveness of peacebuilding
efforts is the purpose of the important appeal to
strengthen the coordination and cooperation among the
various structures and bodies within the United Nations
on peacebuilding issues. In that context, it is important
to underline that such efforts should be undertaken
strictly within the framework of the corresponding
mandates. Otherwise, instead of it being a positive
impetus, we will just find confusion where everybody
will be doing everything but, at the same time, nobody
will be responsible for anything.
A specific section of the resolution is devoted to
questions of financing for peacebuilding, including
through the Peacebuilding Fund. The Fund has proved
to be an important mechanism for facilitating recovery
and development. We expect the Secretary-General
to take a well-rounded view of reasonable options for
guaranteeing long-term financing, on the basis of which
the General Assembly will be able to reach agreement.
Ms. Faizunnesa (Bangladesh): We thank the
President of the General Assembly for convening
today’s plenary meeting and welcome the adoption of the
comprehensive and forward-looking resolution 70/262,
on the review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. We join others in commending the work of
Australia and Angola as facilitators of the negotiations
on the resolution in its draft form.
Bangladesh had the privilege to act as the
spokesperson for the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries (NAM) during the informal negotiations
on the resolution. We wish to put on record our
appreciation for all NAM members for their unstinting
trust and support.
We would now look forward to the effective
implementation of the resolution, building on the
constructive recommendations of the Advisory
Group of Experts. We believe the General Assembly’s
upcoming high-level thematic debate on peace and
security can offer a platform for orienting our focus
on implementing the various aspects of the resolution
16-11838

27/04/2016

within a broader, holistic framework. The annual report
(A/70/714) of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) on
its ninth session, held last year, makes it evident that
the Commission has already embarked on a number of
measures and initiatives to that end. We appreciate the
vision statement and the six-month work programme
presented by the current PBC Chair, as well as the work
achieved so far along those lines. We hope the adoption
of the resolution today will add further impetus to
the Commission’s work on diversifying its working
methods in order to give its Organizational Committee
greater depth, dimension and flexibility in addressing
issues relevant to sustaining peace.
It is quite significant that our experience of United
Nations peacebuilding work over the past 10 years has
led us to coalesce at the conceptual level on the notion
of sustaining peace. The clear definition of that term,
as set forth in the resolution, justifiably broadens the
traditional and rather restrictive notion of peacebuilding
and underscores the importance of sustained political
support through the entire spectrum of conflicts,
including by preventing a relapse into conflict. We
hope that this notion will be duly acknowledged by
all the principal organs of the Organization as well
as other relevant stakeholders with a view to giving
peacebuilding a real chance to deliver on its potentials
in national, regional and multilateral contexts. With
that in mind, we wish to reiterate the importance we
attach to five critical issues.
First, the centrality of national ownership and
leadership in peacebuilding must be valued and preserved
beyond merely being mentioned. International and
regional support for peacebuilding can play a catalytic
role, but can bring about dividends only if it is anchored
in firm commitments led by national Governments
and authorities. It is of paramount importance to
foster an environment for inclusive peacebuilding
where a diverse set of national actors with legitimate
voices and interests have an opportunity to participate
and contribute.
Secondly, the fragmentation of peacebuilding
activities within and outside the United Nations system
poses a serious challenge to the fundamental objectives
and to credibility of peacebuilding. We feel encouraged
at seeing some efforts being made within the United
Nations, including on the ground, to break down the
so-called silos. It must remain a constant preoccupation
for the PBC, through its convening and advisory
roles, to further consolidate those efforts, particularly

A/70/PV.93

towards bringing the security and development actors
closer together without undercutting their respective
mandates and competence.
Thirdly, it is also encouraging to see the increase in
the importance of the PBC’s interface with the relevant
regional organizations, especially in Africa, and its
growing focus on regional cross-cutting issues. If the
PBC is effectively allowed to broaden its focus beyond
the ambit of its agenda, it may be worth exploring
how the Commission could create its niche relevance
through meaningful engagement with concerned
regional entities in parts of the world where it matters.
The PBC’s value-added work on the Ebola crisis in
West Africa could be replicated through other relevant
and emerging issues of concern, including the seminal
task of long-term institution-building.
Fourthly, the PBC’s gender strategy and discussions
on the role of young people in peacebuilding are valuable
contributions to promoting the inclusivity agenda in
peacebuilding. It is important that those approaches
find resonance in the peacebuilding activities of other
relevant United Nations bodies, agencies, funds and
programmes. All concerned should focus on leveraging
their respective strengths instead of repackaging
similar interventions without much coordination.
Fifthly, and perhaps most important, the issue of
financing for peacebuilding remains a major stumbling
block to realizing its full value. We hope that the
unequivocal emphasis on increased, predictable and
sustainable financing in the current resolution will help
garner sufficient political support towards mobilizing
much-needed resources for peacebuilding, including
for the Peacebuilding Fund. We look forward to creative
ideas from the Secretary-General on mobilizing
finances, factoring in both assessed and voluntary
contributions. The notion of sustaining peace will have
meaning only if it is matched with enabling resources.
Bangladesh remains an ardent believer in
peacebuilding and will remain engaged in further
strengthening the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture through consensus among the wider
membership. Our Government recently took the
initiative to establish a peacebuilding centre, which we
believe will broaden regional and international efforts
in that regard through substantive research and training
activities. We invite all interested States to join us in
making that venture the success that is envisaged.

16-1183823/31

A/70/PV.93

Mr. Perera (Sri Lanka): I thank the President
of the General Assembly for convening today’s
plenary meeting.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 70/262,
on the General Assembly’s 2015 review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture. The resolution
and the identical Security Council resolution 2282
(2016) are the outcomes of a lengthy and arduous
intergovernmental consultation process. My delegation
wishes to place on record its deepest gratitude to
Ambassador Bird of Australia and Ambassador Gaspar
Martins of Angola for co-facilitating and diligently
guiding us through the consultative process. Our
thanks also go to the experts of the Australian and
Angolan Permanent Missions, without whose efforts
this outcome would not have been possible.
The adoption of resolution 70/262 and the
parallel Security Council resolution is most timely.
It augurs well for the strengthening of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture to deal with the
contemporary challenges in peacebuilding. That is
particularly important in the context of the human cost
of and the great suffering caused by conflicts across
the globe in these troubled times. Conflict prevention,
effective peacebuilding, addressing the root causes
of conflict and ensuring non-recurrence would save
millions of lives from the scourge of conflict and war.
It is imperative in that regard that measures to prevent
the outbreak, escalation, continuation and recurrence
of conflict be taken forthwith. The present resolution
reflects our collective will to tread down that path.
It is also encouraging to note that the resolution
recognizes and welcomes the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission as the dedicated intergovernmental
advisory body for conferring a strategic element and
coherence to international peacebuilding efforts.
Equally encouraging is the resolve of the Member
States to revitalize the Peacebuilding Support Office.
As a country emerging from a 30-year conflict
that left deep scars in the entire socioethnic fabric of
the nation, Sri Lanka is uniquely placed to reflect on
the human cost and the indescribable suffering that
the conflict brought about and to commit ourselves
to post-conflict peacebuilding. In that context,
reconciliation and healing the hearts and minds of
our people have become our top-most priorities. We
are deeply conscious of the fact that peacebuilding
has to be done as a matter of urgency to prevent the
24/31

27/04/2016

recurrence of conflict. The political transition in Sri
Lanka in January of last year brought about crucial
opportunities for peacebuilding in the country. Our
aim is to promote national reconciliation while giving
priority to generating trust and confidence-building
measures among people affected by the long conflict.
As pointed out by several speakers this morning,
we also believe that peacebuilding is an inherently
political process. It is also essentially a nationally
owned process that needs to be properly sequenced,
taking into account the national circumstances and
with the assistance of all stakeholders, including the
United Nations.
Post-conflict peacebuilding in Sri Lanka is almost
synonymous with post-conflict reconciliation and is
based on the principle of national ownership. We have
recognized that the process of reconciliation involves
addressing the broad areas of truth-seeking, justice,
reparations and non-recurrence. The process of working
out the contours of the architecture of the domestic
mechanisms for truth-seeking, justice, reparations and
guarantees of non-recurrence is evolving.
In Sri Lanka the process of national consultations
on transitional justice, which is a victim-centred
process, has already begun. There is significant civilsociety involvement in that process. We have obtained
technical assistance from the United Nations Special
Rapporteur on the promotion of truth, justice, reparation
and guarantees of non-recurrence in the crucial task
of framing the questions for consultations. I wish to
mention with gratitude that the process is supported
by funding from the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF). The
funding was granted pursuant to the declaration last
year by the Secretary-General that Sri Lanka was a
country eligible to receive financial support from the
Fund. We also welcome and appreciate the funding
assistance received from the Peacebuilding Fund for
the resettlement of the last of the conflict-affected
internally displaced persons, thereby supporting Sri
Lanka’s national reconciliation efforts.
Those projects were funded by the Peacebuilding
Fund’s Immediate Response Facility. A longer-term
peacebuilding plan is currently being prepared by the
Peacebuilding Support Office in consultation with
the Government of Sri Lanka, for which longer-term,
predictable funding would be essential.
I would be remiss if I did not place enough stress
during today’s debate, as other speakers have done, to
16-11838

27/04/2016

the importance of adequate, predictable and sustained
financing for United Nations peacebuilding efforts.
The resolution rightfully identifies that dire need. In
that regard, we welcome the resolution’s recognition of
the importance of strengthening partnerships between
the United Nations and key stakeholders, in particular
international financial institutions.
Strengthening the Peacebuilding Fund through
adequate contributions is of paramount importance.
The funding of the PBF enables the United Nations to
seize political opportunities it would likely otherwise
miss. However, it is discouraging to learn that the
Peacebuilding Fund is hampered by decreasing
contributions, where the projected contributions in
2016 fall far short of the actual funding needs for
peacebuilding activities across the globe.
In that context, Sri Lanka welcomes the proposed
donor pledging conference to be held on the margins of the
General Assembly’s seventy-first session in September
with a view to refinancing the Peacebuilding Fund as
a follow-up to resolution 70/262 and Security Council
resolution 2282 (2016), both adopted today. Sri Lanka
is pleased to confirm that it will co-host the pledging
conference with the Peacebuilding Support Office and
several other Member States, as was mentioned earlier
this morning. We are of the view that a donor pledging
conference of this nature would help to increase the
level of contributions, the number of donors and the
predictability of PBF funding, by way of voluntary
contributions, including multi-year commitments. We
look forward to the active participation of Member
States at the pledging conference.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union and wishes to add the following remarks in its
national capacity.
We welcome today’s adoption of the resolution on
the review of the peacebuilding architecture (resolution
70/262) and the debate on the annual report (A/70/714)
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and of the
Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) (A/70/715). At the outset,
we offer our thanks to the facilitators, Ambassador
Bird of Australia and Ambassador Gaspar Martins of
Angola, for their tireless work; the Advisory Group of
Experts and its Chair, Ambassador Rosenthal, for their
insight; the current PBC Chair, Ambassador Kamau,
and the previous Chair, Ambassador Skoog, as well
as the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacebuilding

A/70/PV.93

Support, Ambassador Fernandez-Taranco, for their
resolute efforts.
As a member of the Organizational Committee
of the PBC, Italy looks forward to the concrete
implementation of today’s resolution, which will lead
to a strengthened Peacebuilding Commission, reinforce
its role as a valuable tool for the Security Council and
enhance the overall capacity of the United Nations in
the field of preventive diplomacy.
We have before us a very comprehensive review of
the sector. I will briefly touch upon some points that are
particularly dear to Italy.
First of all, we deeply appreciate the change in
mindset and the new concept of sustaining peace. It is
not just a matter of words; it has profound implications
on how we carry out our work. Peacebuilding should
no longer be seen as a post-conflict activity, since
the challenge of sustaining peace runs across the
complete cycle of our engagement to prevent conflicts
and avoid relapse. In practical terms, Italy believes we
have to implement an integrated strategy to prevent
cross-regional threats, such as extremist violence and
terrorism, illicit trafficking, smuggling of migrants
and trafficking of human beings, by addressing their
root causes, and to sustain peace, once achieved, by
capacity- and institution-building initiatives.
Secondly, the United Nations is now the main
global enabler of partnerships to sustain peace.
Greater cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, multilateral institutions and civilsociety organizations is therefore essential, and Italy
stands ready to do its part and use all the means at its
disposal to that end. In that context, the PBC’s countryspecific configurations play a pivotal role.
Thirdly, Italy endorses the importance the resolution
gives to women’s leadership and participation in conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
We recognize the continuing need to increase the
representation of women at all decision-making levels
in national, regional and international institutions
and mechanisms for the prevention and resolution of
conflict, and the consideration of gender-related issues
in all discussions pertinent to sustaining peace. That is
why last September our Prime Minister Renzi pledged
to give more resources, up to €50 million in the next
two years, to programmes dedicated to gender equality
and the empowerment of women and girls.

16-1183825/31

A/70/PV.93

27/04/2016

My last point is on the need to secure more
predictable funding for peacebuilding, in particular to
the PBF. Strengthening cooperation with the World Bank
and other financial institutions, as well as addressing
the silo approach of the donor community, are pivotal
issues. But we must also deploy alternative resources
for peacebuilding activities, including non-monetary
contributions and contributions from the private sector.
In that regard, Italy has already decided to resume its
contributions to the Peacebuilding Fund throughout
2016. Our objective is to do more by ensuring adequate
and predictable funds for peacebuilding through longterm commitments. Italy strongly believes that, bearing
in mind the costs of conflicts and instability, preventive
diplomacy is not only the right choice but also the
smart one.

The year 2016 is an important one for the
peacebuilding architecture. We have come a long way
since the review began, in early 2015. Over the past year,
the Security Council, the Peacebuilding Commission,
other United Nations entities, Member States and
many international partners not only collectively
acknowledged that peacebuilding remained underrecognized, they all decided to do something about
it. Manifest in today’s resolutions are both a body of
knowledge and an agenda for action on peacebuilding
on which the international community has deliberated
for the past year. The United States fully supports their
adoption and looks forward to their full implementation.
My Government hopes that they will help to ensure
that the United Nations system can be more strategic,
coordinated and effective in post-conflict contexts.

I would like to conclude by highlighting an issue
that Italy believes is at the core of building peaceful and
inclusive societies — the protection and safeguarding
of cultural heritage. Preserving a society’s cultural
heritage, and in particular protecting it from terrorist
acts and trafficking, as well as promoting and respecting
cultural diversity, is a key element in the reconciliation
and peacebuilding processes. No society can flourish
without culture, and no shared relationships can be
established without respecting a people’s history and
its soul. For those reasons, building on numerous
previous activities, on 16 February Italy and UNESCO
signed a landmark agreement establishing a task force
for protecting ancient cultural artifacts in crisis areas.
Those so-called Blue Helmets of culture are a tangible
sign of Italy’s commitment to the Unite for Heritage
campaign and to building and sustaining peace.

We support the resolutions’ assertion that United
Nations conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding cannot be addressed or managed in silos.
We agree with their language on the concept of sustaining
peace, in which the United Nations and the international
engagement should be better linked across every stage
of a conflict. We also support their highlighting of the
need for improved partnership and cooperation between
the United Nations and other multilateral and regional
organizations and peacebuilding efforts. Furthermore,
my Government also strongly supports the resolutions’
emphasis on women and on the promotion of human
rights in peacebuilding, among other issues. Above
all, however, it is all of our responsibilities — Member
States and the United Nations community — to ensure
that the peacekeeping architecture review has real
impact. Today’s adoption should be only a first step
towards broader implementation of the resolutions. We
look forward to working with everyone here on that
broader endeavour.

Ms. Amadeo (United States of America): I would
like to thank the President, Ambassador Skoog and
Ambassador Kamau for their statements today. I would
also like to congratulate Australia and Angola, the
Chairs of the 2015 peacebuilding review, as well as
the Chairs of the country-specific configurations of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), on their work.
We are grateful for all of their efforts to assist many
of the world’s most fragile States in their efforts to
recover from conflict and to improve the capabilities
of the United Nations in that regard as well. Today’s
meeting is especially important against the backdrop of
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture review,
culminating in today’s adoptions of identical General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions (resolution
70/262 and Security Council resolution 2282 (2016)).
26/31

Turning now to this year’s report (A/70/714) of
the Peacebuilding Commission, it is clear that we
have made some progress in preventing conflicts and
building the conditions for peace in places that have a
history of unrest. In Guinea-Bissau the PBC played an
active role in fostering donor coordination, including
the March 2015 Brussels conference that resulted in the
unprecedented mobilization of more than €1 billion. In
the Central African Republic the PBC helped to raise
awareness about the lack of funding for several priorities
in that country, including elections and mediation. The
PBC was one of the main international actors in the
Central African Republic rallying for additional funds
16-11838

27/04/2016

for elections, which had presented a key obstacle to
achieving the political transition we all seek.
Sustaining the international community’s attention
to countries emerging from crises is at the core of the
Peacebuilding Commission’s work. A key example lies
in the PBC’s continuing attention to the Ebola crisis.
Following the PBC Chair’s visit to West Africa in
April, the special meeting he held here in New York
highlighted the critical gaps and challenges in the
areas of governance, institution-building and civic
engagement. That meeting, along with the PBC’s
continued engagement on those issues, was critical to
ensuring that key peacebuilding needs were addressed
in the recovery phase of the Ebola epidemic.
Turning to the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF), there
are many achievements that deserve the attention of
this body, but I would like to highlight three aspects
from the PBF’s annual report (A/70/715) that we find
particularly encouraging. The year 2015 marked the
first time that the Fund successfully met the SecretaryGeneral’s target for supporting gender equality and
women’s empowerment. We were pleased to learn
that it allocated 15.7 per cent to women’s initiatives.
While we recognize that there is still much work
to be done to fully mainstream gender throughout
peacebuilding portfolios, we welcome the PBF’s
commitment to developing a strategy to mainstream
gender in its country-specific engagements. As we
know, when women actively participate at all levels of
political decision-making, we are all safer, our efforts
at peacebuilding are stronger and around the world
constitutions and peace agreements are more inclusive,
just and lasting.
We are also encouraged by the PBF’s work in
Burundi, where its support has enabled the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) to remain operational following the closing
of the United Nations Office in Burundi. The OHCHR
provides vital human-rights monitoring and reporting
and is one of the only bodies doing such monitoring
in Burundi as political space there continues to shrink.
Finally, PBF funding for UNICEF and the United
Nations Development Programme has helped to provide
key messaging on Ebola in Guinea’s historically
volatile Forestière region. The PBF had previously
given support to that community during the crisis in
Liberia and had built a network through which trusted
messaging about the health response to Ebola was

A/70/PV.93

successfully delivered to local communities. Thanks
in part to that PBF support, the region was the first in
Guinea to be declared Ebola-free.
The year 2015 was a significant one for United
Nations peacebuilding. The international community
focused on the need to better link its engagement
across the arc of conflict, as well as to pay closer
attention to the key components of lasting peace after
conflict — national ownership, social and political
inclusivity, institution-building and predictable
financing. Going forward, the stakes remain high,
with nothing less than peace and security hanging in
the balance. We must seize all opportunities, such as
today’s meeting, to continue to build on the growing
body of lessons of peacebuilding. We must maintain
momentum in order to turn the recommendations of the
2015 peacebuilding review into tangible impact.
Mr. Grant (Canada): I would like to begin by
thanking the President for overseeing this important
process and by congratulating the co-facilitators,
Australia and Angola, for shepherding it towards
such a strong outcome. I would also like to thank the
Permanent Representatives of Kenya and Sweden, the
Chair and Vice-Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), respectively, for their vision, leadership
and commitment.
We have before us the most comprehensive
resolution on peacebuilding ever adopted by the
General Assembly and the Security Council (resolution
70/262 and Security Council resolution 2282 (2016)).
That is a truly remarkable achievement and one that
will strengthen the collective ability of the entire
United Nations system to sustain peace. I would like
to highlight three elements that in our view are crucial.
(spoke in French)
The first is the concept of sustaining peace. Decades
of practice and observation have taught us that conflicts
are not linear and that effective prevention requires
concrete action on the security, development and
human rights fronts. With today’s resolution we affirm
for the first time that peacebuilding and prevention are
two sides of the same coin and specify the tools with
which the United Nations system can begin to knock
down silos. In order to do that, we must make a serious
investment in prevention, tackle the drivers of conflict
at all levels and incorporate the idea of sustaining peace
at every stage of our efforts. We must also invest in the
participation of women at all levels and at all stages.

16-1183827/31

A/70/PV.93

(spoke in English)
Secondly, with regard to the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Economic and Social Council, the
General Assembly and especially the Security Council
have critical roles to play in sustaining peace. The
resolution adopted this morning acknowledges the
important bridging role that the PBC can play and
suggests concrete ways in which this can be done.
For years, we have repeated the mantra that there
can be no one-size-fits-all approach to peacebuilding,
yet for too long the PBC has had a one-size-fits-all
approach to countries on its agenda. With this resolution,
we have clear encouragement from Member States for
the PBC to build on the good practices initiated by
previous Chairs and continue diversifying its working
methods to enable it to consider a broader range of
countries, regions and issues and enhance its focus on
conflict prevention and gender-sensitive peacebuilding.
Finally, with regard to the importance of operational
coherence and implementation, this resolution will not
implement itself — it requires a coordinated plan of
action and a change in mindset, both within the United
Nations system and in the way that we, as Member
States, approach our work across the United Nations.
The resolution identifies important levers and processes
through which this can happen: though strengthened
partnerships with civil society, regional organizations
and international financial institutions; through a
strengthened role for the PBC in advising the Security
Council; through stronger linkages between the United
Nations peacebuilding efforts and the operational
activities for development; and by ensuring adequate,
predictable and sustained financing for peacebuilding.

27/04/2016

collective action taken to face these threats, namely,
through the three major review processes of United
Nations action, which were successfully carried out,
including the review of the peacebuilding architecture
with the Peacebuilding Commission as one of its
major pillars.
As shown in the annual report (A/70/714), the
Peacebuilding Commission, under the able and active
leadership of Ambassador Olof Skoog, to whom I pay
tribute, was able over the course of the previous year
to accomplish remarkable work, both in terms of the
intensity and the tangible and concrete results that were
achieved. I also wish Ambassador Kamau of Kenya
every success in his chairmanship of the Peacebuilding
Commission in 2016.
With the experience it has accumulated over the
course of a decade and the excellent mobilization of its
members, the PBC has been able to implement through
its actions the essence of the recommendations of
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture, be they those on improving
the transparency and flexibility of its working methods,
its interaction with the principal United Nations organs
or its partnership with regional organizations, not to
mention the emphasis placed on the greater involvement
of women and youth in peacebuilding.

With this resolution we, the Member States, are
defining the changes we want to bring about, the
measures we deem necessary to carry out these changes
and what we are ready to do to support the SecretaryGeneral in order to establish a more coherent and
effective approach to peacekeeping. More than ever
before, Canada will be happy to put its shoulder to
the wheel.

Another important recommendation that has been
taken into account by the PBC is its active engagement
in finding effective responses to the issues of funding
for peacebuilding activities. We recognize the negative
consequences that could result from the lack of
predictable and sustainable financing for peacebuilding
efforts. The Peacebuilding Commission has worked to
further strengthen the synergy that has developed in its
work with the Peacebuilding Fund, which is the second
important pillar of the peacebuilding architecture. In
this regard, we welcome the publication of the annual
report (A/70/715) on the Peacebuilding Fund’s activities
for 2015. It shows the full extent and relevance of its
activities in providing sustained support to countries at
risk of falling into conflict situations or those emerging
from conflict.

Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): The year
2015 was exceptional, both in terms of the magnitude
and degree of the challenges that the international
community had to face and the advances made in
the search for better harmony and efficiency in our

We welcome the commitment shown by the Fund
in implementing the main recommendations of the
report on the review of the peacebuilding architecture
(A/64/868, annex) by strengthening its cooperation
with the international financial institutions, while

(spoke in French)

28/31

16-11838

27/04/2016

implementing the third Gender Promotion Initiative in
2016 and expanding its conflict-prevention activity.
We note with concern the difficulties facing the
mobilization of predictable and sustainable financing
for the Fund, which is worsening with the reduction in
donor contributions. The reduction is completely at odds
with the increasing need for financing for peacebuilding
activities. This is a dilemma that resolution 70/262,
which we have just adopted, should aim to respond to.
The resolution on the review is the result of a
long intergovernmental process, and it offers us an
invaluable opportunity for each State to contribute to
this important discussion and contribute to developing
a coordinated, efficient and harmonized strategy
for peacebuilding in countries that need it. I want to
commend the effective leadership and perseverance of
the co-facilitators, Angola and Australia, throughout
the negotiations.
My delegation has played an active role within the
Non-Aligned Movement in all phases of the preparation
and negotiation of this resolution. I would like to
welcome the especially constructive contribution of
the Non-Aligned Movement, which has distinguished
itself through its practicality and consistency with the
realities on the ground, which it was able to imbue the
process with, in particular through the valuable support
of African countries.
The text adopted today, which was the subject of
intense and sometimes difficult negotiations among
the Member States, comprehensively reflects all the
concerns and demands of the different groups and
has responded in a more than satisfactory manner to
the recommendations of the high-level groups. The
resolution represents a new phase in the development
of peacebuilding activities in that it contains innovative
ideas that are better suited to the new realities and
which were constantly requested by my delegation
when we were the Chairs of the Central African
Republic configuration.
Its main asset is its focus on the need to change
the current perception of peacebuilding and adopt an
innovative multidimensional approach that is more
comprehensive and holistic in covering all phases and
aspects of the conflict in order to sustain peace. It also
draws in all of the United Nations bodies, whether
they be principal or subsidiary, and encourages them
to focus their actions on peacebuilding, prevention,
peacekeeping, restoring peace and post-conflict

A/70/PV.93

State-building. It calls for resisting partitioning in
the activities of United Nations bodies and highlights
the role of the PBC as an important advisory body
in supporting those activities. It calls for ensuring
the inclusivity of all the different components of
post-conflict society in rebuilding the country. It
makes national ownership by local actors primarily
responsible for the definition of national priorities
a necessary condition for achieving definitive and
sustainable peace and national reconciliation. It
rightfully accords an important role to women and
young people in all phases of the peace process. It
proposes that we broaden the spectrum of action of
the Peacebuilding Commission and include countries
and regions by focusing on conflict prevention. Lastly,
it reflects the concerns of Member States about the
difficulties of mobilizing appropriate financial support
in a structured, predictable and sustainable manner.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Morocco’s
commitment to supporting all peacebuilding actions
and its readiness to contribute to the implementation of
this resolution.
Mr. Thoms (Germany): Germany aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union.
Today marks an important step forward in the
trajectory of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. The 2015 review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture resulted in the comprehensive
resolution 70/262, which effectively strengthens
the performance and impact of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Peacebuilding Support Office and the
Peacebuilding Fund. Among other achievements, the
resolution introduces more transparent and strategic
working methods, improves partnerships with regional
and subregional actors, bolsters efforts aimed at
conflict prevention, and secures critical funding for
peacebuilding and gender-related issues.
The resolution also significantly broadens the
peacebuilding capabilities of the United Nations
system. Unlike previous failed attempts, the resolution
advances an integrated approach to conflict prevention.
It does not just help countries emerging from conflict
to hold on to fragile reconstruction gains; it also aims at
reducing the chances of an initial outbreak in countries
facing a wide range of destabilizing forces.
As migrants continue to make the perilous journey
to Europe, Germany is painstakingly aware of the

16-1183829/31

A/70/PV.93

benefits to be gained from conflict prevention. The
migrant crisis is a poignant example of how the failure to
prevent conflict can lead to human tragedy. Therefore,
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture must
continue to evolve into an institution that addresses
all types, aspects and stages of conflict prevention.
In order to achieve that, we now need to implement
this resolution. Germany would therefore welcome a
speedy start to the negotiations of the organizational
committee’s new rules of procedure. This would
give life to the idea of a more flexible Peacebuilding
Commission as enshrined in the resolution that we
just adopted.
Germany will also do its share to address the urgent
question of adequate funding of the Peacebuilding
Fund. For 2016, we will contribute the amount of
€10 million. Germany welcomes the Peacebuilding
Fund’s instrumental efforts not only to prevent conflict,
but also to support the stabilization of countries in
the aftermath of a crisis. Germany welcomes today’s
resolution and looks forward to playing an active
role in further strengthening the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture.
Mr. Hahn Choonghee (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, the Republic of Korea welcomes the adoption of
resolutions 70/262 and 2282 (2016) on the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture by the General Assembly
and the Security Council, respectively. My delegation
commends the co-facilitators, the Ambassadors of
Angola and Australia, for their leadership during
the negotiating process. I also thank the President
for convening today’s timely and important debate.
I appreciate the achievements of the Ambassador of
Sweden as the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
in 2015 and thank the Ambassador of Kenya for his
leadership as this year’s Chair of the Commission.
The resolution we have just adopted highlights
the importance of the conceptual shift that sustaining
peace is a shared task and responsibility that needs
to be fulfilled by Governments and all other national
stakeholders; that it should flow through all three
pillars of the United Nations engagement at all stages
of the conflict and in all its dimensions; and that it
needs sustained international attention and assistance.
We believe that the resolution can provide the platform
on which the peacebuilding architecture can continue
to improve. We also hope that the General Assembly
will maintain this comprehensive approach and develop
it further by discussing it as an official agenda item,
30/31

27/04/2016

entitled “Peacebuilding and sustaining peace”, at its
seventy-second session. In addition, we hope a series
of useful discussions on humanitarian issues will be
held, based on this comprehensive perspective, during
the world humanitarian summit in Istanbul in May.
We look forward to many useful outcomes, which
will strengthen the coherence and alignment between
our efforts for sustaining peace, development and
human rights.
The Republic of Korea is pleased to see the
achievements made by the Peacebuilding Commission
during its ninth session. The Commission has proved its
unique and critical role in many peacebuilding processes
by proactively and flexibly responding to various threats
at all stages of conflicts, including in particular newly
emerging threats, such as Ebola. My delegation believes
that strengthening this unique role of the Commission,
as a bridge between the United Nations principal organs
and as a platform to convene all relevant actors within
and outside the United Nations, serves the interests of
the entire international community. We are also of the
view that the Commission should now undertake the
task of reforming its working methods in order to better
meet the challenges of sustaining peace, as called for by
paragraph 5 of the latest resolution.
If the Commission is to better bridge all relevant
actors, mobilize resources and advise on integrated
strategies for post-conflict and recovery, the systematic
and institutional support of the Security Council and
the General Assembly will be essential. As the three
reviews of the United Nations role in maintaining
international peace and security all emphasize, all
efforts to create and sustain peace should be aimed at
the prevention of conflicts, including the prevention of
relapses, in a comprehensive and coherent manner. The
Commission should also focus its work in this direction
and needs more support from the entire United Nations
system to this end.
There were also many considerable achievements
in the activities of the Peacebuilding Fund. The Fund
has carried out various projects to prevent conflicts
and sustain peace in many nations, including Ebolaaffected countries, such as Guinea, Liberia and Sierra
Leone, and 20 other countries outside the purview of
the Commission, such as the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Somalia and Yemen.
It is also commendable that the Fund has enhanced
efficiency in resource management while successfully
meeting the Secretary-General’s target on funding to
16-11838

27/04/2016

support gender equality and women’s empowerment
by allocating 15.7 per cent of its resources to womencentred initiatives.
However, for the second consecutive year, the Fund
is significantly underresourced, even though a series
of reports, such as the report of the Advisory Group of
Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture
and the report of the High-Level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (A/70/95), have validated the
useful role played by the Peacebuilding Fund and made
recommendations for securing predictable financing.
This recommendation deserves more attention and
support from Member States today, as contributions
from major donors are decreasing while the need
for sustained peacebuilding activities is increasing.
The Republic of Korea will continue to join in these

A/70/PV.93

efforts by increasing its contribution to the Fund in the
years ahead.
The Republic of Korea has assumed this year the
vice-chairmanship of the Peacebuilding Commission
and chairmanship of the Working Group on Lessons
Learned. With this important commitment, the
Republic of Korea will continue to actively discharge
its responsibilities. Fulfilling its mandate, the Republic
of Korea will draw on its unique experience of
successfully transitioning from a war-torn nation into
a peaceful, democratic and prosperous country within
a half-century. In this process, the Republic of Korea
will continue to actively engage with the wider United
Nations membership.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

16-1183831/31
