May 1991 from the representatives of C6te d'Ivoire, Cuba,
Ecuador, India, Yemen, Zaire and Zimbabwe to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/22634)". 7

Having learned with deep concern and consternation that
Israel has, in violation of its obligations under the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949,4 and acting in opposition to
relevant Security Council resolutions, and to the detriment of
efforts to achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East, deported four Palestinian civilians on 18 May

At the same meeting, in response to the request of the
same date from the observer of Palestine,8 the Council also
decided, by a vote, that an invitation should be accorded to the
observer of Palestine to participate in the discussion of the item
entitled "'The situation in the occupied Arab territories" and
that that invitation would confer upon it the same rights of
participation as those conferred on a Member State when it was
invited to participate under rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

1991,
1. Declares that the action of the Israeli authorities of
deporting four Palestinians on 18 May 1991 is in violation of
the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949.4 which is applicable to all the Palestinian territories occupied by Israel since
1967, including Jerusalem:

Adopted by 11 I/Oles to 1 (United States
of America), with 3 abstentions (Belgiwn, France, UniledKingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland).

2. Deplores this action and reiterates that Israel, the
occupying Power, must refrain from deporting any Palestinian
civilian from the occupied territories and ensure the safe and
immediate return of all those deported;

Resolution 694 (1991)
ot 24 May 1991

3.

The Security Council,

Decides to keep the situation under review.
Adopted unanimOU8ly at the 2989th
m«lin&

Reaffinning its resolution 681 (1990) of20 December 1990,

THE SITUATION IN LIBERIA

Decisions

At its 2974th meeting, on 22 January 1991, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Liberia and Nigeria to
participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled
"'The situation in Liberia: letter dated 15 January 1991 from the
Charge d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Cote d1voire
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/22076)". 9

"The members of the Council call upon the parties to
the conflict in Liberia to continue to respect the cease-fire
agreement which they have signed and to co-operate fully
with the Community to restore peace and normalcy in
Liberia.
"'The members 0f the Council express appreciation to
the Member States, the Secretary-General and humanitarian organizations for the humanitarian assistance to Liberia
and call for additional assistance. In this connection the
Council welcomes the resumption of the United Nations
emergency programme in Liberia following the acceptance
of a general cease-fire.

At the same meeting, the President made the following
statement on behalf of the Council: 10
"'The members of the Security Council took note of
the final communique of the first extraordinary session of
the Authority of Heads of State and Government of the
Economic Community of West African States, issued in
Bamako on 28 November 1990. 11

"The members of the Council support the appeal
launched by the heads of State and Government of the
Economic Community of West African States to the
international community for increased humanitarian
assistance to the people of Liberia."

"'The members of the Council commend the efforts
made by the heads of State and Government of the
Community to promote peace and normalcy in Liberia.

2
