16

General Assembly-Eighth Session

728 (VIII). Work of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
The General Assembly,
Having considered the problems of refugees who
are i:he concern of the United Nations High Com1
missioner for Refugees in the light of his report
to the General Assembly at its eighth session and of
the Secretary-General's memorandum,2
Having noted 'With appreciation the work being done
on behalf of these refugees,
Having noted 'With concern the precarious situation
of certain groups of refugees within the High Commissioner's mandate, in particular those in need of
emergency aid, the considerable number- still living in
camps, and those requiring special care for whom no
satisfactory arrangements have yet been made,
1. Invites the High Commissioner to concern himself in particular with these groups of refugees in
carrying out his functions as defined in the Statute of
his Office and to pay special attention to them in his
report to the General Assembly at its ninth session;
2. Appeals to the governments of States Members
and non-niembers of the United Nations to intensify
their efforts to promote, in co-operation with the High
Commissioner, solutions for the problems of refugees,
through repatriation, resettlement and integration in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 538 B
(VI) of 2 February 1952;
3. Takes note of the relations which the High Commissioner has established with interested organizations,
expresses the hope that appropriate consultations will
take place in the drawing up of all programmes of
international action designed to improve the situation
of refugees within his mandate and invites the High
Commissioner to give an account of such consultations
in his reports.
453rd plenary meeting,
23 October 1953.
729 (Vlll). Technical assistance in promoting
and safeguarding the rights of women
The· General Assembly,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 504
J II (XVI) of 23 July 1953 concerning technical
assistance in promoting and safeguarding the rights
of women,
Approves the decision of the Council authorizing
the Secretary-General to render, at the request of
Member States, services which do not fall within the
scope of existing technical assistance programmes, in
order to assist these States in promoting and safeguarding the rights of women.
453rd plenary meeting,
23 October 1953.
730 (VIII). Technical assistance in the fields of
prevention of discrimination and protection
of minorities
The General Assembly,
Having considered the recommendation contained
in paragraph 2 of Economic and Social Council reso1 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighth
Session, Supplement No. 11.
2 See document A/2457.

lution 502 G (XVI) of 3 August 1953 on technical
assistance in the fields of prevention of discrimination
and protection of minorities,
1. Authorizes the Secretary-General to render, at
the request of any State Member of the United Nations, technical advice and other services which do
not fall within the scope of existing technical assistance programmes, in order to assist the government
of that State within its territory in the eradication of
discrimination or in the protection of minorities or
both;
2. Decides that the services so authorized may
include, but need not be restricted to, technical advice
regarding the drafting of legislation and the establishment of administrative and judicial machinery and
appropriate services in such matters of fundamental
importance as education, subject to arrangements within
existing agreements with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and other
competent specialized agencie'l.
453rd plenary meeting,
23 October 1953.

731 (VIII). Development of political rights of
women in Territories where these rights are
not fully enjoyed
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 56 ( I) of 11 December 1946
relating to the political rights of women, which was
reaffirmed in resolution 640 (VII) of 20 December
1952,
Having considered Economic and Social Council
resolution 504 F (XVI) of 23 July 1953,
Urges States to take all necessary measures, particularly educational and legislative measures, leading
to the development of the political rights of women
in all Territories in which women do not enjoy full
political rights, including Trust and N on-Self-Governing Territories.
454th plenary meeting,
23 October 1953.
732 (Vlll). Programme of concerted practical
action in the social field of the United Nations
and the specialized agencies
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the principles contained in its resolution
535 (VI) of 2 February 1952,
1. Takes note ivith appreciation of the efforts made
to establish the programme of concerted practical
action in the social field of the United Nations and
the specialized agencies adopted in Economic and
Social Council resolution 496 (XVI) of 31 July 1953;
2. Invites the Secretary-General and the specialized
agencies to keep particularly in mind, in the implementation of the projects of the programme of concerted practical action, the general principles, methods
and techniques defined in Economic and Social Council resolution 496 (XVI), special consideration being
given to the needs of the under-developed countries;
3. Recommends that the Economic and Social
Council should supplement the programme of concerted
practical action in the social field of the United Nations and the specialized agencies as set forth in reso-

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
lution 496 (XVI), by the insertion of a new paragraph 8 ( i) reading as follows :
"Improve the situation with respect to health,
education and social welfare in the N on-Self-Governing and Trust Territories;"
4. Requests the Economic and Social Council:
(a) To keep the development of the programme
under consideration with a view to its progressive
improvement ;
( b) To consider, as appropriate, further practical
measures which may be undertaken in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 535 (VI) and Economic
and Social Council resolution 496 (XVI) with the
addition thereto recommended to the Economic and
Social Council by the General Assembly at its eighth
session;
(c) To report to the General Assembly on the progress achieved.
454th plenary meeting,
23 October 1953.

733 (VDI).

Studies on internal migration

The General Assembly,
Considering the close connexion existing between
internal movements of population and economic and
social progress in the economically less developed countries,
Noting with satisfaction that the Economic and
Social Council, in examining the work of the Population Commission, has recently paid attention to the
problems of internal migration ( resolution 471 D
(XV) of 14 April 1953) which have generally not
been sufficiently studied,
1. Invites the Economic and Social Council, in cooperation with the International Labour Organisation
and other interested agencies, to develop, within available resources, an appropriate programme of studies
on internal migration, especially in the economically
less developed countries, to be carried out at the
request of the countries concerned;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to communicate
to the Economic and Social Council, for its guidance
and information, the records of the debate on this question in the General Assembly at its" eighth session.
460th plenary meeting,
28 November 1953.
734 (VIII). Recognition and enforcement
abroad of maintenance obligations
The General Assembly,
Having noted that the question of the reciprocal
recognition and enforcement abroad of maintenance
obligations has been before the Economic and Social
Council which, at its fifteenth session, decided 3 to
postpone consideration until its seventeenth session,
Being aware of the urgent need to improve the situation of members of families whose legal supporters
living in another country fail to comply with their
maintenance obligations,
Requests the Economic and Social Council to do
its utmost to complete, if possible, its work on this
question in such time as to enable it to report on
8 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Fifteenth Session, Supplement No. 1, page 32.

17

the results to the General Assembly at its next regular session.
460th plenary meeting,
28 November 1953.

735 (VID).

The Social Commission

The General Assembly,
Mindful of the provisions of Articles 61 and 68 of
the Charter,
Considering that one of the aims of the United Nations is to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom and to this end to be a
centre for harmonizing the actions of nations,
Considering that the General Assembly at its present session has adopted 4 a programme of concerted
practical action in the social field,
Recalling that the Economic and Social Council, in
its resolution 414 (XIII) of 18, 19 and 20 September
1951 decided that the Social Commission should meet
biennially instead of annually,
Bearing in mind that, in accordance with its resolution 414 (XIII), the Economic and Social Council
must review in 1954 the question of organization of its
functional commissions,
Having considered the draft proposals 5 made with
a view to the possible revision of the pattern of meetings of the Social Commission, as well as to the expansion of its membership to provide improved representation of under-developed areas and various economic and cultural patterns,
l. Invites the Economic and Social Council, in its
review of this question, to consider the aforementioned
draft proposals, as well as the suggestions made in the
discussion of this matter during the eighth session of
the General Assembly;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to communicate
to the Economic and Social Council the records of
the debate on the question during the eighth session
of the General Assembly.
460th plenary meeting,
28 November 1953.
736 (VIII).

Freedom of information

A
The General Assembly,
Recalling the decisions contained in the resolutions 6
on freedom of information adopted at its seventh session,
Regretting that the Economic and Social Council
was unable 7 to give consideration at its sixteenth session to the subject of freedom of information, including the report 8 of its Rapporteur,
Noting that, at its sixteenth session, the Economic
and Social Council postponed consideration of the
question of freedom of information to its seventeenth
session and decided, in agreement with the Rapporteur,
that the Rapporteur would present his report at the
seventeenth session,
See resolution 732(VIII).
See documents A/C.3/L.376, A/C.3/L.382, A/C.3/L.384 and
A/C.3/L.386.
6 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventh
Session, Supplement No. 20.
7 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Sixteenth Session, Supplement No. 1, page 25.
, 8 lbid., Supplement No. 12.
4

5
