S/PV.9018

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9018th meeting

Tuesday, 19 April 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Dame Barbara Woodward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Coveney
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Abushahab
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-32340 (E)
*2232340*

S/PV.9018

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Estonia, Italy, Poland, Slovakia,
Sweden and Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Kelly T.
Clements, United Nations Deputy High Commissioner
for Refugees, and Mr. António Vitorino, Director
General of the International Organization for Migration.
Ms. Clements and Mr. Vitorino are joining this meeting
by video-teleconference.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Ms. Clements.
Ms. Clements: I thank you, Madam President, for
inviting me to discuss the situation in Ukraine on behalf
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) to the Security Council.
I am joining you tonight from Hungary, a country
to which almost a half a million Ukrainians have fled,
a fraction of the almost 5 million who have been forced
to leave their country and in addition to the more than
7 million who remain displaced within Ukraine. The
United Nations also estimates that there are 13 million
more in the hardest-hit areas, many of them unable to
move and difficult to safely reach with aid. Earlier today
I was in the Czech Republic, and before that in Austria,
and the compassion and solidarity in those countries,
together with others, continue to be unprecedented.
Our fervent wish is that this will also extend to other
refugees who have been uprooted from their homes
and who find themselves on this continent, unable to
return and in need of the same international protection
and solidarity.
My visit, which will continue to the Slovak
Republic, complements the visits, including to Ukraine,
of Filippo Grandi, United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, and Raouf Mazou, Assistant High
Commissioner for UNHCR Operations, who has
been in Moldova and Romania since he addressed the
2/27

19/04/2022

Council (see S/PV.8998). While the sheer scale and
speed of the displacement is immense, we must not
lose sight of what the statistics mean. Our teams on the
ground continue to be confronted by the same scenes
and shared stories. Women, children and the aged have
left their homes, lives, sons, fathers and husbands.
Just this morning in Prague, I met Lyuba, a 25-yearold from Odesa. Like so many others, she was forced
to leave her family behind in Ukraine. Her father, a
military reservist, remains there with her mother. Her
grandmother, who lives in Melitopol, just a few hours
west of Mariupol, has been completely unreachable
since the war began two months ago. Each one of the
millions who have been displaced have been forced to
make impossible, heartbreaking decisions and have left
behind almost everything they hold dear.
At the same time, we have also seen consistently
remarkable acts of humanity. Apartment and office
buildings, windows and balconies and street lamps on
every corner are covered with messages of support.
Local authorities, communities and individuals are
rallying to provide what they can — food, medicine,
transportation and a place to sleep. I saw such
tremendous solidarity and support in Prague today.
Thanks to the commitment of concerned States, borders
have been kept open. Those seeking safety are given
access to protection and aid, and we call for that to
continue in a non-discriminatory manner for all people
in need. That inspiring response is surpassed only by
the strength and composure of the refugees themselves,
who continue to exude both courage and resilience as
they describe their flight to safety, bravely talking about
their separation from their families and fearful that the
war will pursue them. Most of all, they emphasize their
hope for peace, so that they can return home as soon as
possible. Many are therefore staying close to Ukraine.
Some are even returning now, anxious to connect with
family and check on property.
Some in the Council may have joined the briefing
last week by Emergency Relief Coordinator Martin
Griffiths (see S/PV.9011) when he described the
chilling scene in Bucha and throughout Ukraine, with
heartbreaking stories of those killed, those lucky
to escape and those left behind or with loved ones
whose whereabouts remain unknown. He spoke of
dire humanitarian conditions for civilians forced to
withstand unrelenting fighting, but also of the tireless
efforts by many to save lives and help people in besieged
areas such as Mariupol.
22-32340

19/04/2022

S/PV.9018

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

When the High Commissioner visited Ukraine two
weeks ago, he spoke with the Government about scaling
up cash assistance to reach 360,000 vulnerable people
inside the country. He also conveyed our commitment
to extending our expertise on shelter to help those
with damaged homes and with the repair of reception
centres. UNHCR is now signing agreements with three
key ministries in Ukraine to take that work forward
in support of the Government, which is determinedly
leading that effort. Let me reiterate what the High
Commissioner conveyed at that time, which was that
we will continue to expand our life-saving aid to the
internally displaced throughout Ukraine, especially in
the centre and the east, where a brutal humanitarian
nightmare is unfolding. That requires not just resources
but also safe and unhindered access to people in need,
wherever they are in the country, so that they too can
receive desperately needed help safely.
I would like to stress that even as news coverage
has shifted to other aspects of the conflict, people are
still fleeing in desperation and fear, and not just from
Ukraine but from other countries in turmoil around the
world — Yemen, Myanmar, Ethiopia, Syria, Venezuela,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The list goes on.
We ask the Council to continue, even as we focus today
on Ukraine, to consider the needs of all refugees from
all corners of the globe. All who are uprooted from their
homes need the same solidarity, the same compassion
and the same protection.
In Ukraine, the vast majority of people on the move
are women and children, and the risk of gender-based
violence, trafficking and sexual exploitation and abuse
is high. Anecdotal information is already coming in
about persons approaching the displaced with toogood-to-be-true promises of work, accommodation
and transport. The first identified cases of trafficking
confirm that those risks are coming true. At UNHCR
we are working, including with Mr. Vitorino’s
organization, the International Organization for
Migration, to prevent, mitigate and respond to those
trafficking risks. In addition to strengthened genderbased-violence programmes, we have deployed
coordinators expert in preventing sexual exploitation
and abuse to support the response from Governments.
We are also partnering with UNICEF on safe spaces,
called Blue Dots, at main border-crossing points,
transit and reception centres, to provide information
and specialized aid for mothers, adolescents, children
and other vulnerable refugees. It is the first time we
have done that so early in an emergency response, and

we expect that it will serve as a best practice going
forward. However, States have the strongest role to
play, especially on the issue of trafficking. We call on
them to end impunity for traffickers, help identify the
international protection needs of survivors and persons
at risk, and most of all redouble efforts to address the
root causes of the conflict, which allow predators to
exploit the opportunities that war presents.
We will continue our work to provide life-saving
aid in Ukraine. At the same time, and in line with the
Global Compact on Refugees, Ukraine’s neighbours
are increasingly including refugees in their national
education, health and social programmes. That
inclusive approach is, bar none, the best way for
refugees to sustain their lives in exile, and it requires
more international support. But no pile of blankets, no
sum of cash, no amount of medicine will halt the death
and destruction. Aid alone will not stop people being
forced to flee by war, nor will it give them what they
really want and need — peace and safety at home and
a chance to return voluntarily, sustainably and safely.
While we will continue our job to deliver aid,
we also need the Council to do its job. When the
High Commissioner last addressed this body (see
S/PV.8504), he warned that without an immediate end
to the shelling, we were planning for up to 4 million
refugees. Now, eight weeks into the conflict, we are at
5 million and counting, with 5 million unique stories
of loss and trauma. We therefore call again on all the
members of the Council — and, yes, we are aware of
the deep divisions — to put aside their differences and
find a way to end this horrific and senseless war.
The President:
her briefing.

I

thank

Ms.

Clements

for

I now give the floor to Mr. Vitorino.
Mr. Vitorino: I thank the Council for giving the
International Organization for Migration (IOM) the
opportunity to address it today.
As Ms. Clements has just said, more than 12 million
Ukrainians and third-country nationals have already
been forced to leave their homes since the beginning
of the war. According to data collected by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), approximately 5 million people have fled
the country. According to the most recent assessment
by IOM’s displacement tracking matrix, another
7.1 million people have been displaced inside Ukraine.
Through our displacement tool, I hope that by the end

22-323403/27

S/PV.9018

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

of this week I can provide the Council with updated
overall statistics on new displacements, secondary
movements and stranded populations, as well as the
increasing numbers of people returning to Ukraine and
of those inside the country returning to their regions
of origin. However, we remain deeply concerned
about the continued deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in Ukraine, as we anticipate an increase in the
number of people displaced, internally and externally.
I therefore appeal to the parties to the conflict to
honour all their obligations under international
humanitarian law to protect civilians, their homes and
civilian infrastructure. When I visited some of the
neighbouring countries recently, I saw at first-hand the
price that civilians are paying as a result of the conflict.
Women and children, the elderly and people with
disabilities have been disproportionately affected, as
they all represent a highly vulnerable group of people.
From our assessment and work with all of the United
Nations agencies in Ukraine and our non-governmental
partners, we have identified specific risks for internally
displaced people, refugees and third-country nationals.
I would like to highlight a few of them today.
First, in situations of mass displacement, we should
always expect around 30 per cent of the population to
experience, a negative psychological impact and mental
health problems to some degree. However, as the war
continues and even intensifies, psychosocial needs will
undoubtedly increase. We are scaling up our efforts to
address them in Ukraine and its neighbours, through
activities ranging from training front-line responders
in psychosocial first aid to increasing the capacity of
our established hotlines, which provide psychosocial
support. To that end, we are benefiting from the
mobilization of the Ukrainian diaspora worldwide.
Secondly, we remain particularly concerned about
the situation of women and children who have fled
Ukraine and are internally displaced. Unfortunately,
trafficking in persons was already a known
phenomenon in the region. As has been observed in
past crises, large-scale displacement, family separation
and the disruption of civil protections and community
networks render populations vulnerable to violence,
exploitation and abuse. I think it is therefore a matter
of enormous concern that instances of gender-based
violence, including conflict-related sexual violence,
have been reported and in increasing numbers.
Setting up referral mechanisms and developing
close cooperation with law-enforcement agencies
4/27

19/04/2022

is essential to preventing the operation of criminal
networks, trafficking and abuse. We know that
more than half of the children in Ukraine have been
displaced. Unaccompanied and separated children are
particularly vulnerable, and measures to protect them
must be strengthened. I urge neighbouring countries
and those that have been affected in this crisis to
ensure the immediate identification and registration of
unaccompanied and separated children fleeing Ukraine.
Effective international cooperation is urgently required
to reunite children with their caregivers and families.
We applaud all of Ukraine’s neighbours for the
solidarity and openness they have shown and the
enormous efforts that their Governments, civil-society
organizations and private individuals have undertaken
to support the Ukrainians and the more than 218,000
third-country nationals arriving at their borders. But
despite the overwhelmingly positive response, we
have unfortunately witnessed cases of discrimination,
violence and xenophobia against third-country
nationals fleeing Ukraine. Discrimination on the basis
of race, ethnicity, nationality or migration status is, in
my view, not acceptable. I therefore call on all States
to ensure that protection and immediate assistance is
provided in a non-discriminatory manner, particularly
at border crossing points.
For our part, we have set up information and
support hotlines for the populations affected in
Ukraine, Poland, Romania, Lithuania and Slovakia. We
have also established a referral mechanism to facilitate
contact between third-country nationals and the
relevant consulates, as well as to ensure safe, dignified
and non-discriminatory support, information-sharing
and advice, transportation, medical aid and assistance
in their return to their countries of origin.
We are seeing that internally displaced people
tend to move to urban areas in search of potential
employment opportunities and social services. There
will be an urgent need to scale up services and
assistance to meet the needs of an increased population
in those areas, as we are doing in close cooperation with
Ukraine’s Ministry of Social Policy. The situation in
eastern Ukraine in terms of access to food and water is
particularly concerning. Since the response to the crisis
began we have identified cash-based interventions as
one of the most feasible, efficient and effective ways
to reach people in need, both inside Ukraine and in
neighbouring countries. The IOM has already started
providing multi-purpose cash assistance in Ukraine
22-32340

19/04/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

and in some of its neighbours. As Ms. Clements just
mentioned, preparations are under way to scale up that
assistance in close coordination with UNHCR, the
World Food Programme, the Government of Ukraine
and local authorities. However, funding is desperately
needed for that.
Moving forward, we need to seek to better
understand the intentions of those who are fleeing,
those forced to leave their homes and those who have
been separated from their families due to the ongoing
conflict. Many people, particularly those displaced
to neighbouring countries, are willing to return to
Ukraine as soon as possible, but their return must of
course be safe. We are working with the Government
and local authorities to support the internally displaced
and identify safe and stable solutions for them. For
those who have left the country, it will be crucial to
plan ahead and invest in order to ensure that all have
access to adequate support and services and to facilitate
their full inclusion in education and health systems
and the labour market, provide language opportunities
and social housing and other necessary support. We
welcome the decision by the European Union to offer
temporary protection to people fleeing Ukraine, and I
reiterate our readiness to support the implementation of
that directive.
Let me conclude by reaffirming our commitment to
staying and delivering in Ukraine and the neighbouring
countries and to supporting and providing assistance to
the Ukrainian people and third-country nationals who
have been so severely affected by the war. I also want
to reiterate and strongly echo the Secretary-General’s
repeated and extremely urgent call for a humanitarian
ceasefire, and above all for peace.
The President: I thank Mr. Vitorino for his briefing.
I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Defence of the Republic of Ireland.
Mr. Coveney (Ireland): I would like to thank the
Director General of the International Organization
for Migration and the United Nations Deputy High
Commissioner for Refugees.
As we meet this afternoon, we do so in the shadow
of a renewed offensive by Russian forces on eastern
Ukraine — in the shadow of further bloodshed, further
scenes of killing, further disregard for civilian lives
and continued blatant violations of the Charter of the
United Nations.

S/PV.9018

On Thursday of last week I travelled to Kyiv. I
did so because I wanted to see for myself the situation
on the ground and to express Ireland’s solidarity with
Ukraine and its people. What I saw was profoundly
shocking. During my visit, I went to Bucha. Until two
months ago, it was a pleasant and vibrant town, a place
where many of us around this table could have happily
imagined living. It now lies in ruins, with the stench of
burning buildings and bodies in the air. Hundreds of
family homes, shops and other civilian infrastructure
have been blackened, burnt, looted, damaged and in
some cases completely destroyed. Family cars stand
riddled with bullets, their windshields smashed and
bloodstains still evident.
I have been around long enough to know the
difference between truth and staged propaganda when
I see it. There was nothing fabricated about what I
witnessed. I stood at the edge of one of the mass graves,
where the work of carefully exhuming bodies continued.
At that stage, 503 civilians had been identified and just
four soldiers. Those men, women and children were
not combatants, yet appeared to have been deliberately
killed in a brutal manner — in some cases, after being
tortured. Across Ukraine we have seen explosive
weapons, including prohibited cluster munitions, being
used in populated areas against civilian infrastructure.
The toll of destruction on homes, hospitals and schools
is testament to that. It speaks of an utter disregard by
Russian forces for international humanitarian law and
the protection of civilians. There can be no spinning
that reality away with disinformation.
Ireland is a small country. We are not a member
of any military alliance and we are certainly no
superpower, but we fought to take a seat at this table
and we have earned the right to be here. We did so
because we fundamentally believe that despite all of
the Council’s well-documented flaws — and there are
many — it is the ultimate arbiter on matters of war and
peace. This group of 15 countries has been entrusted
with protecting the weak and the innocent and holding
aggressors to account, no matter how powerful they
are. The only weapons that we have are diplomacy,
dialogue, facts, collective leadership and, most
importantly, a shared commitment to international law
and the Charter of the United Nations.
Do we really have to keep repeating around this
table that innocent civilians are never legitimate targets
of war and that all parties to conflict must comply
with international humanitarian law, including the

22-323405/27

S/PV.9018

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

prohibitions against indiscriminate and disproportionate
attacks and the obligation to distinguish between
civilians and combatants? Those obligations are not
optional — not least for those privileged enough to be
seated around this table and who should be leading by
example. During my visit to Ukraine, so many people
spoke to me about the urgent need for accountability
in order to expose the horrors of what has happened to
them, preferably in a court of law. In all situations where
war crimes may have been committed, we must ensure
that timely, credible investigations are undertaken, that
evidence is rigorously documented and that witnesses,
victims and survivors are supported. For that reason,
Ireland committed an additional €3 million in funding
to the International Criminal Court last week. Without
accountability and truth, there is no hope for sustainable
peace in Ukraine or anywhere else.
Russia’s war has driven millions of Ukrainians
from their homes, as we have just heard. Almost
5 million people have become refugees and more than
7 million have become displaced internally in Ukraine.
But the humanitarian consequences of the war are also
being felt thousands of miles from Ukraine by some
of the most vulnerable people on our planet. Countries
across the Middle East and the Horn of Africa, but also
in Latin America, are being increasingly impacted by
the severe economic consequences of this conflict.
The price of wheat and oil has risen by 300 per cent in
Somalia, where more than 700,000 people are already
displaced by drought. Wheat reserves in Palestine
could be depleted in less than three weeks’ time. As
the Secretary-General has said so clearly, the most
vulnerable people around the globe cannot become
collateral damage in yet another disaster for which
they bear no responsibility. Ireland cannot and will
not remain silent while this senseless and devastating
war continues, and neither should any member of the
Security Council.
As it was on 25 February, so it is today. This is a
war of choice. It can end immediately if President Putin
so decides. And yet we are instead seeing a renewed
and scaled-up offensive in eastern Ukraine. This is
madness, which history will judge very harshly. We
have to find a way to stop this war. And the Security
Council has a unique responsibility to do that. I want to
call today on Russia directly — to agree to an immediate
humanitarian ceasefire, commit to negotiations, respect
the Charter of the United Nations. We know that some
progress was made in Istanbul between the key parties.
There is clearly a basis for a peace agreement. President
6/27

19/04/2022

Zelenskyy, to his credit, has continued to remain open
to diplomatic solutions in the face of aggression and
brutality against his people.
I hear the narrative, from far too many quarters, that
peace will be possible only after the battle for Donbas.
I cannot accept that logic, a logic that leads directly to
further death, further suffering, further displacement.
The Security Council must challenge that thinking
today and every day. We must demand more.
Mr. De La Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I thank Ms. Kelly Clements, the United
Nations Deputy High Commissioner for Refugees,
and Mr. António Vitorino, the Director General of the
International Organization for Migration (IOM), for
their briefings. I also want to recognize the presence
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defence of
Ireland, whom we just listened to attentively and whom
we welcome to this meeting.
Mexico and France requested this meeting in
the light of the many humanitarian consequences of
the Ukraine conflict, especially the massive exodus
of people to neighbouring countries and others’
displacement to more secure places within the country.
Civilians in eastern Ukraine have been forced to flee
westward in order to seek greater protection. In that
regard, we deplore the attack today on Lviv, a city
that has taken in hundreds of thousands of internally
displaced persons. Almost two months since this war
began, and as the briefers told us today, this war has
left us with more than 7 million internally displaced
persons and some 5 million refugees, 90 per cent of
whom are women and children who are exposed to
all kinds of abuses. As in any conflict, the risk of
sexual violence and human trafficking is high, but the
predominating age and gender of the people fleeing in
the case of Ukraine has multiplied those risks.
The situation on the ground presents complex
logistical and statistical challenges for collecting
precise information on the numbers of women and
children who have been victims of traffickers. But
although those numbers are very significant, what is
even more significant is each and every person who
is at risk of being taken advantage of by opportunistic
criminals who would exploit their vulnerability in their
situation as refugees or nationals of third countries. The
Security Council should take every measure available
to it to prevent that from happening.
22-32340

19/04/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Given this situation, we recognize the efforts of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the IOM and other agencies on the ground
who, working together with the national authorities
of Ukraine and neighbouring countries, can counter
that threat. We would especially like to recognize the
efforts by the agencies in the area of mental health and
psychosocial support. The protection centres such as
the Blue Dots, for children and families, and campaigns
such as Stay Safe, aimed at protecting anyone who needs
specialized assistance, are commendable because they
are vital and in many cases the only support option for
those persons.
Mexico would once again like to acknowledge
the solidarity of Ukraine’s neighbours, which have
welcomed millions of refugees and support the efforts
of UNICEF to strengthen protection systems for
boys and girls. We also want to once again stress the
importance of host countries’ cooperation in order to
combat trafficking and abuses. Among the dreadful
images that the conflict has left us with, those of
discrimination, violence and xenophobia against thirdcountry nationals stand out. In critical situations when
people’s lives are at stake, there is no justification for
discriminating against or rejecting anyone because of
their ethnicity, religion, gender nationality or migratory
status. We support the new call of the Secretary-General
for a humanitarian pause to allow those civilians who
are most exposed to move to safer places, and we insist
on the need to investigate any incident that violates the
rights of refugees. In conclusion, I would like to make a
couple of final comments.
First, one of the main challenges for humanitarian
personnel continues to be the problem of reaching
those in need. It is therefore vital to guarantee safe and
unimpeded access, and we urge all parties to facilitate
that immediately.
Secondly, reports of violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law cannot go unpunished.
It is crucial that the Security Council work to ensure
that the parties respect international law and insist
that the relevant investigations are conducted and
the mechanisms for seeking justice available to us
are activated.
Finally, we reiterate that the only way to end this
serious humanitarian crisis is through a cessation of
hostilities. Mexico once again calls for an end to the war
and support for the territorial integrity of Ukraine in
accordance with its internationally recognized borders.

S/PV.9018

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Ms. Clements and Mr. António Vitorino
for their briefings and to applaud the remarkable work
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the International Organization for
Migration, the United Nations agencies and all the
humanitarian actors in Ukraine and its neighbours.
They can continue to count on our full support.
We must do everything to assist and welcome
refugees, without any distinction or discrimination.
More than a quarter of the Ukrainian population has
been forced to flee. Almost 5 million people have had
to seek refuge in neighbouring countries. Russia’s
ongoing aggression will inevitably continue to have an
impact on the displacement of people.
France welcomes the solidarity shown by the
European Union (EU), its member States and other
European States, such as Moldova. The activation of
the EU Temporary Protection Directive has enabled
rapid and effective assistance to be provided to those
fleeing the war. As a result, refugees within the EU
have access to education, medical care and the labour
market. We also welcome the actions of the International
Organization for Migration in providing assistance and
in organizing the return of third-country nationals,
including from African States. It is essential to step up
efforts to that end.
We must also increase our efforts to combat human
trafficking. Ninety per cent of displaced persons
are women and children, thousands of whom are
unaccompanied and vulnerable.
The Russian army has been killing civilians,
including children, humanitarian and medical personnel
and journalists, for almost two months. Schools and
water facilities have been destroyed. Some 1.4 million
people no longer have access to water in eastern
Ukraine. Hospitals are also being targeted. The World
Health Organization has confirmed 136 attacks on
medical facilities. I recall that the killing and maiming
of children, as well as attacks on schools and hospitals,
are among the grave violations of children’s rights in
times of war.
Those crimes will not go unpunished. France is
firmly committed to working with Ukraine and national
and international courts, in particular the International
Criminal Court, to that end. Following the terrible abuses
committed in Bucha, France deployed a technical team
to provide expertise in identification and the collection

22-323407/27

S/PV.9018

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

of evidence. We support the commission of inquiry set
up by the Human Rights Council to establish the facts.
We call on Russia to respect the order issued by
the International Court of Justice and to stop its war
of aggression against Ukraine. The priority remains
an immediate cessation of hostilities and full respect
for international humanitarian law. The protection of
civilians is an absolute imperative. Humanitarian access
must be ensured. In that regard, we fully support the
Secretary-General’s call for a four-day humanitarian
pause, starting this Thursday.

19/04/2022

At the same time, the hosting capacities of the
United Nations specialized bodies and agencies can
barely cover the constantly increasing needs due to the
ongoing fighting and movement of people.
The humanitarian workers in both Ukraine and
the host countries are also on-site and trying to
bring vital assistance to those in need through basic
and specialized care services, including mental and
psychological health care, as well as various kinds of
assistance geared to facilitating registration, schooling
for children and employment for refugees.

The whole world is affected by this war, which risks
driving up to 1.7 billion people, more than a fifth of the
world’s population, into poverty and food insecurity.
There is an urgent need to act. As we commemorate
in the coming days the opening of the San Francisco
Conference 77 years ago, France will continue to work
with its partners to ensure respect for the Charter of
the United Nations and to support Ukraine and the
Ukrainian people.

We express our support for the humanitarian workers
and our sincere appreciation for their efforts and those
of host countries. I commend the work of UNHCR and
the IOM. Without that valuable assistance, the daily
lives of many refugees would no doubt be even worse.
We therefore reiterate our appeal to host countries to
assist all those fleeing the fighting without distinction
regarding country of origin. All those people are living
in fear and distress, which does not allow for any bias.

Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Kelly Clements, from the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
and Mr. António Vitorino, from the International
Organization for Migration (IOM), for their informative
briefings. I welcome the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Simon Coveney, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Defence of Ireland.

A few days ago, the Security Council met to address
the allegations of sexual crimes, the exploitation of
women and children and the risk of human trafficking
(see S/PV.9016). It has become common that trafficking
networks, like vultures at the scene of a massacre, seek
to benefit from the plight of the defenceless and those
in need of protection. We all recall such dark stories
in previous conflicts, which should heighten our
vigilance so as to ensure an end to organized criminal
networks preying on our turmoil, be it in Ukraine or in
host countries.

Day by day, there is a heavier toll from the war. The
scourge of those fleeing the war is estimated to have
affected some 12 million people since the beginning of
the hostilities. The number of refugees currently stands
at approximately 5 million, the majority of whom,
comprising women and children, have found refuge in
Poland and other neighbouring countries. Among those
refugees, there are more than 210,000 third-country
nationals, including Africans, for whom the exodus is
often more difficult owing to absurd discrimination.
We have not stopped calling on bordering countries
to consider the situation of those people, who, like the
other victims of the war, are no less deserving of the
compassion and relief granted to other civilians fleeing
the war.
The humanitarian situation is one of the most
worrisome. The attacks against civilians and civilian
infrastructure are particularly devastating and impact
the supply of basic public services, such as water,
electricity and gas, leading to health risks.
8/27

There are many accounts of rape victims and cases of
the exploitation of children, alone and without defence,
picked up on the roads as they flee. If such reports are
found to be true, they will represent serious violations
of international humanitarian law, other relevant
conventions and Council resolutions on conflictrelated sexual violence, in particular resolutions 1820
(2008), 1888 (2009) and 2106 (2013), which reinforce
resolution 1325 (2000).
My country condemns any attack on women,
children or civilians not involved in the hostilities.
Likewise, my country reiterates its appeal for the
launching of an independent, impartial investigation
in order to establish the facts and determine
the perpetrators.
We also reiterate Gabon’s appeal for a cessation of
hostilities. It is time for the fighting to stop. It is time
22-32340

19/04/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

for the weapons to be silent. It is time for diplomacy to
speak out and to put an end to the suffering and death
of innocent people.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the International Organization for Migration for setting
out the devastating human consequences of Russia’s
aggression against Ukraine.
We are appalled by Russia’s ongoing offensive in
Donbas and the relentless attacks against civilians and
vital civilian infrastructure across Ukraine, including
in urban areas. Russia has intentionally created a
humanitarian disaster, particularly in Mariupol, where
civilians have been trapped in cellars for weeks without
food, water, electricity, medicines and other basic
necessities. At the same time, Russia continues to carry
out missile attacks on Kyiv and Lviv. No one is safe in
any part of Ukraine.
As we heard today, 12 million Ukrainians have now
fled their homes. As internally displaced persons or
refugees, they face increased risk of sexual and genderbased violence, trafficking, abuse, psychosocial trauma
and family separation. Russia is solely responsible for
creating that situation. All Russian attacks on civilians
must stop. Russia’s invasion is a blatant violation of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
We welcome the investigation of possible war
crimes and crimes against humanity initiated by the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, as well
as the establishment of the commission of inquiry to
investigate war crimes committed in the aggression
against Ukraine. There must be accountability.
Perpetrators must be brought to justice.
Russia is choosing to cause the largest humanitarian
crisis in Europe since the Second World War. Norway
echoes the Secretary-General’s call for a humanitarian
pause to allow safe passage for civilians and the delivery
of life-saving humanitarian aid.
The brutality and sheer scale of this rapidly
evolving crisis puts civilians at great risk and demands
protective responses at unprecedented levels — from
local communities and areas receiving internally
displaced people and refugees to international
humanitarian organizations and so many in between.
All countries taking in displaced people must ensure
their immediate identification and registration and put
in place measures to protect them from further risk
and harm.

S/PV.9018

Women and children account for 90 per cent of
all those who have fled Ukraine. The response must
therefore be gender- and age-sensitive and tailored
to meet distinct needs, with particular attention
paid to unaccompanied children, who are extremely
vulnerable. Access to education and health services,
including for sexual and reproductive health, must also
be a top priority.
Norway is impressed by the resilience of the
people of Ukraine. Local services, communities
and responders — even those affected by the
conflict — continue to serve people in need. And
we commend the response mounted by local and
international humanitarian organizations. As the needs
grow, so must efforts to step up the response and engage
directly with affected people.
We continue to call for safe, rapid and unimpeded
humanitarian access to people in need. We also
applaud the hospitality and solidarity extended by
Ukraine’s neighbours, and we encourage countries to
keep their borders open to all those seeking protection,
without discrimination.
Russia alone is responsible for the war in Ukraine
and for its devastating global consequences. We are
acutely aware of the war’s negative impact on the cost
of staple foods, fertilizers and energy across the globe
and how it is exacerbating poverty, food insecurity and
humanitarian needs. Russia can choose to stop this
war — to end the aggression against its neighbour. That
is the only way to end the humanitarian catastrophe in
Ukraine and beyond.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We take note of the views voiced by Ms. Kelly
Clements, United Nations Deputy High Commissioner
for Refugees, and Mr. António Vitorino, Director
General of the International Organization for Migration.
We heard many alarming conclusions and terrifying
figures in their statements. In that context, we must recall
that the Russian Federation faced the consequences of
the deteriorating situation in Ukraine immediately after
the anti-constitutional coup there in February 2014. As
soon as the nationalist authorities showed their true
face by unleashing a war against the Russian language
and then undertaking the physical destruction of their
eastern residents, Russia was flooded with refugees
fleeing the Maidan lawlessness. According to official
reports, since 2014 alone, at least 1.7 million people
have applied for Russian citizenship, refugee status or

22-323409/27

S/PV.9018

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

temporary asylum in our country. After the intensified
shelling of Donbas by the Ukrainian side on the eve
of the start of Russia’s special military operation, that
flow increased dramatically, reaching 863,000 people.
In other words, at least 2.5 million Ukrainians have
sought refuge in Russia since the Maidan coup.

19/04/2022

By the way, the mass exodus of Ukrainians from their
country is nothing new for that State. According to the
Ukrainian Ministry of Finance, between 1990 and 2021
the country’s population decreased by a quarter — from
54 to 41 million people. At the same time, according
to the Ptoukha Institute for Demography and Social
Studies of the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine,
in 2021 there were even fewer Ukrainians — 38 million
people. It is noteworthy that — according to the same
Institute — 3 million Ukrainians left for seasonal work.

Moreover, by baselessly portraying what happened
on 24 February as an “unprovoked and unprecedented
Russian aggression” or a “war of choice”, they
hypocritically pretend that nothing more horrific has
happened in the world since the end of the Second
World War, sweeping under the rug the hundreds of
thousands of victims of the military adventurism of
Western States since the Cold War — in Afghanistan,
Iraq, Yugoslavia and Libya. As recently as yesterday,
our Syrian colleagues circulated a letter in the Security
Council about the horrific consequences of the
American razing of the city of Raqqa to the ground
in 2017. That operation has become synonymous with
inhumane action, which resulted in the city being
practically wiped off the face of the Earth, along with
its inhabitants.

I am not providing those figures to downplay
the scale of the migration challenges Ukraine and
its neighbours are facing today. I merely wish to
disagree with attempts to erase the history of postSoviet Ukraine, turn a blind eye to all its problems and
start counting issues only from the beginning of the
Russian special military operation. Today our Western
colleagues prefer to overlook not only the growing
rate of emigration from Ukraine in recent years, as I
mentioned, but also the staggering corruption, the
skyrocketing political murders, most of which have
remained unpunished, the unprecedented repression of
opposition leaders and the mass closure of opposition
media outlets, to name but a few.

Today they are trying to not only rewrite modern
history with an anti-Russian lens, but also to encourage
the insane speculations of some of our Eastern European
neighbours about the role of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics in the liberation of Europe, and the world as
a whole, from fascism. Apparently, it is easier for them
to ignore the egregious manifestations of neo-Nazism
in Ukraine, whose de-Nazification is one of the goals
of our military operation. That is necessary in order
to ensure that there will never again be a threat — not
only to the people of the Donetsk People’s Republic and
the Luhansk People’s Republic, but also to Russia and
to the Ukrainians themselves, who are held hostage by
those authorities — from the territory of this State.

Those who reproach us for human rights violations
fail to recall the unprecedented persecution of the
Russian language and those who speak it in that
country. Understandably, when praising Ukraine,
it is embarrassing to talk about the Mirotvorets
website, which remains operational and posts publicly
the personal data of inconvenient Ukrainians and
foreigners who criticize the Maidan regime. Some of
those whose lives are thus endangered are minors.
None of our Western colleagues have commented on
that disgraceful phenomenon.

I also cannot but note that the concerns of our
Western colleagues about Ukraine and the Ukrainians
are extremely short-sighted and selfish. They need
Ukraine and the Ukrainians today only as cannon
fodder in their indirect war with Russia “to the last
Ukrainian”. At the same time, they are keeping their
own interests front and centre.

In painting their picture of the world, they are
striving to present Ukraine as a pure and innocent white
lamb. That picture does not include the Kyiv regime’s
eight-year war on civilians in the east of its country
or its many years of sabotaging the Minsk agreements.
They simply try to forget about it and prompt others
to do the same under threat of sanctions and direct
political and economic blackmail.
10/27

For example, weapons manufacturers in Western
countries are eagerly rubbing their hands together,
calculating their profits from increased defence
orders. After the first week of hostilities in Ukraine,
the stock value of the leading British arms producer,
BAE Systems, rose by 24 per cent and the stock value
of Thales Air Defence Limited, a producer of anti-tank
and anti-air systems, rose by 42 per cent. We have seen
the same trends with the United States war industry.
That is clearly to the liking of the Eastern European
members of NATO, which have long been thinking
about how to rid themselves of obsolete Soviet weapons.
22-32340

19/04/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Now, promising to supply modern NATO weaponry,
they have been gladly offloading vehicles that no
longer work to Ukraine, as they know that the Russian
army will grind and crush those non-functional items
and they will no longer have to think about its disposal.
In addition, our pragmatic United States colleagues,
without one iota of conscience, are now attempting
to reap maximum economic profits. By prompting
Europeans to impose increasingly stringent economic
sanctions, Washington, which will suffer the least in
that scenario, intends to have other States gradually
become addicted to their gas products. So what if
American liquefied natural gas is considerably more
expensive than Russia’s?
Yet these are “molecules of freedom”, as a United
States official put it, that the Europeans, not the
Americans, will pay for. The Russian economy, as is
well known, is doing fine under these circumstances of
sanctions pressure, finding in these new circumstances
fresh areas of development and new, reliable partners.
The only country that is losing in all respects as a result
of the situation is Ukraine, and yet it seems that the
Kyiv authorities have not noticed that, or perhaps they
prefer not to notice it.
However, that is felt more and more by ordinary
Ukrainians, who from the beginning of the special
military operation have not been encountering
terrorism or shelling by the Russian army, contrary
to what Ukrainian or Western propagandists say, but
ruthless hostility and indifference to the country’s own
population on the part of Ukrainian neo-Nazis and
radicals, who have been seeking to save their own skins
at all costs.
With each passing day there is more and more
evidence of civilians being used as human shields,
indiscriminate shelling of residential areas in their own
cities in order to pin the blame on Russian military
personnel, egregious, Goebbels-inspired provocations
in Bucha and Kramatorsk and at the maternity hospital
and theatre in Mariupol.
It is not possible to sweep the truth about that under
the rug, and the fact that the Ukrainian military has
been using prohibited cluster munitions in the shelling
of residential infrastructure cannot be swept under the
rug either. For example, this morning, cluster munitions
targeted Golovchino, in Belgorod oblast of the Russian
Federation, where there are no military facilities. This
was put on record, and all relevant evidence has been

S/PV.9018

registered. However, for some reason, we do not see any
willingness on the part of our Western colleagues to
condemn that heinous crime and the radicals’ breach of
the norms of international humanitarian law.
One month into the siege of Azovstal plant, those
same radicals and neo-Nazis suddenly declared that
allegedly, there had been civilians inside the plant all
that time, even though until yesterday, they had never
uttered a word about it. They never mentioned any
civilians; in fact, even hundreds of military personnel,
once surrounded, moved to surrender. In that way
they have once again disclosed the truth. The civilians
in that facility were there only to be used as human
shields. There is a multitude of such evidence that we
will without fail share with the Council.
But will members wish to hear about this? For
eight years they have studiously ignored the deaths
of civilians — women, children and the elderly — in
Donbas, and therefore we have our doubts in that respect.
However, we are carrying out the special military
operation not to find understanding or support from
them. It would be naïve to trust in their support in the
geopolitical game that they have initated, in which they
use Ukraine as a mere pawn.
We became aware of the dirty tricks that they are
prepared to utilize to forge a so-called rules-based
world order when we saw that the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in Ukraine,
instead of monitoring and reporting on violations of the
ceasefire, simply engaged in spying for Kyiv’s benefit,
handing over to the Ukrainian army’s information from
surveillance cameras so that they could adjust their
firing positions and targets. The collection of evidence
about that very inconvenient fact is ongoing.
However, another issue warrants specific attention.
I am referring to the use by the Ukrainian armed forces
of OSCE Mission armoured vehicles. According to
media outlets, in late February Azov Battalion fighters
turned up at the Office of the Special Monitoring
Mission in Mariupol demanding that the keys to
the vehicles be handed over. When rejected, they
threatened the staff with guns, and, ultimately, obtained
eight OSCE vehicles, including armoured ones. One
of those vehicles was eventually found 5 kilometres
from the Special Monitoring Mission’s offices, in the
Kirov market in Mariupol. It had clearly been used
in hostilities. Not a single one of those vehicles was
ever returned to the OSCE. Similar threats were made
against the Mission’s staff in Sievierodonetsk in late

22-3234011/27

S/PV.9018

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

February and early March. The OSCE leadership was
aware of that issue but preferred to sweep that fact
under the rug until the last moment. Those disclosures
undermine trust in any international organizations
whose officials include predominantly representatives
of Western countries.
I will not conceal the fact that under these
circumstances calls for peace and a ceasefire sound
mendacious and insincere, and in practice they merely
point to an aspiration to provide Kyiv nationalists and
radicals with breathing room to regroup and obtain more
drones, anti-tank guided missiles and man-portable air
defence system , and in the meantime stage additional
inhumane provocations and disseminate more fake
information about the alleged actions of Russian
soldiers. We will make a clear distinction between such
tactical pseudo-peacekeeping calls and a genuine intent
to help Ukraine to the only correct and long-overdue
course of action.
The sooner that is done by the Ukrainians, contrary
to the inclinations of those that are egging them
on — those who wish to profit from the tragedy that
has been unfolding since 2014, including the European
Union’s leadership, which has taken off its mask — the
better it will be for that country, because in one way or
another, the objective of the special military operation
to liberate Donbas, which is aimed at demilitarizing
and de-Nazifying Ukraine and eradicating the threats
emanating from the area against the Russian Federation,
will certainly be achieved.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I thank Mr. António Vitorino, Director General
of the International Organization for Migration, and
Ms. Kelly T. Clements, United Nations Deputy High
Commissioner for Refugees, for their briefings.
The Ukraine conflict has led to a dire humanitarian
situation and other serious consequences. We are deeply
concerned about that, and I should like to make four
comments in that respect.
First, every effort must be made to reduce the harm
caused to civilians by conflict. China once again calls
on all parties to the conflict to exercise maximum
restraint, strictly abide by international humanitarian
law, protect civilians and civilian facilities and facilitate
evacuation and humanitarian assistance operations. The
parties concerned should strengthen communication
on humanitarian issues and conduct coordination and
cooperation on issues such as opening humanitarian
12/27

19/04/2022

corridors and organizing the safe evacuation
of personnel. China supports Secretary-General
Guterres and Under-Secretary-General Griffiths in
engaging with all parties on the humanitarian pause
and on agreeing on relevant arrangements.
Secondly, the issue of refugees should be properly
addressed. The neighbouring countries of Ukraine
have provided safe havens and humanitarian assistance
to millions of refugees, which China appreciates. The
continuation of the conflict will result in more refugees
and bring huge economic and social challenges to the
host countries. The international community should
strengthen coordination and provide more support
to refugee-receiving countries in the spirit of shared
responsibility. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the
International Organization for Migration and other
agencies should continue to mobilize and coordinate
international aid, scale up humanitarian assistance to
refugees and help ease the pressure on host countries.
We have noticed that in the past few days many
refugees have returned to Ukraine, and we hope that
their basic needs will be met as they return to normal
life. All refugees, regardless of nationality, race or
religion, should be treated equally. Vulnerable groups
such as women and children should be given priority
protection. Actions must be taken to crack down
on human trafficking and other criminal activities
targeting women and children seeking refuge. Agencies
such as UNHCR, UN-Women, UNICEF and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights should also step up monitoring in support of the
efforts of relevant countries.
Thirdly, diplomatic negotiations must be promoted
with a greater sense of urgency. The prospect of an
extended and prolonged conflict is worrying. A ceasefire
and an end to the conflict as soon as possible is the
fundamental way to resolving the humanitarian crisis.
We call on Russia and Ukraine to adhere to the general
direction of dialogue and negotiations, continuously
narrow differences and accumulate conditions for a
ceasefire. All other parties should focus on supporting
diplomatic negotiations. Continuing to send more
heavy or offensive weapons will not bring peace. It will
only prolong and escalate conflict, which will further
aggravate humanitarian catastrophe.
Fourthly, we must pay attention to and eliminate
the negative impact of sanctions. All dimensional and
unlimited sanctions have had serious spillover effects,
22-32340

19/04/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

with developing countries bearing the brunt. Last
week, at the launch of the first report of the Global
Crisis Response Group on Food, Energy and Finance,
Secretary-General Guterres said,
“We are now facing a perfect storm that
threatens to devastate the economies of many
developing countries”.
The vast number of developing countries that are not
parties to the conflict have paid a heavy price for it.
This is neither fair nor reasonable.
The international community should strengthen
coordination to keep food and energy supplies and
prices stable and avoid unnecessary export restrictions.
It should also be pointed out that arbitrary freezes
of foreign exchange reserves of other countries
also constitute a violation of the sovereignty of
other countries and are tantamount to weaponizing
economic independence. Such practices undermine the
foundation of world economic stability and bring new
uncertainties and risks to international relations and
should be abandoned as soon as possible.
China has always stood on the side of peace and
justice and upheld the principles and purposes of the
United Nations Charter. We will continue to work
tirelessly for a final resolution of the Ukraine crisis.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I would also like to thank Deputy High
Commissioner Clements and Director General Vitorino
for their informative briefings on the situation on the
ground in Ukraine. Right now, their agencies and
non-governmental organization partners are doing such
important life-saving work. Their teams are putting
their own lives on the line as they work to assist others.
We were heartbroken to hear about the Caritas
Internationalis staff members who were killed in
Mariupol. I met with the Caritas staff when I was in the
region, and I saw the life-saving work they were doing.
Their deaths are tragic and unacceptable. Humanitarian
aid workers do save lives. They are impartial, and they
should be protected, not shelled indiscriminately.
As we have heard, Russia’s unprovoked,
unconscionable war keeps generating new sobering
milestones. As of the latest count, 5 million refugees
have left Ukraine in search of safety. Of course, the
number of people internally displaced in Ukraine is
even greater. And, yes, these numbers are alarming.

S/PV.9018

Today I would like to focus on what we can do
to help both refugees and those front-line countries
protecting people searching for safety. I want to start
by thanking the countries that have initially taken
in the vast majority of refugees: Poland, Moldova,
Hungary, Romania and Slovakia. These front-line
countries deserve our sincere and heartfelt gratitude
for their service and their sacrifice. They have opened
their borders and their hearts to the people of Ukraine,
and they have not just done the right thing, but they
have also done the hard thing. When I visited Moldova
and Romania, I saw for myself just how difficult and
disruptive it can be for societies to integrate so many
refugees in such a short period of time.
But I speak on behalf of many when I say that they
have given us all hope for humanity. They have shown
the world what it means to be gracious, hospitable,
generous and kind — and what it means to be a good
neighbour. I am so glad that many refugees from
Ukraine are now being hosted by other European Union
countries. That greatly alleviates the impact for all.
For its part, the United States is welcoming up
to 100,000 Ukrainians, and we are funding efforts to
support all those who have fled Ukraine.
As we do everything we can to support Ukrainian
refugees, all of us need to provide just as much support,
protection and grace to the many third-country
nationals fleeing Ukraine. As I have said before,
refugees are refugees, no matter their background,
their race, their religion or the country they come from.
Regardless of their age, their abilities, their nationality,
irrespective of their sexual orientation, gender identity
or creed, refugees are refugees, period. Upholding the
human rights of those in need is a paramount concern,
and I am proud that my Government has contributed to
these efforts.
National Geographic recently highlighted some of
the stories of the refugees fleeing Ukraine, featuring
some of the thousands of Africans, many of whom were
students living in Ukraine, who had to flee the country.
I was particularly moved by the story of one, a young
woman by the name of Blessing Oyeleke. She was a
25-year-old medical student from Nigeria who escaped
Ternopil. Blessing had lived in Ukraine for five years,
and she told reporters that coming to Ukraine was like
a dream come true for her. One does not have to be a
citizen of Ukraine to have one’s dreams dashed or one’s
heart split in half. We are therefore beyond grateful
to the countries that have shown such generosity and

22-3234013/27

S/PV.9018

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

hospitality and let in all those who are fleeing for
their lives.
Finally, as Director General Vitorino made clear,
we also need to address the threat of human trafficking.
Because refugees and other displaced people have
limited access to resources and employment and
often lack proper identification documents, they are
particularly vulnerable to exploitation, violence and
human trafficking. As we emphasized last week (see
S/PV.9013), 90 per cent of this refugee population are
women and children. They are at immense risk of being
trafficked and exploited and experiencing gender-based
violence, and we must do everything we can to mitigate
those risks. I know that some countries, such as Poland
and Romania, are conducting targeted awareness
campaigns and are also taking specific preventive
measures such as instituting checks at the border and
facilitating access to shelter and transportation. The
United States is proud to be providing support for those
important protection initiatives, both in Ukraine and
in neighbouring countries such as Romania, Poland,
Slovakia and Hungary. To that end, on my trip to the
region, I announced $50 million in additional assistance
to Moldova, much of which went to border management
and anti-trafficking efforts. With so many lives on the
line, we must all increase our vigilance and support
for such initiatives, as well as resources for survivors
and accountability for those who exploit the most
vulnerable. We cannot let the world’s most nefarious
actors take a horrific situation and make it worse.
At the same time, we need to work together.
Supporting countries, partner organizations and United
Nations agencies need to coordinate to ensure that we
are doing everything we can to help the countries on
the front lines of this refugee crisis and the millions
of people fleeing violence. Yesterday the SecretaryGeneral called for a humanitarian pause to enable
humanitarian corridors to open. Every day I am asked
if the United Nations and even the Security Council
are irrelevant to the crisis. We know that the world is
looking to the United Nations and wondering how to
respond in the wake of Russia’s unconscionable actions.
Supporting refugees and the countries taking them in
is one of the most powerful and immediate ways that
we all can help, and it is so important to ensure that the
United Nations plays a key role in that.
Let us therefore show the world what we have
learned from decades of addressing refugee crises
and humanitarian situations. Let us show the world
14/27

19/04/2022

that when Russia provoked the worst refugee crisis
in Europe since the Second World War, the rest of the
Security Council and the United Nations stepped up
and helped those most in need.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I would like to
thank the briefers for their important contributions. Let
me also take this opportunity to reiterate our solidarity
with all the victims of this war, including those who
have lost their homes and are now fleeing in fear.
Europe is facing its fastest-growing refugee crisis
since the Second World War. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
International Organization for Migration, which were
created precisely in the aftermath of that war, are now
playing a crucial role in offering protection and relief
to millions of refugees and internally displaced persons
in Ukraine and other parts of the world. We are deeply
concerned about the fact that nearly one fourth of
Ukraine’s population has been forcibly displaced in the
past few weeks, a statistic that attests to the intensity
of the conflict and the degree of disruption to normal
life that it is inflicting on Ukrainians. Many more may
follow if the hostilities continue to increase in eastern
and southern Ukraine and in densely populated areas.
The high proportion of women and children fleeing
Ukraine is also worrying, as they are more vulnerable
to sexual violence, exploitation, and human trafficking,
not to mention the psychological effects that the conflict
may have on children and the prospects for their future
development. All the parties have an obligation to
protect civilians and critical civilian infrastructure and
ensure safe timely and unimpeded humanitarian access,
especially in eastern Ukraine. And while the opening
of humanitarian corridors and the establishment of
local humanitarian pauses are positive steps, only a
nationwide ceasefire will enable effective protection
for the civilian population. The conflict is now creating
a looming food crisis with a potentially devastating
impact on the most vulnerable all over the world.
The destruction of Ukraine’s productive capacities,
on one hand, and the unilateral economic sanctions, on
the other, are both major factors in the surging global food
insecurity. All of that comes at a time when developing
countries are still struggling with the socioeconomic
consequences of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
The fact that the World Food Programme (WFP)
recently announced a reduction in its assistance for
refugees and other vulnerable populations across East
Africa and the Middle East illustrates that problem. As
22-32340

19/04/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

David Beasley, the WFP’s Executive Director, recently
reminded us (see S/PV.9008) in a different context,
we should not be forced to take from the hungry to
feed the starving. Let us not forget that developing
countries host approximately 85 per cent of the world’s
refugees. Prices of food, energy and fertilizer have
been increasing very steeply worldwide. The Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations has
published data showing that food prices are now more
than 30 per cent higher than this time last year. Since
fertilizer prices have doubled, the medium- and longterm effects on agriculture are also concerning. In fact,
on 13 April the Secretary-General made reference to
this dangerous three-dimensional crisis, and the United
Nations Global Crisis Response Group published its
first brief, entitled “Global impact of war in Ukraine
on food, energy and finance systems”, on the same day.
Since 3 March, in line with our tradition of
solidarity, Brazil’s Embassies in Bratislava, Bucharest,
Budapest, Prague and Warsaw have been granting
special visas to displaced Ukrainians and stateless
persons affected or displaced by the armed conflict in
Ukraine. Once on Brazilian territory, they have full
access to all public services and social benefits on an
equal footing with Brazilian nationals. Brazilian civil
society has been forthcoming in mobilizing to provide
further specialized assistance to help local integration.
Such measures are part of a long-standing Brazilian
humanitarian visa policy that has already benefited
people affected by crises in Afghanistan, Haiti, Syria
and Venezuela. Through this we attest to our belief that
we should never discriminate against any person or
group fleeing an armed conflict. All deserve support,
regardless of race, ethnicity, nationality, migration
status, age, disability or other circumstances. We
welcome the demonstration of international solidarity
with Ukrainian refugees and host countries. That is
the attitude that we need to foster globally if we are
to tackle the immensely complicated humanitarian
landscape of our time, marked by a rapid multiplication
of crises and situations of forced displacement in many
regions of the world.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Let me begin by
thanking Mr. António Vitorino, the Director General
of the International Organization for Migration, and
Ms. Kelly Clements, the United Nations Deputy High
Commissioner for Refugees, for their remarks on the
humanitarian situation in Ukraine.

S/PV.9018

The humanitarian situation in Ukraine has
deteriorated further since the Council previously
discussed the issue (see S/PV.9013). According to
reports coming out of Ukraine, women and children
have been disproportionately affected, and they form
a majority of the refugees and internally displaced. We
support calls urging for guarantees of safe passage to
deliver essential humanitarian and medical supplies,
including through the establishment of permanent
humanitarian corridors. We hope that the international
community will continue to respond positively to the
evolving humanitarian requirements. Keeping in view
the dire humanitarian situation in Ukraine, India has
been sending humanitarian supplies to Ukraine and its
neighbours that include medicines and other essential
relief material. We will provide more medical supplies
to Ukraine in the coming days. India has also ensured
the safe return of approximately 22,500 Indians from
Ukraine. To that end, we initiated Operation Ganga,
involving 90 flights. We have also assisted nationals
from 18 other countries in that process. We are
deeply appreciative of the facilitation rendered by the
authorities of Ukraine and its neighbouring countries
in ensuring their safe return.
The impact of the situation is being felt beyond
the region through increasing food and energy costs,
especially for many developing countries. It is in our
collective interest to work constructively, both inside
and outside the United Nations, to seek an early
resolution of the issue. We have noted the findings of
the Secretary-General’s Global Crisis Response Group
Task Team, which were issued last week. We welcome
its recommendation for exempting food purchases by
the World Food Programme for humanitarian assistance
from food export restrictions, with immediate effect.
The food security challenges resulting from the
conflict in Ukraine require us to respond creatively.
The growing shortages can be addressed only by going
beyond the constraints that we are currently labouring
under. Energy security is an equally serious concern
and should be addressed through cooperative efforts.
I would like to reiterate the importance of United
Nations guiding principles for humanitarian assistance.
Humanitarian action should always be guided by those
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence and should never be politicized.
India remains deeply concerned about the worsening
situation and reiterates its call for an immediate
cessation of violence and an end to hostilities. From
the beginning of the conflict we have emphasized

22-3234015/27

S/PV.9018

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

the need to pursue a path of diplomacy and dialogue.
When innocent human lives are at stake, diplomacy
must prevail as the only viable option. We continue to
emphasize to all States Members of the United Nations
that the global order is anchored in international law,
the Charter of the United Nations and respect for the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of States.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me thank Director
General Vitorino and the Deputy High Commissioner
for Refugees, Ms. Clements, for their updated
information on the situation in Ukraine.
There is unfortunately no good news from Ukraine,
only more of a never-ending tragedy. Every briefer
from the United Nations system who addresses the
Council echoes the same concerns, sounds the same
alarms and highlights the same issues. The situation
in Ukraine is dire and worsening. We are running
out of words to describe the continued terrible human
suffering, the deliberate large-scale destruction and the
increasing humanitarian needs. But we are not running
out of rage or condemnation of what should never have
happened in the first place. Russia has crossed all
moral red lines, knowingly, willingly and on purpose.
The war of aggression remains as brutal as on its first
day. Russia continues to impose its inhuman behaviour
and ruthless vision on its neighbour. It continues to
slaughter civilians, destroy the country and persist in
dashing hopes.
In a matter of weeks, the war has managed to defy
the wildest of projections, since, as we heard from
Ms. Clements, more than 5 million people have crossed
the border since 24 February. Add to that the fact that
more than 7.1 million people have been internally
displaced and uprooted from their homes, and another
13 million affected by this special madness, and the
picture is apocalyptic. The country is upside down.
These people, the majority of them women and
children, have left everything behind. They have lost
their homes. They have been dispossessed of their lives
and deprived of their dreams. They are left only with
made-in-Russia nightmares.
A major assault has started in eastern Ukraine. It
was anticipated, and we do not need to be told what
Russia will do there. Mariupol, Bucha and Chernihiv
are the calamitous templates that foretell more of the
same ruthlessness. There will be more victims and
destruction, more suffering and atrocities and more
children hurt. That shows that the so-called negotiations
were never sincere, merely a tactical bullet to force
16/27

19/04/2022

Ukraine into concessions or a move to gain time and
regroup to inflict more pain.
We welcome the work of the United Nations
agencies and their international partners — including
those at risk of losing their lives, like the worker from
Caritas — while helping millions in need, wherever
possible, inside and outside the country. As we
heard from the briefers, the needs continue to grow
exponentially, because no ceasefire is anywhere on the
horizon, which we deeply regret. Safe passage must be
ensured to allow for the safe evacuation of civilians.
The Secretary-General has called for a humanitarian
pause. We support his call, but will he be heard?
Everything must be done to protect people vulnerable to
trafficking inside Ukraine or those at risk while fleeing
the country. We applaud the generosity and hospitality
of Ukraine’s neighbours and the measures that they and
others have taken in welcoming Ukrainian refugees and
providing them with access to labour markets, health
care and social benefits.
Everything is under attack in Ukraine — freedom,
property, rights and life itself. Where there are no
ground troops, there will be deadly missiles falling from
the sky. The alarming reports of the arbitrary detention
of civilians, forced deportation and increased conflictrelated sexual violence in territories under Russian
control are appalling and must be fully investigated.
Accountability is central to our collective efforts to
suppress and, hopefully, prevent acts of aggression. We
applaud the visit of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, Karim Khan, to the crime scenes.
Gathering evidence for the purpose of accountability
for the atrocities committed in Ukraine remains key
not only to delivering on our commitment but also to
taking responsibility at all levels to establish truth and
end impunity.
We may sometimes be sceptical of media reports
here and there. To be properly informed, we always
need critical thinking, but it would be hard to refute
the credibility of The New Yorker magazine. The most
recent investigative report on the siege of Chernihiv
is petrifying.
“The siege had lasted 39 days and, according to
the city’s mayor, killed some 700 people — though
countless more died as a result of freezing
temperatures, lack of medical care and shortages of
food and medicines.... Residential buildings were
struck with terrifying regularity.”
22-32340

19/04/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Even the Yuri Gagarin stadium was flattened. It could
hardly be otherwise. When hospitals and schools are
attacked, the fight is not against an army; it is aimed at
destroying a population. Nina Rogacheva, at 92 years
old, is in a hospital bed, badly wounded. She was 11
years old when her family got the news that her father,
who was fighting with the Red Army in the Second
World War, had been killed at the front. Amid tears, she
said, “My father died defending Russia and now that
same Russia is bombing me”.
Let me end on this note. In order to enforce its
long-held obsessive claim that Ukraine does not exist,
the Kremlin has resorted to brute force, coupled with
totalitarian censorship back home, in an attempt to
force reality to meet the myth. What has happened
over the past seven weeks shows the contrary. Reality
is hard to deny, and misreading history may result in
disaster. History serves not only to bear witness to what
has happened in the past, but also as a way to draw
lessons and not repeat mistakes in the future. I cannot
help going back for a moment to November 1939. Stalin
had decided to invade Finland. He wanted a part of it
and was convinced that the invasion would be over in
a matter of days. What happened was a different story
altogether. The outnumbered Finnish resistance, some
3,600 people, inflicted a humiliating defeat on the
25,000-strong Soviet division of that time. For Stalin,
it was a territorial grab. For the Finnish, it was an
existential threat. No might can defeat the brave hearts
of those in the right.
It is important to recall that the Soviet Union
wanted to Sovietize Europe. It tried and it failed. The
same attempt to impose one man’s rule, concept and
foolish dream is failing again, resulting in humiliation
for the aggressor but also, unfortunately, in dramatic
consequences for Ukraine and serious disruptions for
the world. That is why Russia’s war of choice concerns
not only the fate of 44 million Ukrainians, but all
of us. We must not allow one country to bully the
world into submission. No country should be free to
dominate others.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Let me begin by thanking
Mr. António Vitorino, the Director General of the
International Organization for Migration, and Ms. Kelly
Clements, the United Nations Deputy High Commissioner
for Refugees, for their comprehensive briefings. I also
commend the dedicated work of their teams in Ukraine,
as well as in its neighbouring countries, through the
implementation of the inter-agency Regional Refugee

S/PV.9018

Response Plan spearheaded by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Too many people have been needlessly thrust
into the stark and painful reality of life as refugees
and internally displaced persons since the Russian
Federation invaded Ukraine. In just seven weeks,
almost 5 million people in Ukraine have been forced to
flee to neighbouring countries and some 7 million more
have been internally displaced, with little or no hope
of ever returning to their known places of abode and
domicile. We commend the willingness of Ukraine’s
neighbours — many of which are themselves still in
fragile situations — for opening their borders to receive
the exodus of people arriving daily from Ukraine. We
also particularly thank the families and individuals
who have generously offered to share their homes and
continue to contribute food and other items to help us
meet the needs of the refugees. We urge for sustained
cooperation between United Nations agencies, host
Governments and the relevant stakeholders to ensure
that the refugee assistance and protection measures
conform with the internationally accepted standards
defined by the 1951 United Nations Convention on the
Status of Refugees and its amending Protocol of 1967.
Ghana is particularly concerned about the reports of
the discriminatory treatment of third-country nationals
in their efforts to board trains and buses transporting
people out of Ukraine and to cross its borders into the
safer territories of neighbouring countries. We believe
that even in the most challenging circumstances the
best of our common humanity will come through if we
are committed. We therefore condemn any differential
treatment based on race, colour, nationality or any other
distinguishing criteria and call for the equal treatment
and protection of all refugees and internally displaced
persons. In particular, we urge for easing border
controls to facilitate the entry and passage of thirdcountry nationals. We further urge host countries to
refrain from forced deportations and instead to provide
third-country nationals with assistance and legal
options so that they can remain or return voluntarily to
their countries of nationality.
We remain alert to the risks posed by such mass
movements of people, especially where human
trafficking is concerned, and urge for strengthened
oversight and accountability measures, including in
transit and host countries. We call for prioritizing the
particular needs of women, children, the sick, the elderly
and persons living with disabilities, while underscoring

22-3234017/27

S/PV.9018

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

that all reported cases of crimes and violations of
human rights, including human trafficking and genderbased and sexual violence against women and girls,
must be urgently and independently investigated to
establish the culpability of those responsible and hold
them accountable.
The continuing bombardment in several parts
of Ukraine has intensified the need for a negotiated
humanitarian pause and for demilitarizing humanitarian
corridors to ensure the safe passage of people leaving
the war-torn areas, enabling the unobstructed delivery
of life-saving aid and assistance to those who are unable
to leave. We further reiterate our call to the parties to
respect and uphold their obligations under international
humanitarian law and to refrain from direct attacks
on civilian populations and civilian infrastructure.
Humanitarian workers and medical personnel must also
be protected from harm.
Our desire to see an end not only to the humanitarian
crisis in Ukraine but to the fast-growing food, energy
and financial crisis that is developing globally as a
result of the war should drive our efforts to facilitate a
peaceful settlement of the conflict through dialogue and
diplomacy. We therefore have an urgent and collective
responsibility to invest in peace in Ukraine and avoid
actions that reinforce the security apprehensions of the
parties and serve only to perpetuate a needless war.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I thank Deputy High
Commissioner Kelly Clements and Director General
António Vitorino for their briefings. I also welcome
the participation of the Permanent Representatives of
Ukraine, Sweden, Italy, Poland, Estonia and Slovakia
in this meeting.
The scale of the Ukrainian exodus to escape
the war is unprecedented in recent history. With
the continuation of the aggression causing that
humanitarian catastrophe, the number of refugees will
only increase. We commend the rapid mobilization
by humanitarian actors, including the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of
the High Commissioner for Refugees, the International
Organization for Migration and the International
Committee of the Red Cross. We urge them to redouble
their efforts to ensure that the refugees from Ukraine are
protected from forms of modern slavery such as forced
labour and forced marriage. The security services of
receiving countries should also make every effort to
ensure that those victims of war are protected from the
predation that so often comes to those who have fled their
18/27

19/04/2022

countries. We further recognize and praise Ukraine’s
neighbours for so generously opening their borders to
the millions of Ukrainians and other nationals fleeing
in fear of violence and atrocity. We continue to urge
them to ensure that all refugees, whatever their race,
national origin or religion, deserve equal protection in
line with international humanitarian law.
We call on the Russian Federation to end the
war and to return to its important responsibility for
protecting international peace and security. Ending the
war is the only way to put an end to the humanitarian
crisis under way. Continuing it will lead to more
suffering and a steady erosion of the legitimacy and
status of the United Nations, regardless of its efforts to
provide humanitarian relief. We further urge all actors
to ensure that there are safe humanitarian corridors
provided in Mariupol, Kherson and other besieged
cities. The Africans trapped in those cities should be
protected by all actors, not only from bombs and bullets
but from racist treatment.
The war is leading to hunger and poverty all over
the world. Ukraine’s inability, due to the war, to safely
harvest, transport and export its commodities and goods
is adding to global food insecurity. The sanctions,
whose scope is unprecedented, are also impacting
global food and energy prices. We urge the largest
shareholders in the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund to mobilize those funds to offer farreaching efforts to cushion the world’s most vulnerable
countries. It is particularly important that fertilizers
should be made available to countries that suffer from
chronic food insecurity. But we must go further than
offering alms to the poor and victimized. The extent
of the crisis should impel us to support bold leadership
in providing a viable development path to the poorest
countries, particularly in the context of climate-change
mitigation and adaptation.
Every crisis has important lessons that can help
us heal in a way that gives birth to a kinder and fairer
world. One of those lessons is to recognize and act on
the profound danger to all of us from ethnocentrism and
racism in all their manifestations. A few weeks ago,
we shared our delegation’s interaction with an African
student who had been studying medicine in Ukraine.
She told us of the many thousands of Africans who, like
her, had to make a terrifying journey to flee the war
and find refuge in Europe. She spoke of the indignities
and dangers they experienced from the racist treatment
they received along the way. A similar story can be told
22-32340

19/04/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

by the thousands who seek to cross the Mediterranean
from Africa or travel overland from Asia and the Middle
East into Europe. These are not merely refugee policies.
They point to a fundamental flaw in the global order.
It is our contention that racism and ethnocentrism,
especially when they are supported and trumpeted
by official policies, are the clearest early-warning
signals of catastrophic war and atrocity. Since we are
speaking of a war in Europe, Europe knows from its
tragic history and understands all too well the horrors
that emerge when the full, violent logic of racism and
ethnocentrism can mobilize armies. This very United
Nations was established after the policies of race and the
pseudoscientific racism of the Nazis — which built on
the legacies that had generated the transatlantic slavery
and other forms of violent racism in the Americas and
Europe — killed tens of millions of Europeans, Asians
and Africans. To prevent a new age of destructive wars
and their associated humanitarian crises, we must build
anti-racism into the very foundations of the multilateral
order. In every area, from how the United Nations
agencies are led and do their work, to policies on refugees
and climate change and even Security Council reform,
we must embrace anti-racism as the greatest possible
preventive action for humanitarian emergencies.
In conclusion, with regard to the specific
humanitarian crisis in Ukraine today, the most humane
action that can be undertaken is a cessation of hostilities.
We call for that cessation — one that has clearly defined
contact lines and humanitarian corridors and that lays
a foundation for a lasting peace settlement that respects
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Ukraine.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to thank Director-General António Vitorino and
Deputy High Commissioner Kelly T. Clements for
their valuable briefings. As we have heard from today’s
briefers and indeed in all our meetings on Ukraine since
the conflict began, almost two months ago, the human
costs of the war are staggering. In a clear example of
the toll it has taken, more than a quarter of Ukrainians,
90 per cent of whom are women and children, have
fled their homes in this short period of time. We call
on all the parties to uphold their obligations under
international humanitarian law. We also reiterate that an
immediate cessation of hostilities throughout Ukraine
is imperative if we are to move towards a peaceful
solution to the war. In that regard, we welcome the
Secretary-General’s call for a four-day humanitarian

S/PV.9018

pause to enable the opening of a series of humanitarian
corridors, which would help preserve lives, prevent and
alleviate suffering and protect civilians. More broadly,
in the context of the current situation, I would like to
focus on four points.
First, dialogue remains the only way to sustainably
end this conflict. The United Arab Emirates supports
the ongoing negotiations between the parties and
all good-faith efforts aimed at reaching a peaceful
resolution of the conflict. Women’s full, equal and
meaningful participation in all peace efforts must be
guaranteed, considering their critical role in building a
more sustainable and durable peace.
Secondly, the human suffering created by the
conflict requires significant resources for rendering
aid to those in need. In particular, we commend the
generosity in hosting large numbers of refugees shown
by neighbouring countries and others, particularly
Poland and Romania, which together have taken in more
than 3.4 million Ukrainians, as well as Moldova, which
has taken in more than 400,000 refugees, a number
equivalent to 15 per cent of its own total population.
We also commend the European Union for its ongoing
support to States bearing the brunt of the refugee crisis.
Additionally, the United Arab Emirates recognizes with
appreciation the work of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration in supporting refugees in
host countries, which is essential to providing ongoing
care and reassurance after so many have lost so much in
the war. We also reiterate our call to allow civilians to
safely and voluntarily evacuate from conflict-affected
areas and to enable humanitarian aid to reach those in
need, in accordance with international law.
Thirdly, we reiterate the need for a genderresponsive approach to be implemented in all
humanitarian efforts in Ukraine and host countries. We
are particularly concerned about the increasing reports
of human trafficking. Ensuring that structured systems
are put in place at border crossings to vet assistance
providers and detect, prevent and suppress the criminal
activity of traffickers is essential to keeping women
and children safe. In that context, the humanitarian
response must include the voices of women, who can
inform the provision and delivery of humanitarian
assistance, services and programming efforts with their
needs at the centre.
Fourthly, we need to also address the global effects
of the conflict in Ukraine urgently and effectively. That

22-3234019/27

S/PV.9018

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

is especially critical as we are seeing sharp rises in food
and commodity prices, including in many countries on
the Security Council’s agenda.
In conclusion, we should spare no effort to end the
conflict and the ongoing humanitarian tragedy through
diplomacy, and the United Arab Emirates will support
every initiative to that end.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as the representative of the United
Kingdom.
I would like to start by thanking Ms. Clements
and Mr. Vitorino for their briefings. As we have heard
today, the people of Ukraine continue to bear the
terrible costs of Russia’s invasion. And as Russia begins
a new offensive in the Donbas, millions of Ukrainians
face further suffering. Our consideration of the
humanitarian situation in Ukraine must be guided by
two overarching principles, the protection of civilians
and the prosecution of war crimes.
After 55 days of war, 7.1 million people are
displaced within Ukraine, and 4.7 million people
have fled to neighbouring countries. Like others,
I pay tribute to the compassion and solidarity of the
neighbours that are hosting refugees and the work
of the United Nations, in particular the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the International Organization for Migration, for their
initiatives, and especially the Blue Dot initiative to
protect unaccompanied women and children, who may
face sexual exploitation, abuse and suffering. Many
Ukrainians, including children, have been forcibly
deported to Russia against their will. They should be
allowed to leave in safety and with dignity.
For the thousands of civilians remaining in
Mariupol, Kherson, Donetsk, Luhansk and other cities,
struggling to survive without food, water, warmth or
medical supplies, the United Kingdom joins others in
supporting the Secretary-General’s call for an urgent
humanitarian pause to allow assistance to reach
civilians in the hardest-hit areas. To that end, the United
Kingdom has pledged almost £400 million in aid to
Ukraine and is a leading humanitarian donor, providing
£220 million in humanitarian assistance to deliver
life-saving aid and to support countries receiving and
hosting refugees. We have also guaranteed $1 billion in
World Bank lending to Ukraine.
Secondly, with regard to the prosecution of war
crimes, those who suffered from the occupation
20/27

19/04/2022

and atrocities by Russian forces in Bucha, Irpin,
Borodyanka, Chernihiv and many other towns should
be in no doubt that justice will be sought for those
crimes against humanity. We welcome the International
Criminal Court investigations led by Prosecutor Karim
Khan, which are under way. As the Prosecutor said,
Ukraine is now a crime scene. The investigations
of the appalling sexual violence in Ukraine will be
informed by the Murad Code, which we launched at
the United Nations last week and which is a vital step
towards supporting survivors and bringing perpetrators
to justice.
For the sake of those we could not protect from
violence, there must be the prosecution of those who
committed it.
Finally, we should not ignore the looming
humanitarian needs caused by secondary displacements
as the economic consequences of this war translate
into rising food, energy and finance costs, exposing
more than 1.2 billion people in 69 countries to perfectstorm conditions. The urgent and simple solution to
this humanitarian crisis is for President Putin to stop
the war.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I recognize the
representative of Putin’s regime in the permanent seat
of the Soviet Union.
First of all, I would like to thank Minister Coveney
for his statement. I also thank Mr. António Vitorino,
Director General of the International Organization
for Migration, and Ms. Kelly Clements, United
Nations Deputy High Commissioner for Refugees, for
their briefings.
Yesterday morning, surgeons in Lviv carried out an
operation on a three-year-old boy by the name of Myron,
an internally displaced person (IDP) from Kharkiv. His
family left eastern Ukraine in an attempt to save their
child from Russian shelling. Unfortunately, Russian
rocket attacks against Ukrainians know no bounds, and
Myron’s family came under attack from a Russian air
strike on the other side of Ukraine while in the vicinity
of a car service centre hit by a Russian cruise missile.
Fortunately, Myron survived, unlike seven other people
killed by the air strike on Lviv, unlike three people
killed by Russian shells in his native town of Kharkiv
22-32340

19/04/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

just today and unlike many other Ukrainians whom
Russia is killing right now.
One may like to ask Putin’s representative how the
attempted murder of a three-year-old boy near a car
service centre in Lviv could protect Donbas from neoNazis. But I will not do that, as it would simply be a
waste of time to listen to another lie that the Russian
representative feeds to us to justify what cannot be
justified. Let their deeds speak for themselves, and they
are sinister.
It was also yesterday that Putin granted the 64th
motorized infantry brigade of the Russian army the
honorary title of Guards Brigade. As an argument,
Putin referred to the so-called “mass heroism and
valour, tenacity and courage” of the soldiers of the
aforementioned brigade. Let it be remembered that the
64th brigade was supposed to seize Kyiv, according to
the initial Russian plans. It failed and was deployed to
the town of Bucha for almost the whole of March — a
month that was turned into a period of terror against
the civilian population of the occupied town. The
soldiers of that brigade, many of whom have already
been identified, are responsible for the mass atrocities
in Bucha.
That is the Russian interpretation of heroism and
courage — to kill hundreds of unarmed civilians, to rape
dozens of women and girls and, finally, to flee from the
advancing Ukrainian forces. One could only agree that
the Russian soldiers demonstrated tenacity. Retreating
under the fire of the Ukrainian forces, they tenaciously
kept all that they had looted from the private houses
and apartments of the residents of Bucha. Russians left
behind their munitions in order to pack their vehicles
with stolen computers, television sets, mobile phones,
clothes, carpets, washing machines and even toilets.
One may find such an inclination for stealing toilets
too much even for Russians. However, it should be
remembered that about a quarter of Russian households
still do not have access to indoor plumbing. In rural
Russia, the record of sanitation facilities is even worse
and extends to almost two thirds of households.
As we meet now, the battle for the Ukrainian Donbas
is unfolding. Russian forces are attacking Ukrainian
cities and villages in the east of the country, trying to
raze them to the ground and making no differentiation
between the military and civilians. It means that, while
the Ukrainian forces courageously protect every parcel
of Ukrainian soil, civilians in the conflict area remain
under deadly threat from Russian forces.

S/PV.9018

The situation in Mariupol remains the most critical.
Thousands of civilians are still in the city. Hundreds
of them, including children, have taken shelter in the
Azovstal plant. They need immediate safe evacuation,
and the Russian forces are well aware of that. Instead,
the Russians are denying all requests from the Ukrainian
side, world leaders and United Nations senior officials
for evacuation corridors for civilians. The Russians
continue to shell Azovstal and the entire city with
aerial bombs, rockets and heavy artillery. The Russians
have also blocked humanitarian convoys with food and
medicine from Ukraine and international organizations
to the city.
Every time it seems that we have already become
accustomed to the ignoble methods of Russian warfare,
every new piece of news from Mariupol and dozens of
other hotspots proves that Russians are still able to hit
new lows.
I call on the Security Council to urgently exercise its
authority, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, to save the innocent civilians of Mariupol and
other eastern cities and towns that remain hostages of
the bloody war fantasies of Putin. I would also like
to acknowledge the importance of today’s call by the
Secretary-General for a humanitarian pause to allow
for the opening of a series of humanitarian corridors.
We demand that Russia heed that call. However, what
we just heard from a Putinite instead was that “calls
for a ceasefire sound false and insincere”, followed by
a torrent of tommyrot and drivel from the comrade in
the Soviet seat.
We commend the continuous efforts of the United
Nations humanitarian teams to support Ukrainian
citizens on the ground. In that regard, we welcome
the return to Kyiv by the United Nations mission. It
will ensure better interaction with the Government.
We welcome the joint actions of the World Food
Programme and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees to provide special cash
assistance to low-income IDPs and retirees. We believe
that such an approach will contribute to more targeted,
balanced humanitarian aid to those in need.
We also encourage United Nations agencies
to assist in the implementation of the Government
programmes to relocate Ukrainian production facilities
and support the employment of IDPs. More than 250
State-supported production facilities have already
been relocated to other areas, with hundreds of others
waiting their turn. We believe that Ukraine is a good

22-3234021/27

S/PV.9018

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

place for the active implementation of the humanitarian
development nexus.
Let me once again express our special gratitude
to all States that have accepted Ukrainian refugees,
primarily women and children, as well as those that
have provided children education, health protection
and psychological and social support. However, given
the enormous magnitude of the crisis, we ask that the
humanitarian response in and around Ukraine be scaled
up and that the volume of humanitarian aid be increased
and promptly delivered to those in need.
In the Russia-controlled territories, including the
Kherson and Zaporizhzhya regions, the invaders are
building filtration camps and torture chambers. They
continue to abduct representatives of local authorities
and activists. We all remember the assurances of
Putin’s representative in this Chamber that Russia did
not intend to occupy Ukrainian lands — another lie,
like everything that comes out of his mouth.
Now Russians are trying to tear off the Kherson and
Zaporizhzhya regions, following the model of the socalled Donetsk People’s Republic and Luhansk People’s
Republic. The Russian occupiers continue to forcibly
transfer Ukrainians from the occupied territories of
Donbas to Russia, as Nazi Germany once did. Filtration
camps are an integral element of their transfer.
At least 20,000 Ukrainians are being kept in
filtration camps on the Mangush-Nikolske-Yalta
line — about 5,000 to 7,000 people in the filtration
camp in the village of Bezimenne, Donetsk region.
According to available information, citizens of Ukraine
are sent to the economically depressed regions of
the Russian Federation, in particular the northern
regions and the island of Sakhalin. Ukrainians receive
documents banning them from leaving Russian regions
for two years.
To date, more than 500,000 Ukrainians, including
121,000 children, have been forcibly transferred to
Russia’s territory. Such actions of the Russian invaders
can be qualified as kidnapping and require a resolute
response by the international community, primarily
from the relevant United Nations agencies. As of today,
more than 12 million persons have left their homes
due to the armed aggression of the Russian Federation,
and many of them have no place to come back to.
Almost 5 million Ukrainians — including 2 million
children — have left Ukraine, while 7 million are
internally displaced, including 2.5 million children.
22/27

19/04/2022

We call on the United Nations to provide its
assistance to monitor the situation and ensure the safe
return of the Ukrainian displaced persons, particularly
children, to secure places in Ukraine or in other
countries. The rights of displaced Ukrainian children
must be protected.
We also expect more active involvement in
establishing humanitarian corridors, which are currently
being blocked by the Russian troops, ensuring the safe
evacuation of civilians and delivering humanitarian aid
to those who remain in the area of conflict.
Since 5 March, the Government of Ukraine,
through the mediation of the International Committee
of the Red Cross, offered 348 humanitarian routes,
303 of which have been agreed upon. Nevertheless,
only 176 took place. As of 18 April, more than 290,000
people have been evacuated. None of the 38 attempts
of the Ukrainian authorities to arrange humanitarian
corridors for civilians from Mariupol and Volnovakha
were successful, due to Russia’s unwillingness.
Since January, we have held more than a dozen
meetings on the Russian aggression against Ukraine.
We all value our time, so let me ask the Council — how
do our meetings influence those that occupy a seat
that the Charter of the United Nations still allocates to
another already defunct entity? How many meetings of
the Security Council will be held with the same result
and without changing Russia’s role in the Council?
It appears that these meetings do not affect
much —not the security situation on the front line
or the humanitarian situation in Ukraine. I do not
underestimate the commitment of our partners to help
Ukraine at the bilateral level. However, what is the
role of the Security Council — the organ that failed to
prevent the war and continues to fail to stop it now due
to Russian actions.
Unfortunately, in this Chamber, we continue to
listen to the subjects of a future war trial and make
statements before them. For what reason? Is the
international community ready to relegate the role of
the Security Council in addressing the worst security
crisis in the European continent since the Second World
War to discussions only? I strongly urge the Security
Council to seriously address the issue of how to solve
the problem of Russian’s dubious presence in this
Chamber, as it impedes the Council’s effectiveness in
exercising its primary responsibility — to maintain
international peace and security.
22-32340

19/04/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Why does this organ have no influence on Russia’s
war against Ukraine? The answer is obvious — because
the Security Council continues to pretend that Russia
is a full and legitimate permanent member. I see no
meaningful change in the role of the Security Council
if an answer is not found soon. Russia must be stopped
for the sake of peace, for the sake of Ukrainians and for
the sake of people throughout the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden.
Ms. Eneström (Sweden): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.
Let me start by thanking the briefers for their clear
and concise remarks. I also want to pay tribute to the
staff of their respective organizations and all other
humanitarian workers on the ground in Ukraine and in
neighbouring countries. We are immensely grateful for
their efforts, which, sadly, are essential for the safety
and dignity of so many Ukrainians. The United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration are doing impressive work
to assist refugees and internally displaced persons and
we encourage them to continue to scale up their work.

S/PV.9018

in particular. Access to places such as Mariupol
and Kharkiv is still being granted on a case-by-case
basis and requires complicated negotiations, while
humanitarian needs are on a scale that requires
sustained access. The main cause of the lack of access
are the attacks by the Russian Federation on areas
where civilians are located, which compromises the
safety and security of humanitarian actors on the
ground. We call on the parties to the conflict to abide
by their obligations to allow and facilitate access to
the east and to other hard-to-reach areas, recalling
again the particular responsibility that rests on the
shoulders of the invading forces. We welcome in that
regard the efforts of the Emergency Relief Coordinator
to negotiate a humanitarian ceasefire during his recent
visit to Moscow and Ukraine, and we strongly support
the Secretary-General’s call for a humanitarian pause.
Secondly, in line with humanitarian principles,
protection and assistance must take into account the
needs of everyone living in a situation of vulnerability.
We see how women who have chosen to stay are at
heightened risk of sexual and gender-based violence. We
also see how the elderly and people with disabilities are
unable to leave. Those aspects must be fully integrated
into the humanitarian response.

As we heard today and as evidenced by so many
testimonies from those who have fled, the efforts
of humanitarian actors are being dwarfed by the
unspeakable horrors caused by the unprovoked,
unjustified and illegal Russian aggression against
Ukraine. The decision to launch this war places a heavy
responsibility on those who made it.

Thirdly, international humanitarian law must be
respected. Civilians must never be a target, and civilian
infrastructure must be protected. Sexual violence can
never be tolerated. That brings me back to the issue of
responsibility. No amount of denial and disinformation
will prevent accountability for serious international
crimes, including war crimes.

We welcome the efforts of humanitarian actors to
assist and protect as many people in need as possible, as
well as the hospitality and generosity of those countries
who are hosting refugees from Ukraine. Ukraine’s
immediate neighbours — Poland, Moldova, Romania,
Hungary and Slovakia — deserve particular recognition
in that regard.

We are now almost eight weeks into Russia’s fullscale aggression against Ukraine. During that time,
we have witnessed horrific atrocities that have ended,
ruined or disrupted the lives of millions. But we have
also seen the international community coming together
in solidarity with Ukraine. And, most importantly, we
have been deeply impressed by the incredible resilience
of the Ukrainian people.

The Nordic countries are proud to be part of a donor
community that has mustered an impressive response
to the initial humanitarian appeal of $1.1 billion.
Going forward, let me highlight a few elements that
we see as particularly important to further improve the
efficiency of humanitarian work:
First, safe, rapid and unhindered humanitarian
access must be ensured — not least to the areas hardest
hit by the conflict and places that risk being encircled,

In conclusion, we recall the two resolutions adopted
by the emergency special session of the General
Assembly (resolutions ES-11/1 and ES-11/2), as well as
the order by the International Court of Justice issued on
16 March this year. All of them include a clear call on
Russia to stop this war. But let us be candid: no United
Nations resolutions or court orders are necessary in that
regard. It is obvious to everyone what the right course
of action is. This aggression should never have been

22-3234023/27

S/PV.9018

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

launched in the first place, and it must end now. It is
never too late to make the right choice.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Massari (Italy): We are thankful to the
Permanent Mission of the United Kingdom for having
organized this meeting and to all the briefers for their
insightful remarks.
First and foremost, let me take this opportunity to
reiterate Italy’s firm condemnation of the unjustified
and unprovoked aggression by the Russian Federation
against Ukraine and our full support for Ukraine and
its people.
We are deeply concerned by the repeated attacks
on civilians, including women and children, and by
the testimonies and reports of the war crimes, grave
breaches of international humanitarian law and serious
violations of international human rights law perpetrated
by the Russian armed forces.
As the horrifying images that we have been seeing
in the past month have confirmed, human displacement
is the inevitable reaction to the scourge of war in the
quest for the safety of civilians. As has been mentioned,
7.1 million people are internally displaced, and there
are more than 4.5 million refugees. Even though those
numbers are already shocking, they are continuing to
grow as we speak.
Refugees are a priority that requires a coordinated
international approach. Hence we welcome the efforts
of the International Organization for Migration, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the other United Nations agencies on
the ground in order to try to alleviate that unbearable
human suffering. We have provided a contribution of
€20 million to the United Nations flash appeal and
€6 million to the Red Cross.

19/04/2022

fleeing from Ukraine across the borders. We know
that the risks of gender-based violence, trafficking,
abuse and psychological trauma and family separation
increase in times of conflict and displacement, but,
given the gender profile of that refugee outflow and
the fact that many children have fled alone, those risks
are incredibly high. The testimony of rapes and sexual
violence by Russian troops that are now emerging are
utterly disturbing.
The protection and promotion of women’s and
girls’ rights and the fight against all forms of sexual
and gender-based violence, in times of both peace and
armed conflict, is a long-standing commitment on the
part of Italy. We believe that full accountability must
be ensured for the individual perpetrators of such
violations so as to avert any form of impunity.
While affirming our condemnation of the Russian
aggression, Italy reiterates its call for an immediate
cessation of hostilities, the withdrawal of the Russian
military forces from the internationally recognized
borders of Ukraine and the return to a negotiating
path. We also affirm our heartfelt solidarity with
Ukraine and its people and mourn all the victims of
that senseless war.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): I would like to thank
the United Nations Deputy High Commissioner for
Refugees and the Director General of the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) for their interventions
today. It is important that both the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the IOM
maintain their presence across Ukraine and support
refugees and internally displaced persons in their
everyday needs.

Italy has been following migration flows from
Ukraine since 2014, also in the light of the presence of
a large Ukrainian community in our country. Almost
250,000 Ukrainians live in Italy, accounting for one of
the largest Ukrainian diasporas in the world before the
war. In addition to them, we have already welcomed
almost 100,000 refugees and are ready to do our part in
assisting all Ukrainians arriving in Italy.

As a consequence of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine,
we are witnessing one of the gravest displacement and
humanitarian crises on record. On 6 March, the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Filippo
Grandi, rightly described it as the fastest-growing
refugee crisis in Europe since the Second World
War. The rate at which people are fleeing Ukraine
is unprecedented, even when compared with the
displacement crises in Venezuela, Afghanistan, Syria
and Iraq.

Nonetheless, we must point out that the Ukrainian
refugee crisis is a protection crisis for women and
children, who account for 90 per cent of all those

Since day one of the war, Poland has remained open
to those fleeing the atrocities of the Russian aggression,
and we have registered people of 170 nationalities. All

24/27

22-32340

19/04/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

of them are treated equally and accordingly with their
legal status. We are now welcoming in our homes most
of the 3 million people in question. Estimates show
that 75 per cent of them voluntarily decided to stay in
Poland, and we welcome their choice.
We need to ask ourselves one very simple question.
Since we all agree that this crisis is on an unprecedented
scale and the fastest-growing one since the Second
World War, have we all, as the international community,
responded to it on an unprecedented scale, too? Let
me be 100 per cent frank: the answer is both yes and
no. Yes, we have seen an exceptional outpouring of
solidarity and political support from many corners of
the world. Our societies have opened their hearts and
homes to the distressed, and our Governments have
strongly condemned the aggressor and followed up with
sanctions regimes. The General Assembly has adopted
important resolutions.
In Poland, we have almost 15 million households.
Taking into account that we have welcomed almost
3 million people from Ukraine, that means, statistically,
that one in five Polish families lives now with guests
from abroad. The reception of such a large number
of refugees requires the Polish Government and local
authorities to undertake enormous efforts in order to
provide shelter, access to health care and education.
We are trying to be as flexible as possible as we adjust
Polish regulations to the current reality. For example,
by today, almost 1 million Ukrainian refugees have
received a Polish personal identification number,
and around 180,000 refugee children have enrolled
in Polish schools. This has solved one of the most
challenging problems of any refugee crisis, namely,
personal registration.
At the same time, it is obvious that Poland and
other neighbouring countries of Ukraine will not
be able to shoulder the burden of this crisis on their
own, even though, in Poland, we operate according to
a simple principle: we first help with our own means,
and only when our resources are exhausted do we
ask for international assistance — not the other way
around. The unprecedented scale of the crisis requires
increased involvement of United Nations agencies and
the support of the international community as a whole.
Only a concerted effort will bring relief to those who
are suffering, and this help must come not in words, but
in deeds.
For the sake of time, I would simply like to draw
Council members’ attention to the following three

S/PV.9018

aspects. First, with regard to the need for coordination
of our efforts, since the beginning of the war, the
Polish Government, non-governmental organizations
and individual society members have been delivering
humanitarian assistance to Ukraine and facilitating
deliveries of aid from third countries. In fact, between
1,500 to 2,000 tons of such aid are being shipped from
Poland every day. We would like to encourage the
United Nations institutions involved in the relief efforts
to use Poland’s infrastructure, as our resources allow
us to reach even the most distant regions of eastern
Ukraine, as we did a few days ago with the largest
shipment of aid yet — 120 container railway cars with
1,500 tons of aid for Zaporizhia and Kharkiv. Poland and
Ukraine have well-functioning systems of national and
local government institutions and logistics, including
transportation and storage facilities, which are ready
to be used.
Today the Polish Prime Minister opened the first
“container town” for internally displaced persons
in Lviv, which was fully funded by Poland. He also
announced similar projects to be launched in towns
around Kyiv, including Bucha. Shelter of this type,
which covers 1,000 people, costs around $8 million.
We therefore encourage the United Nations to take this
opportunity to work more closely with our Governments
to increase the efficiency of the humanitarian assistance
provided to Ukraine.
Secondly, there is an urgent need to adequately
respond to and prevent such displacement-related
risks as human trafficking and abuse. Poland has
undertaken actions to address challenges related
to the risks of trafficking in human beings. In this
context, the Polish Border Guard, police and other
authorities have increased their actions to prevent
and counter human trafficking. Relevant authorities
have undertaken appropriate information campaigns.
For example, special alerts containing comprehensive
information about potential threats, possible assistance
and dedicated hotline numbers are disseminated to all
refugees entering Poland. Furthermore, to ensure the
safety of minor Ukrainian citizens, we developed a
special legal procedure for the safekeeping of the records
of unaccompanied minors and their actual caregivers.
Thirdly, we are deeply concerned at the fate of
people who were forcibly taken far into Russia’s
territory. According to some reports, there are 500,000
people who share this plight, including over 120,000
children. We see the urgent need for reflection about

22-3234025/27

S/PV.9018

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

what can be done by relevant United Nations agencies,
including the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration, to stop and prevent this
process. We should make a distinction between those
fleeing from aggression and those being forcibly
deported. This distinction is currently not being made
in United Nations statistics.
In the light of this enormous humanitarian crisis,
much more can be done by the international community
to respond to rapidly raising challenges. This is why
Poland and Sweden have taken the initiative to convene
on 5 May a high-level international donor conference
for Ukraine to mobilize substantial pledges in support
of the United Nations humanitarian response in Ukraine
and to discuss how to respond to the challenges created
by the Russian war against Ukraine. The event will be
an opportunity to show solidarity with Ukraine and the
Ukrainian people through practical means, which is so
greatly needed today. Please show up.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I am speaking today on
behalf of the Baltic countries — Latvia, Lithuania and
my own country, Estonia. We give great importance
to this opportunity to take part in the Council
discussion today.
I thank the briefers for their updates, which reflect
the alarming humanitarian situation caused by the
brutal Russian military aggression, with the complicity
of Belarus, against Ukraine. This aggression is illegal
and unprovoked. We strongly condemn this violation of
international law, including the United Nations Charter.
We repeat the demand of the International Court of
Justice and that of the General Assembly for Russia to
immediately stop its aggression and unconditionally
withdraw all forces and military equipment from the
entire territory of Ukraine.
The Russian aggression was launched and is
being conducted with a cynical indifference to its
humanitarian consequences for Ukraine and the world.
Cities reduced to ruins, homes and farms destroyed,
families torn apart; thousands, including hundreds
of children, killed and wounded; civilians tortured,
subjected to sexual violence, summarily executed
and burned in Bucha and elsewhere; rising hunger
and poverty in the most vulnerable regions of the
world — these are the devastating results of the choice
26/27

19/04/2022

that Russia has made. They bring echoes of the worst
crimes of the past century, which the United Nations is
designed to prevent.
Five million people have been forced to flee
Ukraine, most of them women and children. We
commend the solidarity of Ukraine’s immediate
neighbours in helping those fleeing. We continue to
assist the nearly 110,000 refugees who have reached
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.
Millions are displaced as a direct result of the war.
Our countries are sending medical and shelter supplies,
food aid and other support to help the people in Ukraine.
Our combined humanitarian assistance — from the
State but also countless individuals, companies and
civil society organizations — amounts to €66 million.
As just one example: one in every three Estonians
has made a charitable donation to help the people in
Ukraine. We are contributing to the United Nations
humanitarian flash appeal and the regional refugee
response plan and the International Committee of the
Red Cross. We also continue to provide humanitarian
assistance and development cooperation globally.
The humanitarian situation of those trapped in the
cities under siege has been described as “hell”. The
Russian Federation must immediately grant full, safe
and unhindered access for humanitarian assistance
to Mariupol and other besieged cities, as well as safe
passage to allow civilians to safely and voluntarily
leave for the destination of their choice.
As we discuss the humanitarian consequences
of the Russian aggression, we also reiterate our call
for accountability for the systematic violations of
international law, including international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, committed
by the Russian armed forces in Ukraine. We support
the Independent International Commission of
Inquiry on Ukraine as well as the work being done
under the auspices of the Moscow Mechanism of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation, and we
continue our support for the Office of the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court. But we cannot
forget that, while these investigations are under way,
countless civilians continue to be targeted by Russia in
Ukraine every day.
The Russian attack against the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally
agreed borders needs to stop now. I repeat: Estonia,
Latvia and Lithuania stand with the people of
22-32340

19/04/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Ukraine — women, men and children —who have
shown immeasurable courage. We stand with humanity
against brutality.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Chatrnúch (Slovakia): Since 24 February, the
Security Council has been actively engaged on the issue
of the situation in Ukraine and held multiple meetings,
for one simple reason — the Russian decision to start
the senseless war. The consequences of the unjustified
and unprovoked Russian aggression against Ukraine, in
blatant violation of international law and the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, are unprecedented
and outrageous.
We would like to thank today’s briefers for the
information provided, which, unfortunately, confirms
our ongoing grave concerns about the deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in Ukraine. The conflict has
already resulted in significant human costs, including
the growing number of civilian casualties and damage
to critical civilian infrastructure. The numbers of killed
and wounded civilians are shocking. According to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, as of yesterday 2,072 civilians had been
killed and 2,819 wounded. Needless to say, the reality
is actually much worse.
Slovakia, as a neighbouring country and thus
directly affected, is particularly alarmed by the refugee
crisis resulting from the Russian aggression. Almost
5 million refugees have fled the country, while far
more than 7 million are internally displaced. Since the
beginning of the aggression, about 345,000 people have
entered Slovakia.

S/PV.9018

Slovakia has adopted numerous legislative
measures facilitating the provision of temporary refuge
and basic services for people crossing the border. In this
regard, I would like to particularly mention that around
7,000 children from Ukraine have been provided with
adequate education in Slovak schools. Our Government,
humanitarian organizations, municipalities, businesses
and individual citizens are determined to continue
providing strong humanitarian support to relieve the
suffering of the Ukrainian people. We stand in solidarity
with them as a close friend and good neighbour in these
most challenging times. Causing all this suffering is
cynical and barbaric.
Let me reiterate that the aggressor accountable
for this situation is obvious. Slovakia calls on the
Russian Federation to immediately cease its hostilities
against Ukraine, in particular all attacks against
civilians and civilian objects. In this regard, we
likewise urge the Russian Federation to listen to the
voice of the international community and implement
the humanitarian resolution ES-11/2 adopted by the
General Assembly on 24 March, taking into account
the situation of vulnerable groups, including women,
children and older persons who are stuck in Mariupol.
Slovakia supports the direct dialogue that has
started between Ukraine and the Russian Federation
and calls for the peaceful settlement of the conflict,
in compliance with the United Nations Charter. In the
light of the upcoming Orthodox Easter, we also support
the Secretary-General’s call for a four-day truce in
order to open humanitarian corridors.
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

22-3234027/27
