S/2018/963

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 October 2018
Original: English

Letter dated 25 October 2018 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to draw your attention to Security Council resolution 1966
(2010) of 22 December 2010, by which the Council established the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and to the statute of the Mechanism
annexed thereto.
Article 8 of the statute provides that the Mechanism shall have a roster of 25
independent judges, not more than 2 of whom may be nationals of the same State.
The judges shall only be present at the seats of the branches of the Mechanism as
necessary at the request of the President to exercise the functions requiring their
presence and shall not receive any remuneration or other benefits for being on the
roster. The terms and conditions of service of the judges for each day on which they
exercise their functions for the Mechanism shall be those of the judges ad hoc of the
International Court of Justice.
In a letter dated 22 June 2018 (S/2018/626), I informed the President of the
Security Council that I intended to reappoint 23 out of the 25 judges of the
Mechanism. In a letter dated 26 June 2018 (S/2018/627), the President of the Security
Council informed me that the members of the Council had taken note of my intention.
In a letter dated 29 June 2018 (S/2018/652), I informed the President of the Security
Council that I was proceeding with the reappointment of 23 out of the 25 judges of
the Mechanism. In a letter dated 2 August 2018 (S/2018/756), the President of the
Security Council informed me that, having carefully analysed the current situation,
the members of the Council reasonably expected that filling the two vacant positions
would assist in the effective and timely implementation of the mandate of the
Mechanism in accordance with resolution 1966 (2010) and that they had decided that
two judges should be elected to the roster of judges of the Mechanism in accordance
with article 10 of the statute. The Council also decided that, from the nominations
received, the Council would establish a list of not less than three candidates, or,
should there be only two nominations, a list of two candidates, taking due account of
the qualifications set out in article 9, paragraph 1, of the statute and adequate
representation of the principal legal systems of the world, as well as the nationalities
of the current judges of the Mechanism.
Article 10, paragraph 1, of the statute provides that the judges of the Mechanism
shall be elected by the General Assembly from a list submitted by the Security
Council, in the following manner:
(a) The Secretary-General shall invite nominations for judges, preferably
from among persons with experience as judges of the International Tribunal for

18-18075 (E)

311018

*1818075*

S/2018/963

the Former Yugoslavia or the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, from
States Members of the United Nations and non-member States maintaining
permanent observer missions at United Nations Headquarters;
(b) Within 60 days of the date of the invitation of the Secretary-General, each
State may nominate up to two candidates meeting the qualificatio ns set out in
article 9, paragraph 1, of the statute;
(c) The Secretary-General shall forward the nominations received to the
Security Council …;
(d) The President of the Security Council shall transmit the list of candidates
to the President of the General Assembly … The candidates who receive an
absolute majority of the votes of the States Members of the United Nations and
of the non-member States maintaining permanent observer missions at United
Nations Headquarters, shall be declared elected. Should more than two
candidates of the same nationality obtain the required majority vote, the two
who received the highest number of votes shall be considered elected.
In the letter dated 2 August 2018, the President requested me to invite States to
submit nominations within a period of 60 days. Pursuant to article 10, paragraph 1 (a),
of the statute, the Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs and United Nations
Legal Counsel sent a letter on my behalf on 16 August 2018 to Member States and
non-member States maintaining permanent observer missions, inviting nominations
of up to two candidates within 60 days of the invitation. By the deadline, eight
candidates had been nominated by seven Member States.
In accordance with article 10, paragraph 1 (c), of the statute, I have the honour
to forward for the consideration of the Security Council the eight nominations that
were received. The list of candidates, in alphabetical order, together with the curricula
vitae, has been provided to me in connection with their nominations.* In this regard,
I would like to draw the attention of the Council to article 9 of the statute, which
provides the following:
1.
The judges shall be persons of high moral character, impartiality and
integrity who possess the qualifications required in their respective countries
for appointment to the highest judicial offices. Particular account shall be taken
of experience as judges of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
or the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
2.
In the composition of the Trial and Appeals Chambers, due account shall
be taken of the experience of the judges in criminal law, international law,
including international humanitarian law and human rights law.
In accordance with the letter dated 2 August 2018 from the President of the
Security Council, the term of office of the two elected judges will terminate at the
same time as the term of office of the judges who are currently on the roster. Pursuant
to article 10, paragraph 3, of the statute, the judges shall be eligible for reappointment
by the Secretary-General after consultation with the Presidents of the Security
Council and of the General Assembly.
I would be grateful if you could bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

* The information is on file with the Secretariat and is available for consultation.

2/2

18-18075
