V.

- ---

34/125 of 14 December 1979, in which the Assembly,
inter alia, recognized the special economic hardship confronting Botswana as a result of diverting funds from
current and planned development projects to effective
arrangements for security against attacks and threats
by Southern Rhodesia, and endorsed the assessments
and recommendations contained in the notes by the
Secretary-General dated 28 March 1977 206 and 26 October 1977 207 and in his reports of 7 July 1978 208 and 28
August 1979, 209
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
of 19 June 1980, 210 to which was annexed the report of
the mission which he sent to Botswana in response to
General Assembly resolution 34 / 125,
Noting with satisfaction that the war in Zimbabwe has
now stopped,
Noting the need of the Government of Botswana to
rehabilitate and develop effective road, rail and air communications, both internally and with the rest of the
world, in view of the uncertain political situation in the
region, Botswana's vulnerability as a land-locked country and its dependence on the externally controlled railway systems for the transport of its principal exports
and imports,
Noting also the urgent need to complete speedily
the projects that have been identified in the annex to
the report of the Secretary-General on assistance to
Botswana,
Expressing deep concern at the critical food shortage
currently being experienced as a result of a continuing
drought and at the serious adverse effects of the accelerating outbreaks of foot-and-mouth disease in
Botswana,
I. Endorses fully the revised programme of assistance contained in the annex to the report of the
Secretary-General and calls the attention of the international community to the outstanding needs for assistance identified therein;
2. Notes that, while the response from some Member States and international organizations to the appeals of the Secretary-General has been encouraging,
there is urgent need to maintain the flow of contributions to carry out the remainder of the emergency programme, the implementation of parts of which remains
a critical necessity;
3. Draws the attention of States and international
and intergovernmental organizations particularly to the
projects in the field of transport and communications, as
well as to the priority requirements to rehabilitate the
border areas most adversely affected by the war and to
deal with the drought situation in accordance with the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General;
4. Reiterates its appeal to all States and intergovernmental organizations to provide generous assistance to enable Botswana to carry out the remainder
of its planned development projects, as well as those
made necessary by the current political and economic
situation;
5. Appeals to all Member States, regional and interregional organizations and other intergovernmental
20

Official Records of the Security Council. Thirty-second Year, Supplement for January, February and March 1977, document S/12307.
0
' ' Ibid., Supplement for October, November and December 1977,
document S/ 12421.
'°" A/33/166 and Corr.I.
"" A/34/419-S/13506.
21
" A/35/162-S/l 3870.
•

155

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee
-·

-- ----

-

bodies to provide financial, material and technical assistance to Botswana to enable it to carry out its planned
development programme without interruption;
6. Appeals also to the international community to
provide, on an urgent basis, additional food aid to
Botswana to enable it to meet its current emergency
food needs;
7. Urges Member States and organizations which
are already implementing or are negotiating assistance
programmes for Botswana to expand them, wherever
possible;
8. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, the World Bank and the International Fund for Agricultural Development to bring to
the attention of their governing bodies, for their consideration, the assistance they are rendering to Botswana,
for which the General Assembly has requested the
Secretary-General to implement a special economic assistance programme, and to report on the results of that
assistance and their decisions to the Secretary-General
in time for consideration by the Assembly at its thirtysixth session;
9. Appeals to the international community to
contribute to the special account established by the
Secretary-General for the purpose of facilitating the
channelling of contributions to Botswana;
I0. Requests the appropriate specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system to
co-operate closely with the Secretary-General for the
purpose of facilitating the channelling of contributions
to Botswana;
11. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical and material assistance to Botswana;
(b) To keep the situation in Botswana under constant review, to maintain close contact with Member
States, regional and other intergovernmental organizations, the specialized agencies and international financial institutions concerned and to apprise the Economic
and Social Council, at its second regular session of I 981,
of the current status of the special economic assistance
programme for Botswana;
(c) To arrange for a review of the economic situation of Botswana and the progress made in organizing
and implementing the special economic assistance programme for that country in time for the matter to be
considered by the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth
session.

84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980
35/99.

Assistance to Mozambique 211

The General Assembly,
Recalling the decision of the Government of Mozambique to implement mandatory sanctions against the
illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia in accordance with
Security Council resolution 253 ( 1968) of 29 May 1968,
'

11

See also sect. X. B.3, decision 35/423.

156

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

Recognizing the substantial economic sacrifices made
by Mozambique in the implementation of its decision to
enforce United Nations sanctions and to close its borders with Southern Rhodesia,
Recalling Security Council resolution 386 ( 1976) of
17 March 1976, in which the Council appealed to all
States to provide, and requested the Secretary-General,
in collaboration with the appropriate organizations of
the United Nations system, to organize with immediate
effect, financial, technical and material assistance to enable Mozambique to carry out its economic development programme normally and to enhance its capacity
to implement fully the United Nations mandatory sanctions,
Noting with deep concern the loss of life and the
destruction of such essential infrastructure as roads,
railways, bridges, petroleum facilities, electricity supply, schools and hospitals identified in the annex to the
report of the Secretary-General of 16 August 1979, 212
Recalling further its resolutions 31 /43 of 1 December
1976, 32/95 of 13 December 1977, 33/126 of 19 December 1978 and 34/129 of 14 December 1979, in which it
urged the international community to respond effectively and generously with assistance to Mozambique,
Noting that the independence of Zimbabwe provides
both an opportunity and a challenge for the international community, particularly for those neighbouring
States whose economies have been so closely linked to
that country,
Bearing in mind the fact that the drought which affected six out of the ten provinces of Mozambique has
attained the dramatic proportions of a natural calamity,
Having examined the paper on the drought in Mozambique, 213 which contains an assessment of the immediate requirements for urgent assistance from the international community,
Noting that a mission of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the World Food
Programme and the World Meteorological Organization visited Mozambique in July 1980 in order to assess
the emergency food situation in terms of the partial loss
of cereals due to the drought which had devastated part
of the country,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
of 30 June 1980 21 • on assistance to Mozambique and
noting with concern that the economic and financial
position of that country remains grave and beset by
budget and balance-of-payments deficits and that, in the
absence of increased international assistance, the
Government will have to reduce major imports that are
essential for its development programmes and for restoring industrial production to pre-sanctions levels,
Taking into account the fact that the Committee for
Development Planning at its fourteenth session recommended that the present list of the least developed
countries should stand 215 and that the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations
Development Decade has not yet been launched, 21 0
1. Strongly endorses the appeals made by the
Security Council and the Secretary-General for international assistance to Mozambique;
212
A/34/377.
"'A/C.2/35/5, annex.
214
A/35/297-S/14007.
""Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, /978. Supplement No. 6 (E/1978/46 and Corr. I), para. 99.
"' See resolution 35 /56 above, para. I.

2. Endorses fully the assessment and major recommendations contained in the annex to the report of the
Secretary-General of 30 June 1980;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for the measures he has taken to organize
an international economic assistance programme for
Mozambique;
4. Expresses its appreciation also for the assistance
provided thus far to Mozambique by various States and
regional and international organizations;
5. Regrets, however, that the total assistance provided to date falls far short of Mozambique's pressing
needs;
6. Draws the attention of the international community to the additional financial, economic and
material assistance identified in the annex to the report
of the Secretary-General as urgently required by
Mozambique;
1. Urges Member States and organizations which
are already implementing or are negotiating assistance
programmes for Mozambique to strengthen them,
wherever possible;
8. Appeals to the international community to
provide the urgently needed external assistance in foodstuffs and medicines and technical co-operation for
disaster preparedness and prevention;
9. Calls upon Member States, regional and interregional organizations and other intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations to provide financial, material and technical assistance to Mozambique,
wherever possible in the form of grants, and urges them
to give special consideration to the early inclusion of
Mozambique in their programmes of development assistance, if it is not already included;
10. Appeals to the international community to
contribute to the special account established by the
Secretary-General for the purpose of facilitating the
channelling of contributions to Mozambique;
11. Requests all States to grant to Mozambique, in
view of its difficult economic situation, the same treatment as that enjoyed by the least developed among the
developing countries;
12. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations and the International Fund for
Agricultural Development to bring to the attention of
their governing bodies, for their consideration, the special needs of Mozambique and to report the decisions of
those bodies to the Secretary-General by I 5 August
1981;
13. Requests the appropriate organizations and
programmes of the United Nations system-in particular, the United Nations Development Programme, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the World Food Programme, the World
Health Organization and the United Nations Children's Fund-to maintain and increase their current and
future programmes of assistance to Mozambique and to
co-operate closely with the Secretary-General in organizing an effective international programme of assistance, and to report periodically to the Secretary-General
on the steps they have taken and the resources they have
made available to assist Mozambique;

V.

14. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical and material assistance to Mozambique;
(b) To keep the situation in Mozambique under constant review, to maintain close contact with Member
States, regional and other intergovernmental organizations, the specialized agencies and international financial institutions and other bodies concerned and to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its second
regular session of 1981, of the current status of the special economic assistarce programme for Mozambique:
(c) To arrange for a review of the economic situation of Mozambique and the progress made in organizing and implementing the special economic assistance
programme for that country in time for the matter to be
considered by the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth
session.

84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980
35/100.

157

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Assistance to Zimbabwe

The General Assembly,
Noting the statement made before the General
Assembly at its eleventh special session, on 26 August
1980, by the Prime Minister of Zimbabwe, 217 in which he
outlined his Government's economic development
priorities and invited the international community to
render assistance in dealing with serious economic and
social problems in Zimbabwe, and having heard the
statement made before the Assembly by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Zimbabwe, on 29 September 1980, 2 1x
in which he described the serious economic and social
problems facing his country,
Recalling Security Council resolution 460 ( 1979) of
21 December 1979, in which the Council called upon the
international community to provide urgent assistance
for the reconstruction and rehabilitation of Zimbabwe,

Having studied the report of the Secretary-General of
25 'August 1980 219 on assistance to Zimbabwe,
Stressing the necessity for major programmes for reconstruction and rehabilitation of both rural and urban
areas in Zimbabwe and the fact that the country inherited at independence an obsolete and worn-out infrastructure, showing obvious signs of lack of repair and
maintenance,
Noting the heavy burden of resettling returning
refugees and displaced people in Zimbabwe,
Also noting the significant role which an independent
and economically strong Zimbabwe can play in the economic development of the southern African region,
Deeply concerned, however, that the assistance so far
provided or pledged by the international community
falls far short of the amount needed for the reconstruction and rehabilitation of Zimbabwe,
1. Endorses fully the assessments and recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-General
and draws the attention of the international community
'" Official Records of the General Assembly, Eleventh Special Session, Plenary Meetings, 4th meeting, paras. 2-90.
'" Ibid., Thirty-fifth Session, Plenary Meetings, 15th meeting.
paras. 158-192.
219
Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-fifth Year. Supplement for July, August and September /9i/O, document S/ 14121.

to the requirements for assistance to carry out the projects and programmes identified in that report
" Appeals to Member States. regional and interregional organizations and other intergovernmental
bodies to provide effective and continuous financial,
material and technical assistance to Zimbabwe to help
that country to overcome its financial and economic difficulties:

3. Appeals to the international community to contribute to the special account which was established by
the Secretary-General for the purpose of facilitating the
channelling of contributions to Zimbabwe:
4. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, the World Bank and the International
Fund for Agricultural Development to bring to the attention of their governing bodies, for their consideration, the special needs of Zimbabwe and to report the
decisions of those hodies to the Secretary-General by
15 August 1981;
5. Requests the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system to report
periodically to the Secretary-General on the steps they
have taken and the resources they have made available
to assist Zimbabwe;
6.

Requests the Secretary-General:

To continue his efforts to mobilize resources for
an effective programme of financial, technical and
material assistance to Zimbabwe:
(b) To ensure that adequate financial and budgetary
arrangements are made to continue the mobilization of
international assistance for Zimbabwe;
(c) To keep the situation in Zimbabwe under constant review, to maintain close contact with Member
States, regional and other intergovernmental organizations, the specialized agencies and international financial institutions concerned and to apprise the Economic
and Social Council, at its second regular session of 1981,
of the current status of the special economic assistance
programme for Zimbabwe;
(d) To arrange for a review of the progress made
in organizing and implementing the assistance programme for that country in time for the matter to be considered by the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session:
(a)

7. Expresses its appreciation to those States and organizations that have provided assistance to Zimbabwe
in response to the appeals by the Security Council and
the Secretary-General;
8. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees for co-ordinating a
programme for the return to Zimbabwe and resettlement of refugees and displaced people.

84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980

35/101.

Assistance to Saint Lucia

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 32/ 186 of 19 December 1977,
33/152 of 20 December 1978 and 34/194 of 19 December 1979, in which it. inter alia, stressed the urgency of
