102

General Anembly-Twenty•nlnth Senion

Concerned that the economies of the Territories
listed abo"e are based mainly on either single cash
products, such as copra or phosphates, or on military
activities,
Deploring also the negative attitude of the administering Powers concerned with respect to the receiving
of United Nations visiting missions in the Territories
under their administration,
Bearing in mind the constructive results achieved
as a consequence of previous visiting missions to colonial Territories, including those dispatched by the
Special Committee in l 974 to the Cocos (Keeling)
Islands, the Gilbert and Ellice Islands and Niue, 25 and
reiterating its conviction that the dispatch of visiting
missions to the Territories dealt with in the present
resolution is indispensable for securing adequate and
first-hand information in regard to the political, economic and social conditions in the Territories and to
the views, wishes and aspirations of the peoples therein,
Deeply concerned at the testing of nuclear weapons
which continued to take place in 1974 in the South
Pacific, despite the strong opposition to such testing as
evidenced in resolution 3156 (XXVIII) and in the
relevant chapters of the report of the Special Committee, and as expressed by the peoples of the Scuth Pacific, including those of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in the region,
Mindful that the Territories listed above require the
continued attention and assistance of the United
Nations in the achievement by their peoples of the
objectives embodied in the Charter of the United
Nations and in the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
A ware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and the economic conditions of the Territories,
. 1. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special Committee on the • Situation with reeard to the
ImplPmentation of the Declaration on the ~Grantino of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples"' relating to the Territories of American Samoa, Guam,
New Hebrides, Pitcairn, St. Helena and Solomon
Islands;26
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
those i:erritories to self~determination and independence m accordance with the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples;
3_. ~eaffi_rms its conviction that the questions of
temtonal size, geographical isolation and limited resources should in no way delay the implementation of
the Declaration with respect to the Territories concerned;
4. Calls upon the administering Powers concerned
to take all the necessary steps, without further delay,
to ensure. the full and speedy attainment of the goals
set forth m the Declaration with respect to the Territories and, in that regard, to establish, in consultation
with t~e fr~ely elected representatives of the people,
a specific t1me-t'.3-bl: for the !re~ exercise by the peoples of the Temtones of theIT nght to self-determination and independence;
25 Sec

Official Records of the General Assembly Twentyninth Session. Supplemnt No. 23 (A/9623/Rev.l ), ~hap. XX,
annex, chap. XXI, annex I, and chap. XXII, annex I.
2 6 Ibid., chaps._X, XV, XVII and XXI.

5. Strongly deprecates any attempt aimed at the
partial or total disruption of the national unity and
territorial integrity of colonial Territories and the establishment of military bases and installations in those
Territories as being incompatible with the purposes
and principles of tbe Charter of the United Nations
and of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) ;
6. Calls upon the Governments of France and the
United States of America, as the administering Powers
concerned, to reconsider their attitude towards receiving United Nations visiting missions and to permit
access by such missions to the Territories under their
administration;
7. Calls upon the Government of France, as an
administering Power, to participate in the relevant proceedings of the Special Committee concerning the Territory of the New Hebrides and, in particular, to report
to the Special Committee on the implementation of the
present resolution;
8. Calls upon the administering Powers concerned
to take all possible measures to diversify the economies
of the Territories listed above;
9. Urges the administering Powers to safeguard the
inalienable right of the peoples of those Territories to
the enjoyment of their natural resources by taking
effective measures which guarantee the rights of the
peoples to own and dispose of those natural resources
and to establish and maintain control of their future
development;
10. Reiterates its deep concern at the testing of
nuclear weapons which continued to take place in
1974 in the South Pacific, despite the stn,ng opposition to such testing as evidenced in General Assembly
resolution 3156 (XXVIII) and in the relevant chapters of the report of the Special Committee, and as
expressed by the peoples of the South Pacific, including those of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in the
region;
11. Requests the organizations of the United
Nations system to assist in accelerating progress in all
sectors of the national life of the Territories listed
above;
12. Invites the Secretary-General, having regard to
the mandate entrusted to him by the General Assembly
in its resolution entitled "Dissemination of information on decolonization", 27 to pay particular regard to
the need to intensify widespread dissemination of information on the process of decolonization in respect
of the Territories listed above and, in particular, to
consider intensifying the activities of the information
centres concerned;
13. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
give full consideration to this question, including .in
particular the dispatch of visiting missions to the Territories, as appropriate, and to report to the General
Assembly at its thirtieth session on the implementation
of the present resolution.
2318th plenary meeting
13 December 1974
3291 (XXIX). Question of the Comoro Archipelago
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Comoro
Archipelago,
27 Resolution

3329 (XXIX).

103

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Commillee

Having heard the statement of the administering
Power 28 as well as that of the representative of the
Government of the Comoro Archipelago29 to the effect
that a popular consultation will be held in the Territory on 22 December 1974,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration, as well as resolution
3161 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973 on this question,
Noting that, in pursuance of the Joint Declaration
on the Accession to Independence of the Comoro
Archipelago, containing the text of an agreement
reached on 15 June 1973 between the Minister for
Overseas Departments and Territories of the Government of France and the President of the Governing
Council of the Comoro Archipelago, 30 a popular consultation on independence is to take place on 22 December 1974 and bearing in mind the statement made
on 26 August 1974 by the Government of France, according to which the consultation shall be organized
on an "archipelago-wide" basis, 31
Noting with regret that the administering Power did
not participate in the related work of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Mindful of the responsibility of the United Nations
to render all help to the people of the Comoro Archipelago in their efforts freely to decide their own future,
Bearing in mind the statement by the representative
of France that the French Government has affirmed
"the readiness of the Comoro Archipelago for independence" and "its intention to respond faithfully to
the aspirations" of the Comorian people, and has stated
that the Comorian Government can request independence for the Territory at any time, 32
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Comoro Archipelago to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV);
2. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the question of the Comoro Archipelago;:1:1
3. Reaffirms the unity and territorial integrity of
the Comoro Archipelago;
21! See Official Records of the General Assemh/y, Twentyninth Session, Fourth Committee, 2124th meeting.
~9 Ibid., 2128th meeting.
an Ibid., Twenty-eighth Session. Surpleme11t No. 23 (A/9023/
Rev. I). chap. XI, annex, appendix II.
31 Ibid., Twenty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/9623/
Rev.I), chap. XI, a,nnex, para. 32.
a2 Ibid., Twenty-eighth Session, Fourth Committee, 2064th
meeting, paras. 22 and 27.
:i:i /hid., Twenty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/9623/
Rev.!), chap. XI.

4. Notes the express desire and readiness of the
Comorian people to accede to independence in friendship and co-operation with France;34
5. Requests the Government of France, as the administering Power, to ensure that the unity and territorial integrity of the Comoro Archipelago are preserved;
6. Calls upon the administering Power to take all
necessary measures to ensure the full and speedy attainment of freedom and independence by the people
of the Territory in accordance with the objectives of
the Declaration and in conformity with the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and,
in particular, to carry out these measures as soon as
po5sible after the popular consultation to be held on
22 December 1974;
7. Requests all States to render the necessary assistance to the people of the Territory in their efforts to
achieve the objectives of the Declaration;
8. Requests the Special Committee to continue its
examination of the question, including the dispatch,
as appropriate and in consultation with the administering Power, of a United Nations visiting mission to the
Territory, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirtieth session;
9. Urges the administering Power to co-operate
with the Special Committee in the discharge of the task
referred to in paragraph 8 above.
2318th plenary meeting
13 December 1974

3292 (XXIX). Question of Spanish Sahara
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling also its resolutions 2072 (XX) of 16 December 1965, 2229 (XXI) of 20 December 1966,
2354 (XXII) of 19 December 1967, 2428 (XXIII)
of 18 December 1968, 2591 (XXIV) of 16 December 1969, 2711 (XXV) of 14 December 1970, 2983
(XXVII) of 14 December 1972 and 3162 (XXVIII)
of 14 December 1973,
Reaffirming the right of the population of the Spanish
Sahara to self-determination in accordance with resolution 1514 (XV),
Considering that the persistence of a colonial situation in Western Sahara jeopardizes stability and harmony in the north-west African region,
Taking into account the statements made in the
General Assembly on 30 September and 2 October
1974 by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of Morocco3 " and of the Islamic Republic of
Mauritania,36
Taking note of the statements made in the Fourth
Committee by the representatives of Morocco=n and
34 /hid., Twe11ty-eighrh Session, Fourrh Committee, 2065th
meeting, para. I 0, and ibid.. Twe11ty-eif./lllli Session, Stmplement No. 23 (A/9023/Rev.l ), chap. XI, annex, appendix I.
:1;, Ibid., Twenty-ninlli Session, Plenary Mee1ings, 2249th
meeting.
ao Ibid., 2251st meeting.
a1 Ibid., Fourth Commillee, 2117th, 2125th and 2130th
me,.tines.
