UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1998/287
31 March 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 31 MARCH 1998 FROM THE CHARGÉ D’AFFAIRES A.I.
OF THE PERMANENT MISSION OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA TO THE UNITED
NATIONS ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

On instructions from my Government, I have the honour to submit to you a
letter from the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Roy Yaki, addressed to the
President of the Security Council.
My Government would appreciate his advice concerning the form of
endorsement that members of the Security Council are able to give in response to
the request contained in the letter.
I should also like to advise that my Government will be sending a special
ministerial-level representative to New York, the Special State Negotiator for
Bougainville, Sir John R. Kaputin, to provide such information as members of the
Security Council might seek. The proposed dates for the visit are 10 to
15 April 1998 (subject to the availability of the President of the Security
Council and the Secretary-General).
I should be grateful if you would circulate the present letter and its
annex as an official document of the Security Council.

(Signed) Jimmy U. OVIA
Chargé d’Affaires a.i.

98-09065 (E)

010498

/...

S/1998/287
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 30 March 1998 from the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Papua New Guinea addressed to the President
of the Security Council

I have the honour to inform you of recent developments through which the
parties to the nine-year-old conflict in Bougainville, Papua New Guinea, have
met and agreed to a secure and lasting peace by peaceful means. They include a
truce, signed in Burnham, New Zealand, on 10 October 1997 (the Burnham Truce)
and the Agreement on Peace, Security and Development on Bougainville, signed at
Lincoln, New Zealand, on 23 January 1996 (the Lincoln Agreement), which, among
other things, extends the truce until a permanent and irrevocable ceasefire
takes effect at 2400 hours on 30 April 1998.
Copies of the Burnham Truce and the Lincoln Agreement (which was signed in
the present of a representative of the Secretary-General) are attached for
information.
In addition to the Government of the Independent State of Papua New Guinea,
the parties engaged in the peace process include the main Bougainvillean groups:
the Bougainville Transitional Government, the Bougainville Resistance, the
Bougainville Interim Government and the Bougainville Revolutionary Army.
Leaders of all of these groups have signed the Lincoln Agreement and are
cooperating in its implementation.
The Burnham Truce includes an agreement to invite a neutral regional Truce
Monitoring Group, composed of civilian and military personnel from Australia,
Fiji, New Zealand and Vanuatu, to promote and instil public confidence in the
peace process and to observe and monitor implementation of the truce. I had the
honour to provide the Secretary-General with a copy of the agreement under cover
of a letter dated 15 December 1997.
The initial deployment of the Truce Monitoring Group, which was due to
expire on 31 January, has since been extended, in accordance with the agreement,
until 30 April, when the ceasefire will take effect. All of the parties agree
that the presence and activities of the Truce Monitoring Group, which is
unarmed, have made an outstandingly positive contribution to providing the
security and reassurance on which peace depends.
The parties have, therefore, agreed to invite a neutral regional Peace
Monitoring Group, also made up on a regional basis and working within a similar
framework as the Truce Monitoring Group, to monitor and report on compliance of
the parties with all aspects of the ceasefire. Other aspects of the mandate for
the neutral regional Peace Monitoring Group are set out in paragraph 6 of the
Lincoln Agreement (see attachment I).
My Government, in consultation with the other parties involved in the peace
process, is holding discussions with the Governments of Australia, Fiji, New
Zealand, Vanuatu and other States in the South Pacific with a view to early

/...

S/1998/287
English
Page 3

finalization of detailed arrangements for their participation in the Peace
Monitoring Group after 30 April.
As paragraph 5 of the Lincoln Agreement makes clear, the parties to the
ceasefire look to the United Nations to support their efforts to secure a
lasting peace by peaceful means. Consistent with the Lincoln Agreement, I
therefore have the honour, on behalf of the independent State of Papua New
Guinea, to request the Security Council to endorse the Lincoln Agreement on
Peace, Security and Development on Bougainville, including establishment of the
neutral regional Peace Monitoring Group for which paragraph 6 provides.
Under separate cover, my Government is also requesting the SecretaryGeneral to appoint and deploy a United Nations observer mission to monitor
implementation as foreseen in paragraph 5.2 of the Lincoln Agreement.
The conflict in Bougainville has cost not only the participants but also
many innocent people and Papua New Guinea as a whole very dearly - in loss,
injury and disruption of human life, damage and destruction of property, as well
as opportunities foregone.
All of the parties are determined to ensure that the peace process
succeeds.
The United Nations would be sending important and encouraging signals of
the international community’s support for peace by accepting my Government’s
requests, respectively, for Security Council endorsement and for the SecretaryGeneral to send a small observer mission to monitor implementation of the
Lincoln Agreement.
Let me take the opportunity to assure the Security Council of my
Government’s firm commitment to give full effect to both the letter and the
spirit of the Lincoln Agreement, including reconciliation, restoration, an early
return to civilian peacetime arrangements for maintaining public order and law,
as well as free and fair elections for a Bougainville Reconciliation Government
before the end of 1998.

(Signed) Roy YAKI, MP
Minister for Foreign Affairs

/...

S/1998/287
English
Page 4

Attachment I
Lincoln Agreement on Peace, Security and Development
on Bougainville

The Government of Papua New Guinea, the Bougainville Transitional
Government, the Bougainville Resistance Force, the Bougainville Interim
Government, the Bougainville Revolutionary Army and the Bougainville Leaders
(the "Parties"), having met in Lincoln University, Christchurch, New Zealand,
from 19 to 23 January 1998,

Praying for the Almighty’s forgiveness, guidance and blessing for their
common endeavours,
Emphasizing their firm commitment to peace by building on the achievements
in the Burnham Declaration, the Burnham Truce and the Cairns Commitment,
Acknowledging the suffering, pain and loss on all sides of the conflict
that they have agreed to end forever,
Committing themselves to peace, reconciliation and working together for the
common good,
Engaged in a process of consultation and cooperation, initiated by
Bougainvillean leaders, which they will continue,
Hereby agree to the following:
1.

PEACEFUL MEANS

The parties will cooperate to achieve and maintain peace by peaceful means.
They also pledge to renounce the use of armed forces and violence, and agree to
resolve any differences by consultation, both now and in the future. They also
confirm their respect for human rights and the rule of law.
2.

EXTENSION OF THE TRUCE

The parties agree to extend the period of the truce currently in force to
30 April 1998 to allow for consultation as regards the establishment of the
ceasefire.
3.

CEASEFIRE

3.1 A permanent and irrevocable ceasefire will take effect in Bougainville
at 2400 hours on 30 April 1998.
3.2 The parties will cooperate to reduce fear in Bougainville and take
urgent steps to cooperate in promoting public awareness of, and respect for, the
ceasefire.

/...

S/1998/287
English
Page 5

3.3 Immediately after the ceasefire takes effect, the parties will refrain
from use of arms, ammunition, explosives and other instruments of death, injury
or destruction in Bougainville.
3.4 The parties will not manufacture, trade or distribute weapons or
ammunition.
3.5 The parties will cooperate in accordance with the law in reporting and
preventing the use, manufacture, importation, sale, trade or exchange of weapons
and ammunition.
3.6 The parties will cooperate with the successor to the Truce Monitoring
Group in recording, locating and arranging for the disposal of all arms,
ammunition, explosives and other instruments of death, injury and destruction,
including parts and ingredients of all the parties in Bougainville.
4.

WITHDRAWAL OF DEFENCE FORCE FROM BOUGAINVILLE

The parties agree to a phased withdrawal of the Papua New Guinea Defence
Force from Bougainville subject to restoration of civil authority.
5.

PEACE MONITORING GROUP

5.1 The Papua New Guinea National Government undertakes to conclude the
arrangements required for deployment of the successor to the neutral regional
Truce Monitoring Group by no later than 30 April 1998.
5.2 The Papua New Guinea National Government will seek the endorsement of
the United Nations Security Council for these arrangements, including the
appointment of a special observer mission to monitor these arrangements.
6.

MANDATE OF THE PEACEKEEPING FORCE
The mandate of the success to the Truce Monitoring Group will be:

(a) To monitor and report on the compliance of the parties to all aspects
of the ceasefire;
(b) To promote and instil confidence in the peace process through its
presence, good offices and interaction with people in Bougainville;
(c) To provide people in Bougainville with information about the ceasefire
and other aspects of the peace process;
(d) To provide such assistance in restoration and development consistent
with this agreement as the parties may agree and available resources allow;
(e) To assist with the development and training and institution of a
Bougainvillean constabulary;
and such other matters as may be agreed to by the parties that will assist with
the democratic resolution of the situation.
/...

S/1998/287
English
Page 6

7.

TRANSITION TO CIVILIAN PEACETIME POLICING
The parties will cooperate in:
(a)

Re-establishing the village court system in Bougainville; and

(b) Restoration of civilian peacetime policing, including arrangements
that will facilitate the recruitment, training and deployment of Bougainvillean
police.
8.

RECONCILIATION

8.1 The parties will cooperate in promoting reconciliation between
Bougainvilleans and with other individuals, groups and organizations in Papua
New Guinea.
8.2 The parties agree to free and democratic elections on Bougainville to
elect a Bougainville Reconciliation Government before the end of 1998.
9.

REMOVAL OF BOUNTIES AND FREE MOVEMENT
The Papua New Guinea National Government:
(a)

Has confirmed the removal of bounties; and

(b) Will facilitate the free and unhindered movement of Papua New Guineans
into, within and out of Papua New Guinea in accordance with the law.
10.

AMNESTY AND PARDON
The Papua New Guinea National Government will:

(a)
sides;

Grant amnesty to persons involved in crisis-related activities on all

(b) Following receipt of advice from the Advisory Committee on the Power
of Mercy, recommend pardons for persons convicted of crisis-related offences.
11.

RESTORATION AND DEVELOPMENT

11.1 The parties will cooperate in restoration and development in
Bougainville in both the public and private sectors, with particular emphasis on
rural areas.
11.2 The Papua New Guinea National Government will seek appropriate forms
of assistance from international organizations, foreign Governments and
organizations for restoration and development in Bougainville.
11.3 Assistance for restoration and development in Bougainville will, to
the maximum practical extent, be sought and administered so as to promote
Bougainvillean participation.

/...

S/1998/287
English
Page 7

11.4 The Papua New Guinea National Government will prepare an indicative
programme in consultation with the parties to help secure funding and other
resources to assist in restoration and development in Bougainville.
11.5 The parties agree to cooperate in restoring normalcy, including the
return of Bougainvilleans in care centres to their villages and resuming
development in Bougainville by acting without delay:
(a) To facilitate communication with and access to villages on
Bougainville;
(b)
12.

To provide essential services, such as health and education.

CONSULTATION AND LIAISON

The parties agree to promote consultation, cooperation and liaison at the
political level among Bougainvilleans and with the Papua New Guinea National
Government.
13.

POLITICAL ISSUE

13.1 The parties agree to meet again in Bougainville to address the
political issue before the end of June 1998.
13.2 Officials will meet as required to prepare for such meetings.
14.

PUBLIC AWARENESS

The parties will cooperate in promoting public awareness of, and respect
for, the present Agreement.
15.

ANNEXES TO THE AGREEMENT AND SUBSIDIARY ARRANGEMENTS

Detailed arrangements for implementation and development of the present
Agreement may, by agreement, be embodied in annexes or subsidiary arrangements
to the present Agreement.
16.

ONGOING COOPERATION

In signing the present Agreement, the parties whose signatures appear below
commit themselves to working together for peace, justice, security and
development in Bougainville by:
(a)

Cooperating with each other; and

(b) Promoting a bipartisan approach in the National Parliament and in the
community as a whole.

/...

S/1998/287
English
Page 8

Done at Lincoln, Christchurch, New Zealand this 23rd day of January, 1998.

(Signed) Sir John KAPUTIN
Chief Negotiator
Papua New Guinea Government

(Signed) Joseph KABUI
Vice President
Bougainville Interim Government

(Signed) Sam AKOITAI
Minister for Bougainville Affairs
Papua New Guinea Government

(Signed) General Sam KAUONA
Commander,
Bougainville Revolutionary Army

(Signed) Gerard SINATO
Premier
Bougainville Transitional Government

(Signed) John MOMIS
Member for Bougainville Region
Papua New Guinea Government

(Signed) Michael LAIMO
Member for South Bougainville
Papua New Guinea Government

(Signed) Michael OGIO
Member for North Bougainville
Papua New Guinea Government

(Signed) Hilary MASIRIA
Resistance Commander

WITNESSED BY:
(Signed) Bartholomew ULUFA’ALU
Prime Minister
Solomon Islands

/...

S/1998/287
English
Page 9

Attachment II
The Burnham Truce

Reaffirming the principles contained in the Burnham Declaration of 518 July 1997, representatives of the National Government of Papua New Guinea,
the Bougainville Transitional Government, the Resistance, the Bougainville
Interim Government and the Bougainville Revolutionary Army, having met in
Burnham military camp, New Zealand, from 1 to 10 October 1997, recognize the
desirability of taking immediate positive measures:
-

To cease armed conflict;

-

For peace and reconciliation; and

-

For the return of normalcy and restoration of services by all parties,

and pending a formal meeting of leaders, desirably by 31 January 1998,
Have agreed, as immediate interim measures, to the following:
1.

To respect and promote basic human rights and fundamental freedoms;

2.

To refrain from all acts of intimidation and armed confrontation;

3.

To promote peace and reconciliation in the community;

4.
To lift all restrictions so as to restore freedom of movement and
delivery of services to the people of Bougainville, subject to appropriate
clearances;
5.
That field commanders of the Papua New Guinea Security Forces, the
Resistance and the Bougainville Revolutionary Army, and village chiefs meet on a
regular basis to consult, review and monitor the implementation of this
commitment as well as to consult as required and resolve any incidents which may
threaten or breach these understandings as well as to promote the aspirations
expressed herein;
6.
To recommend to the National Government and leaders on Bougainville to
immediately invite a neutral regional group to monitor the terms of this
agreement.
This agreement shall take effect as of the date of signature.

/...

S/1998/287
English
Page 10

Signed at Burnham Military Camp, Burnham, New Zealand on this tenth day of
October, 1997.

Papua New Guinea National
Government Delegation:

Bougainville Transitional
Government

Bougainville Interim Government/
Bougainville Revolutionary Army

(Signed) Robert IGARA
Secretary for Prime Minister
and National Executive Council
and Delegation Leader

(Signed) Kapeatu PUARIA
Legal Advisor
(Bougainville Transitional
Government)
Delegation Leader

(Signed) Martin MIRIORI
Secretary
(Bougainville Interim
Government) and Delegation
Leader

WITNESSED BY:
(Signed) Rev. Leslie BOSETO
Minister for Home Affairs
Government of Solomon Islands

(Signed) Don McKINNON
Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade
Government of New Zealand

/...

S/1998/287
English
Page 11

PAPUA NEW GUINEA SECURITY FORCES

Royal Papua New Guinea Constabulary

Papua New Guinea Defence Force

(Signed) Ludwig KEMBU
Deputy Commissioner of Police
Chief of Operations

(Signed) Brig. Gen. Leo NUJA
Commander
Papua New Guinea Defence Force

(Signed) John TOGUATA
Assistant Commissioner of Police
Divisional Commander
Islands Division

(Signed) Lt. Col. Michael TAMALANGA
Commanding Officer 2RPIR

(Signed) Lt. Col. Jeoffrey WIRI
Director Land Operations
Headquarters
Papua New Guinea Defence Force

(Signed) Lt. Col. Peniel NILIGUR
Director Military Intelligence
Headquarters
Papua New Guinea Defence Force

/...

S/1998/287
English
Page 12

RESISTANCE COMMANDERS

Buka
Hilary MASIRIA
Donald HAMAO
Northwest
Justin PERESIVERI
Jonathan TORE
John Bosco DOAKA
Tinputz
Ross VAVEIO
Wakunai
Paul AKOITAL
Tony BUSU
Kieta
Hilary LONI
John Bosco PIRITOI
Buin
Jacob NAISY
Philip PUSUA
Henry KIUMO
Andy FOSTER
Cosmas PIRUKE
Siwai
David MIKISA
Michael KOMOIKO
Pius KUHEU
Bana
Jacob LAULAU
Enoch PUKARO
Daniel NAMAKE

/...

S/1998/287
English
Page 13

BOUGAINVILLE REVOLUTIONARY ARMY COMMANDERS

(Signed)
(Signed)
(Signed)
(Signed)
(Signed)
(Signed)
(Signed)
(Signed)

Sam KAUONA, General
Ishmael TOROAMA, Chief of Staff
Peter NAGUO, Chief of Operations
Steven TOPESI, Task Force Commander
Ben KAMDA, Planner
Aloysious SINGKA, Ground Force Commander
Barnabas TOBI
Timothy Laku SIVE, Training Commander

BOUGAINVILLE COMPANY REPRESENTATIVES - COMMANDERS
(Signed)
(Signed)
(Signed)
(Signed)
(Signed)
(Signed)
(Signed)
(Signed)
(Signed)
(Signed)
(Signed)
(Signed)
(Signed)
(Signed)

Epeli EPIOVA
Steven KIWI
Pais MAKO
John MUKAKI
Justin KOKIAI
Ben PAURA
Kevin KAPARIKA
Thomas TARI
Cornelius SOLOMON
Joe MARK
John KONGKAI
Eric NETO
David TSIKIA
Getsi TANAHAN

(Signed)
(Signed)
(Signed)
(Signed)
(Signed)
(Signed)
(Signed)
(Signed)
(Signed)
(Signed)
(Signed)
(Signed)
(Signed)
(Signed)

-----

Glen BIARAS
Joel PATU
George DIVA
Sammy DARIUS
Noel RUFO
Darius WAMI
Benjamin KOMENA
Eddy MOHIN
Frank SINAKU
John KOURO
Amos OVE
Sylvester WANE
Lucas ALIKUS
Zachias PEAHIRI
