80

General Aa-bly-Twenty-eeeond Seuion

5. Expresses the wish that, in conjunction with
future sessions of the International Law Commission,
other seminars might be organized, which should continue to ensure the participation of a reasonable numher of nationals of developing countries;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
International Law Commission the records of the discussions at the twenty-second session of the General
Assembly on the report of the Commission.
1615th plenary meeting,
1 December 1967.

2273 (XXII). Special miYions
The General Assembly,
Having considered chapter II of the report of the
International Law Commission on the work of its nineteenth session,8 which contains final draft articles and
commentaries on special missions,
Recalling that in its resolutions 1687 (XVI) of
18 December 1961, 1902 (XVIII) of 18 November
1963 and 2045 (XX) of 8 December 1965 it recommended that the International Law Commission
should continue the work of codification and progressive
development of the topic of special missions, taking
into account the views expressed in the General Assembly and the comments submitted by Governments,
and that in its resolution 2167 (XXI) of 5 December
1966 it recommended that a final draft on special
missions should be submitted to the Assembly by the
Commission in its report on the work of its nineteenth
1ession,
Noting further that at its eighteenth and nineteenth
sessions, in 1966 and 1967, the International Law
Commission, in the light of the observations and comments submitted by Governments and taking into account the relevant resolutions and debates of the General Assembly, revised the provisional draft articles
on special missions prepared at its sixteenth and
seventeenth sessions and that at its nineteenth session
the Commission finally adopted the draft articles,
Recalling that, as stated in paragraph 33 of the report
of the International Law Commission on the work of
its nineteenth session, the Commission decided to
recommend to the General Assembly that appropriate
measures be taken for the conclusion of a convention
on special missions,
Mindful of Article 13, paragraph 1 a, of the Charter
of the United Nations, which provides that the General Assembly shall initiate studies and make recommendations for the purpose of encouraging the progressive. development of international law and its
codification,
Believing that the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations4 and the Vienna Convention on Consular
Relationsli have contributed to the fostering of friendly
relations among nations, irrespective of their differing
constitutional and social systems, and that they should
be completed by a convention on special missions and
the privileges and immunities of such missions,
a Ibid., Supplement No. 9 ( A/6709/Rev .1 and Corr.1).
"United Nations Conference on Diplomatic Intercourse and
Immunities, 1961, Official Records. voL II (United Nations
publication, Sales No.: 62.X.l), p. 82.
& United Nations Conference on Consµlar Relations, 1963,
Official Records, vol. II (United Nations publication, Sales
No.: 64.X.l), p. 175.

1. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Law Commission for its valuable work on special missions and to the Special Rapporteur for his contribution
to this work ;
2. Invites Member States to submit, not later than
1 July 1968, their written comments and observations
on the final draft articles on special missions prepared
by the International Law Commission;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate the
comments submitted by Member States on the subject,
so as to facilitate its consideration by the General
Assembly at its twenty-third session in the light of
those comments;
4. Decides to include an item entitled "Draft -Convention on Special Missions" in the provisional agenda
of the twenty-third session, with a view to the adoption
of such a convention by the General Assembly ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange for the
presence of the Special Rapporteur on special missions
as an expert during the debates on the topic at the
twenty-third session of the General Assembly and to
submit at that session all relevant documentation ;
6. Invites Member States to include as far as possible in their delegations to the twenty-third session
of the General Assembly experts competent in the
field to be considered.
1615th plenary meeting,
1 December 1967.

2287 (XXII). United Nations Conference on the
Law of Treaties
The General Assenc.bly,
Recalling that by its resolution 2166 (XXI) of
5 December 1966 it decided that an international conference of plenipotentiaries should be convened at
Geneva or at any other suitable place, the first session
early in 1968 and the second early in 1969, to consider
the law of treaties and to embody the results of its
work in an international convention and such other
instruments as it might deem appropriate,
Recalling also its request that the Secretary-General
convoke that conference,
Recalling further that it decided to refer to the conference the draft articles contained in chapter II of the
report of the International Law Commission on the
work of its eighteenth session8 as the basic proposal for
consideration .by the conference,
Having considered the item entitled "Law of treaties"
at its twenty-second session,
Recognizing that the exchange of views and the
written comments of Governments on the draft articles
on the law of treaties prepared by the International
Law Commission at its eighteenth session may facilitate
the work at the international conference,
Noting that an invitation has been extended by the
Austrian Government to hold at Vienna both sessions
of the conference on the law of treaties convened by
the General Assembly in resolution 2166 (XXI),
1. Decides that the first session of the United
Nations Conference on the Law of Treaties referred
to in General Assembly resolution 2166 (XXI), to be
held in 1968, shall be convened at Vienna in March
1968;
6 Official Records of the GtKtral Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Supplefflfflt No. 9 (A/6309/Rev.l), part II.

Resolutions adopted on the reporlll of the Sixth Committee

2. Invites participating States to submit to the Secretary-General not later than 15 February 1968, for
circulation to Governments, any additional comments
and draft amendments to the draft articles prepared
by the International Law Commission that they may
wish to propose in advance of the Conference;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Conference the summary records relating to the consideration of this item at the twentv-serond session of
the General Assembly, together with all other relevant
documentation.
1621st plenm-y meetinq,
6 December 1967.
2312 (XXII). Declaration on Territorial Asylum
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1839 ( XV II) of 19 December 1962, 2100 (XX) of 20 December 1965 and 2203
(XXI) of 16 December 1966 concerning a rleclarati011
on the right of asylum,
Considering the work of codification to he undertaken by the International Law Commission in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1400 ( X 1V\
of 21 November 1959,
Adopts the following Declaration :
DECLARATION ON TERRITORIAL ASYLUM

The General Assembly,
Noting that the purposes proclaimed in the Charter
of the United Nations are to maintain internationai
peace and security, to develop friendly relation<, among
all nations and to achieve internatiunal co-operation in
solving international problems of all c·onomic, social,
cultural or humanitarian charactc:r anct in promoting and
encouraging respect for human right~ and for fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race,
sex, language or religion,
Mindful of the Universal Declaration of 1l111n;•'1
Rights, which declares in article 14 that:
"1. Everyone has the right to seek and to <c!tJ<lY
in other countries asylum from persecution
"2. This right may not be invoked in tl,e , ;N'
of prosecutions genuinely arising from non-politica I
crimes or from acts contrary tu the purposes and
principles of the United Nations'.',
Recalling also article 13, paragraph 2. of the lT ni
versa! Declaration of Human Rights. which st;ites.
"Everyone has the right to le<11·e any country.
including his own, and to return to his conntry",
Recognizing that the grant of asylum hy a State to
persons entitled to invoke article 14 of 1he Universa:
Declaration of Human Rights is a peaceful and hum;rnitarian act and that, as such, it cannot be regarded :t-.
unfriendly by any other State,
Recommends that, without prej11dice to exis1i11g instruments dealing with asylum and the statlls of refugees
and stateless persons, States should base thernse]vr's
in their practices relating to territorial asylum on the
following principles :
Article 1
1. Asylum granted by a State, in tl11" e,c,·,·:;;,• of its
sovereignty, to persons entitled to invoke artick 14 of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. including
persons struggling against coloniali,m. ,li:dl k r-Pspectt-ct
by all other States.

81

2. The right to seek and to enjoy asylum may not be
invoked by any person with respect to whom there
r,re serious reasons for considering that he has committed a crime against peace, a war crime or a crime
against humanity, as defined in the international instrum~nts drawn up to make provision in respect of such
cnmes.
3. It shall rest with the State granting asylum to
evaluate the grounds for the grant of asylum.

Article 2
l. The situation of persons referred to in article 1,
paragraph 1, is, without prejudice to the sovereignty
of States and the purposes and principles of the United
Nations, of concern to the international community.
2. ,i\!here a State finds difficulty in granting or continuing to grant asylum, States individually or jointly
or through the United Nations shall consider, in a spirit
of international solidarity, appropriate measures to
lighten the burden on that State.
Article 3
1. No person referred to in article 1, paragraph 1,
shall be subjected to measures such as rejection at the
frontier or, if be has already entered the territory in
which he seeks asylum. expulsion or compulsory return
to any State whrre lw may be subjected to persecution.

2. Exception may he ma<le to the foregoing principle ,mly for ,1verriding reasons of national security
or in order to safeguard the population, as in the case
nf a 111:1ss influx of persons.
3. Should a State decide in any case that exception
to the principle stated in paragraph 1 of this article
would he justified, it shall consider the possibility of
granting to the person concerned, under such conditions
as it may deem appropriate, an opportunity, whether by
way nf provisional asy 1nm or otherwise, of going to another State.

Article 4
States granting asylum shall not permit persons who
h:1 ve received asylum to engage in activities contrary to

the purposes and principles of the United Nations.

1631st plenary meeting,
14 December 1967.

2313 (XXII). United Nations Programme of
Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of lntema•tional Law

The General Assembly,

Rec,1llinr1 its resolutions 2099 (XX) of 20 December l %5 and 2204 ( XXI) of 16 December 1966 regarding tlw United Nations Prognmme of Assistance in
tht Te:tching. Study, Dissemination and Wider Appr~ci:tt1un of Tnternational Law,
N u'mq with apprrcration the report of the SecretaryCeneral on the implementation of the Programme7 and
1;1(' rccommencL~tions_ made to the Se:retary-~eneral by
t1w /,dv1sorv Committee on the Umted Nat10ns Pro-~r:1mu,, of ,\,,·i,tancc in the Teaching, Study, Dis" n,ir1.. Tw.-ntv-suC'nd Sn.rio11, ,-Jnnc.:res, agenrla item 90,
,\,,rnrnent A/6816.
