S/PRST/2007/9

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 April 2007
English
Original: French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5653rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 3 April 2007, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council deplores the violence which occurred from 22 to
25 March in Kinshasa between the Congolese security forces and the security
guards of Senator Jean-Pierre Bemba. It expresses its grave concern at the loss
of lives, in particular of civilians, and urges all parties to respect the sanctity
of human life and the principles of human rights. It also expresses its regret at
the destruction and pillaging, including of some diplomatic missions, which
took place during the clashes.
“The Security Council encourages the Congolese authorities and the
United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) to undertake the necessary investigations into these events.
“The Security Council emphasizes the legitimacy of the new
democratically elected institutions and the need for these institutions to ensure
the protection of the population. At the same time, it underlines the importance
of these institutions operating with respect for the rule of law, human rights
and international humanitarian law, and avoiding any unnecessary or
disproportionate use of force.
“The Security Council regrets the use of violence, instead of dialogue, to
resolve disputes, and urges all Congolese stakeholders to pursue negotiated
solutions to their differences with respect for the constitutional framework and
the law. It calls on the Government to respect the space and role conferred on
parties by the Constitution with a view to ensuring their effective participation
in the national political debate, and encourages all parties to remain committed
to the political process.
“The Security Council welcomes the declaration of the Conference of
Presidents of the Congolese National Assembly of 26 March 2007, in which all
parliamentary groups reaffirmed their commitment to supporting the
democratic process and recommended that all institutions of the Republic work
towards reconciliation, national harmony and permanent dialogue between
political stakeholders.

07-29390 (E) 030407

*0729390*

S/PRST/2007/9

“The Security Council expresses its full support for the efforts of
MONUC to re-establish dialogue between the Government and opposition
parties and to contribute to the protection of the civilian population.
“The Security Council takes note of the Communiqué of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union of 24 March 2007, and of the
Communiqué of the Extra Ordinary Summit of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) Heads of State and Government held in
Dar-Es-Salaam on 28 and 29 March 2007 which reaffirms the sovereign right
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to have a single national army and
urges all armed groups to integrate into the national army or to be
demobilized.
“The Security Council reiterates the importance of the international
community’s continuing support for the peace consolidation process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, particularly with a view to carrying out
urgently security sector reform, and the need to ensure concerted action by
international partners to this end. It recognizes that such support must be based
on a shared commitment from the Congolese authorities and all Congolese
political actors to national reconciliation and to the strengthening of
democratic institutions.”

2

07-29390
