A/64/PV.15

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

15

th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 6 October 2009, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Hackett
(Barbados), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3:10 p.m.
Agenda item 107 (continued)
Report of the Secretary-General on the work of the
Organization (A/64/1)
Mr. Kim Bonghyun (Republic of Korea): First of
all, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
annual report on the work of the Organization
(A/64/1), which provides a comprehensive and clear
overview of what has been achieved over the last year
and lays out a coherent blueprint for what must be
accomplished in the future. As the Secretary-General
said in his report, “We are seeing the convergence of
complex challenges across a spectrum of issues that lie
at the core of the United Nations mission” (A/64/1,
para. 4).
To confront these immense challenges and make
the world a safer and more prosperous place, the
international community must work together more than
ever before. In this regard, my delegation strongly
supports the idea that we should build on a new
multilateralism that contains the five essential elements
referred to in the Secretary-General’s report. We should
engage in multilateral cooperation using the United
Nations as the platform and hub of that new
multilateralism. My delegation is fully committed to
engaging actively and constructively in order to further
advance and restore global hope and solidarity.

With less than six years left until the target year
of 2015, the prospects of achieving the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) in a timely fashion seem
to be imperilled. The global economic crisis has had a
negative impact on achievement of the MDGs. It is
estimated that between 73 and 103 million more people
will remain in extreme poverty this year, with women
and children suffering disproportionately from the
impact of the crisis. The particularly difficult situation
in sub-Saharan Africa demands more of our attention.
Next year’s MDG Review Summit must play a crucial
role in summoning political will and inducing Member
States to redouble their efforts in order to make
meaningful use of the next five years.
Based on its development experience, both as a
partner country and a donor, the Republic of Korea will
fulfil its pledge to triple its 2008 official development
assistance (ODA) by 2015. In an effort to support the
fight against HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria in
sub-Saharan Africa, we are mobilizing further
resources through the air ticket solidarity levy. In
addition, we are striving to improve the quality of
ODA by joining the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development (OECD) Development
Assistance Committee in 2010, and we will continue to
contribute to strengthening the global partnership for
more inclusive and effective development cooperation
by hosting the fourth High-Level Forum on Aid
Effectiveness in 2011.
As the Secretary-General has rightly pointed out,
climate change is the most pressing challenge of our
time. Responding to climate change has become an

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

09-54411 (E)

*0954411*

A/64/PV.15

indispensable and urgent priority for all of humanity. In
that regard, my delegation greatly appreciates the
leadership of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon in
placing climate change at the top of the agenda and in
galvanizing global efforts to ensure a successful
outcome of the Copenhagen Conference in December.
My delegation also appreciates such initiatives by the
Secretary-General as convening the 22 September
Summit on Climate Change, which helped demonstrate
leaders’ strong political will to seal the deal in
Copenhagen. The Republic of Korea, as a non-Annex I
country, plans to announce its voluntary midterm
mitigation target for 2020 before the end of this year.
Korea has also proposed the establishment of a registry
of nationally appropriate mitigation actions of
developing countries at the secretariat of the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
with a view to inviting developing countries to
participate voluntarily in mitigation. We hope that our
efforts and proposals will contribute positively to
successful outcomes at Copenhagen.
The United Nations peacekeeping operations face
new challenges in meeting ever-growing demands for
peacekeeping with increasingly complex and
multidimensional mandates — far beyond what the
Brahimi report (A/55/305) envisaged nearly 10 years
ago. My delegation welcomes the initiatives of
Member States and the Secretary-General to
reconfigure United Nations peacekeeping operations to
meet those new challenges. With regard to new
initiatives, my delegation wishes to emphasize two
factors critical to ensuring greater success:
strengthening partnerships among all the stakeholders
and partners, and setting clear, credible and achievable
mandates. In this connection, my delegation
appreciates and welcomes the Secretary-General’s
“New Horizon” initiative, emphasizing a new United
Nations peacekeeping partnership.
As
regards
disarmament
and
nuclear
non-proliferation, my delegation shares the view that
there is encouraging momentum in the field, especially
towards achieving a world free of nuclear weapons, as
stipulated in Security Council resolution 1887 (2009).
We highly appreciate the Secretary-General’s efforts in
this field, including his five-point proposal for nuclear
disarmament. The Republic of Korea is ready to
cooperate with all Member States to take full
advantage of this window of opportunity for tangible
progress.

2

Despite significant progress in the field, serious
violations of human rights continue to be committed in
many parts of the world. The United Nations system
and Member States should be ever more determined to
work together to promote and protect human rights. As
the Secretary-General points out, increasing economic
hardship, exacerbated by the global economic crisis
and other challenges, including climate change, further
affects vulnerable groups such as minorities, migrants,
women, children and persons with disabilities. The
Organization and its Member States should fully
recognize the relevance of human rights in crafting
responses to such global challenges.
The United Nations has made significant progress
in preventing and responding to mass atrocities. The
comprehensive report of the Secretary-General
(A/63/677) on implementing the responsibility to
protect provided a strong base for sincere and
productive General Assembly debates, leading to the
adoption of resolution 63/308 by consensus confirming
the firm commitment of Member States to the
responsibility to protect. Now we must move towards
actual implementation of that norm on the ground. The
Republic of Korea is convinced that our continued
deliberations on implementing the responsibility to
protect will produce a policy framework for the United
Nations system, regional organizations and individual
Governments.
The Republic of Korea welcomes the Assembly’s
unanimous adoption of resolution 63/311 on systemwide coherence, in particular the agreement on the
establishment of a stronger gender architecture in the
form of a composite entity, as a way to pursue gender
equality and the empowerment of women more
effectively. My delegation expects the SecretaryGeneral to implement the resolution in a timely
manner, including the early introduction of a
comprehensive proposal on the composite entity.
Let me conclude by renewing the Republic of
Korea’s support of the Secretariat’s efforts to make the
United Nations a more effective, more accountable and
better functioning Organization under the able
leadership of the Secretary-General. A better world
depends on it.
Mr. Pálsson (Iceland): I would like, at the outset,
to thank the Secretary-General for his concise and
valuable report on the work of the Organization
(A/64/1).

09-54411

A/64/PV.15

The past year has been a gruelling one for the
world and for the United Nations. The global financial
and economic crisis has affected the well-being of
millions of people, threatening to set back the
development efforts of the international community by
several years. At a time of dwindling national
resources, the crisis is putting unprecedented strain on
our multilateral system, raising questions about the
effectiveness of our Organization in dealing with some
of its manifestations. But the primary lesson of the
recent turmoil is hardly that we should now turn
inward or fall back on our individual means. Quite the
opposite, the need to cooperate within the existing
framework of international institutions is now greater
than ever. As the Secretary-General rightly observes in
paragraph 4 of his report, this is the “ultimate
multilateral moment”.
The world community must do its utmost to
prevent the financial crisis from turning into a real
development emergency. Extraordinary efforts will be
needed to prevent the financial crisis from reversing
the hard-won gains made towards achieving the
Millennium Development Goals in areas like primary
education, maternal health and the fight against hunger.
I take this opportunity to compliment the SecretaryGeneral for the initiative he is taking in introducing the
Global Impact and Vulnerability Alert System.
One of the risks associated with the current global
crisis is that it may undermine confidence in the
international system, including the United Nations, at a
time when we can least afford it. To prevent this from
happening, we need, among other things, stronger and
more representative international institutions, sound
global regulatory frameworks and greater surveillance
and supervision in the area of international finance. But
more is required in order to fashion the new
multilateralism that the Secretary-General has called for
in his report. We must also accelerate progress on a
comprehensive United Nations reform. Key to this effort
is the urgent need to improve the working methods of
the Security Council and to widen its membership. A
Security Council that is more representative of the
world we live in, including the developing countries,
will carry greater weight and authority.
As small States comprise a large share of the
United Nations membership, any enlargement must also
ensure that the interests of small States are fully taken
into account. The promotion of greater accountability
and efficiency in the work of the Organization, as well

09-54411

as measures to render the wider United Nations system
more coherent, coordinated and responsive, is another
important facet of the reform process.
This includes strengthening the so-called gender
architecture, long characterized by fragmentation and
the lack of accountability. Iceland welcomes the
General Assembly’s unanimous decision to create a
new and consolidated United Nations gender entity to
be headed by an Under-Secretary-General and urges
the Secretary-General to move forward on that decision
as expeditiously as possible.
However, to redeem the full potential of the
United Nations we need more than structural
improvements. We should also reform the way our
Organization reacts to global challenges of the highest
order. The genocides of the twentieth century show that
too often the international community has failed to
prevent or respond adequately to mass atrocities. By
moving to operationalize the concept of the
responsibility to protect, the Organization can now take
deliberate steps to shore up the protection of basic
human rights and the rule of law. My delegation hopes
that the current session of the General Assembly will
work constructively towards that end.
An extended economic crisis exacerbates the risks
of conflict and the impacts of poor food security and
health care, and deteriorating living conditions in
different parts of the world threaten to undermine the
upholding of human rights. For that reason, Iceland
fully subscribes to the Secretary-General’s view that, at
this time, it is imperative for the United Nations to make
a special effort to promote respect for human rights.
To ensure prosperity and peace for future
generations, it is also essential that we take measures
to safeguard the earth’s ecosystem. While climate
change may, as the Secretary-General has said, be the
defining challenge of our generation, the interlinkages
between climate and other aspects of our ecosystem,
including land use, energy and oceans, should also be
recognized. No country is shielded from the impact of
climate change, and an effective solution to the
problem will require the active cooperation of each and
every Member of the United Nations. We must join
hands and work to conclude a legally binding
agreement in Copenhagen. At the same time, a gradual
but fundamental reorientation of energy policy should
be seen as essential for preventing future climate
changes. Member States should work, among other

3

A/64/PV.15

things, to increase the share of renewable energy
resources used in meeting world energy demand, aided
not least by the International Renewable Energy
Agency established in January of this year.

the challenges before us. This multifaceted global
crisis has revealed the exhaustion of the savage
capitalism that is gripping the world under the rubric
“neo-liberalism”.

In connection with climate change, we must also
consider the state of the oceans, which are essential to
sustaining the world’s social and economic
development. A host of man-made environmental
hazards, including pollution, overfishing and climate
change, are threatening the productivity of our oceans.
If we are to eradicate poverty and hunger, reduce child
mortality and combat disease, we must also prevent
and reverse the degradation of the oceans. Regrettably,
there is currently no systematic effort to keep the state
of the world’s oceans under continuing review. That is
why world leaders decided at the Johannesburg
Summit seven years ago to launch a regular process
under the United Nations for global reporting and
assessment of the state of the marine environment,
including socio-economic aspects. As the start-up
phase of this valuable initiative has now been
completed, Iceland supports the initiation of the first
fully integrated assessment of the regular process to be
completed by the year 2014.

Venezuela appreciates the success of the highlevel Conference on the World Financial and Economic
Crisis and Its Impact on Development and hopes for a
fruitful follow-up. The Conference was particularly
important for the work of the General Assembly and
demonstrated the need to reform and transform the
world economic and financial architecture in order to
correct the imbalances provoked by speculative
financial capital.

As the Secretary-General’s report makes clear, the
tasks before us have rarely been more demanding or
diverse. This should not be a source of discouragement.
Let us instead make the best possible use of the
opportunity afforded by this “ultimate multilateral
moment” to ensure a fruitful and productive session of
the United Nations General Assembly.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela warmly welcomes the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and gratefully
appreciates his introduction of his report on the work
of the Organization (A/64/1). That report is part of the
Secretary-General’s obligation to give an annual report
to the General Assembly on the Organization’s
activities, in accordance with Article 98 of the United
Nations Charter. The Secretary-General’s report
provides an opportunity at today’s debate to address
key topics on our agenda this year.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela agrees
fully with the Secretary-General’s observation that we
are in a time of crisis — economic and financial crisis,
food crisis and climate crisis — and that only by
strengthening multilateralism will we be able to meet

4

My delegation endorses the statements made by
various organizations and Member States to the effect
that the General Assembly is the principal organ of the
Organization and must maintain its independence from
the other organs. We must therefore reverse the
Security Council’s tendency to involve itself in topics
outside its field of competence, as that weakens the
central role of the General Assembly within this
multilateral institution.
On several occasions, Venezuela has stressed the
need to move ahead more expeditiously and resolutely
in reforming the United Nations. We are convinced that
only by ensuring the democratization of the
Organization, greater transparency in its methods and
its genuine accountability to Member States will fertile
ground be laid in which the United Nations can
flourish.
Venezuela welcomes the decision of the General
Assembly to pursue intergovernmental negotiations on
Security Council reform at the sixty-fourth session.
That is fundamental if the Organization is to restore its
credibility before the world and no longer be seen as an
institution held hostage to hegemonic interests. The
Organization must, of course, have a starring role in
addressing the problems that beset all humankind. It is
precisely by correcting its deficiencies and by
faithfully adhering to the United Nations Charter that it
will be able to present itself to the people of the world
as a model of justice, equity and genuine commitment
to international peace, security and development.
We must reform the Security Council forthwith,
expand its membership, eliminate the veto and improve
its working methods, including in particular direct and
universal participation of the General Assembly, by
secret ballot, in the selection of the Secretary-General.

09-54411

A/64/PV.15

The Secretariat must fulfil its mandates from the
General Assembly and prioritize those related to the
comprehensive development of peoples and the fight
against poverty in order to attain a world of abundant
justice, equality and solidarity.
My delegation welcomes the comments made by
various Member States to the effect that the General
Assembly must remain the principal forum for debate
within the Organization. We must therefore prevent the
Security Council from involving itself in issues that are
outside its competencies but within the purview of the
General Assembly.
My delegation notes the progress made towards
achieving the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs), as described in the Secretary-General’s
report, and in particular the increased global
investment in the fight against HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis
and malaria.
The crisis of capitalism has, however, multiplied
its negative effects throughout the world, in particular
in developing countries. All forecasts indicate that
injustice and inequality will become more pronounced
and that many countries will be unable to meet the
MDGs. For that reason, we note with concern that,
although we stand at the threshold of the 2010 MDG
review, no projects or actions have been proposed
towards the achievement of the Goals.
My delegation has been particularly struck by the
fact that the Secretary-General’s report contains a
section on genocide prevention and the responsibility
to protect. This is a conflation of two distinct topics —
genocide and the responsibility to protect. We are told
that the Special Advisers to the Secretary-General have
a mandate to work on both concepts, including, clearly,
the responsibility to protect. We are concerned,
however, that initiatives are being implemented on
which the General Assembly has not yet reached
consensus.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela will
always raise its voice to defend the principles of the
United Nations Charter and of international law,
including respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States, non-interference in internal affairs,
and the promotion of and protection of all human rights
to be preserved intact.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
the Secretary-General and the Secretariat for all of

09-54411

their efforts in preparing the report on the work of the
Organization (A/64/1). Allow me to take this
opportunity to share with the Assembly my country’s
views on some of the main agenda items addressed in
the report, which also comprise the main challenges
ahead.
At the outset, I should say that we are all facing
this precipice together in the same ship and that
multilateralism is the only safe way to forge ahead
towards a safer world. Unilateralism is the main
adversary of a multilateral and integrated approach and
will thwart our attempts to develop a common
understanding of the global public good. That is why
the interlinkage between global, regional and national
objectives should be drawn in a completely unbiased
and well-balanced manner that leaves no room for
further unilateralism or polarization.
In this sense, the existing global multilateral
architecture must be renovated so that it can properly
address the challenges of the twenty-first century.
Lessons learned from the twentieth century should not
be repeated but should serve as hazard lights and
guiding torches, allowing a new global multilateral
architecture to flourish. Yes, the United Nations can
and should be the hub of this new world if it is able to
restructure the global architecture to ensure that justice
prevails over prejudice and if the world’s peoples are
to enjoy the rule of law rather than the rule of might —
a world free from threats, aggression, discrimination,
hatred and poverty. To that end, the balance between
the principal organs of the United Nations should be
restored and the role and authority of the General
Assembly reaffirmed in ways that promote
multilateralism.
There is general agreement that the international
community must be vigilant not to let the horror of the
mass killings and genocide of the past be repeated in
the future. This should in no way prejudice the
established principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, particularly respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of
States, as well as non-intervention in their internal
affairs. We should also be highly alert to this
humanitarian notion being misused and abused to
undermine the foundational principles of Charter-based
international law, in particular the prohibition of the
threat or use of force, as set forth in Article 2.4 of the
Charter.

5

A/64/PV.15

After all, we should remember that the inaction of
the international community in the face of grave mass
atrocities in the previous decade was not the result of
the absence of concepts or a normative framework;
rather, it was the consequence of the failure of the
Security Council — in fact, of certain member
States — to act when action was needed.
The Islamic Republic of Iran believes that the
notion of responsibility to protect needs to be further
discussed and clearly defined and refined. The
Assembly’s debate of this item at the sixty-third
session showed that there are still many questions and
concerns surrounding the concept that need to be
addressed. The General Assembly is the competent
organ of the United Nations to continue the debate on
the concept and to address the concerns and questions
of many delegations concerning it and its implications.
It should be repeatedly emphasized that
multilateralism and multilateral solutions agreed in
accordance with the Charter provide the only
sustainable method of addressing disarmament and
international security issues. At the top of the United
Nations agenda are the continued existence of nuclear
weapons and their possible use or threat of use as a
matter of grave concern and a threat to international
peace and security. Therefore, nuclear disarmament
remains the highest priority. However, we regret to see
the slow pace of progress towards nuclear
disarmament, as well as the lack of progress by
nuclear-weapon States towards the total elimination of
their nuclear arsenals. In fact, reductions in
deployment and in the operational status of nuclear
weapons cannot substitute for irreversible, verifiable
and transparent cuts in and the total elimination of
nuclear weapons. It is now up to the Conference on
Disarmament to establish an ad hoc committee on
nuclear disarmament to follow through.
The 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) should play a crucial role in a balanced
approach towards nuclear disarmament, nuclear
non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy. Meanwhile, we wish to reaffirm that the
choices and decisions of each country with respect to
the peaceful use of nuclear energy should be respected.
There should be no interference in a State’s policies or
arrangements for the peaceful use of nuclear energy,
including its fuel-cycle policies.

6

With respect to paragraph 116 of the report of the
Secretary-General, we would like to emphasize that, as
a result of Iran’s proactive cooperation and full
transparency in the implementation of the workplan
agreed between Iran and the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) in the summer of 2007, all
outstanding safeguards implementation issues have
been resolved and closed. Naturally, pursuant to the
modality agreed to in the workplan, the implementation
of safeguards in Iran must become normalized. We
reiterate that Iran’s nuclear programme is and has
always been undertaken for peaceful purposes and in
full conformity with the provisions of the NPT.
Therefore, the concern expressed in paragraph 116 is
without foundation.
Establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
Middle East is yet another priority that cannot be
addressed due to the non-adherence of the Israeli
regime to the NPT and its ongoing development and
stockpiling of nuclear weapons. The necessary steps
should be taken in different international forums,
including the NPT Review Conference and IAEA, for
the immediate establishment of such a zone.
With regard to the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs), we share the concerns expressed by the
Secretary-General in his report on the slow pace of
progress in their overall attainment. The full impact of
the financial and economic crisis on their achievement
has yet to be unveiled. However, it is quite obvious
that negative economic growth, diminished resources,
fewer trade opportunities for the developing countries,
possible reductions in aid flows and protectionist
tendencies will slow or reverse the progress that has so
far been achieved. We know from past experience that
whenever political will is complemented by adequate
financial resources and commitments, progress has
become attainable. Otherwise, and despite all the good
will and wishful thinking, we may unfortunately miss
the 2015 deadline for the achievement of the MDGs.
As the defining challenge of our generation,
climate change inflicts serious damage on the vital
socio-economic infrastructure of countries and erodes
their progress in development. While developing
countries are committed to the Convention and the Bali
Action Plan, concerted ambitious commitments and
measures must be undertaken by developed countries
to address the needs of developing countries in all four
major components of the Action Plan, namely,
mitigation, adaptation, finance and technology. That is

09-54411

A/64/PV.15

a basic requirement for the success of the Copenhagen
Conference.
In the same vein, investing in sustainable forest
management will create 10 million new green jobs,
providing long-term employment opportunities for the
rural sector and fostering pro-poor sustainable
development in many developing countries. In
addition, such an investment would also make a major
contribution to climate change mitigation and
adaptation efforts, biodiversity conservation, and
combating deforestation and desertification.
The President took the Chair.
Finally, one major regional impact of climate
change that has emerged in recent years as a huge
challenge to many countries, including in my region, is
dust storms and sandstorms. Dust storms and
sandstorms are among the most serious and hard-tobeat challenges that have arisen in recent years. They
inflict substantial damage on the socio-economic
situation of many countries, impair the normal life and
health of the people, erode agricultural lands and
pollute water resources throughout arid regions. It is a
region-wide problem that, in addition to the firm
national determination of all countries involved,
requires regional and global cooperation and
interaction to combat this challenge. The post-Kyoto
arrangements will have to look at the dust storm and
sandstorm issue closely in order to identify the root
causes of the problem and eradicate it.
Mr. Montoya (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me, Mr. President, to reiterate my delegation’s
congratulations to you and your Bureau on your
election to lead our work, and to wish you every
success in that important task. You can count on our
cooperation and support in achieving a fruitful
outcome to your work.
The report of the Secretary-General (A/64/1)
reflects the efforts of the United Nations to fulfil its
objectives. The work of the Secretary-General and his
team, reflected in the results achieved by the
Organization, deserves the recognition of the Member
States.
There are many notable elements in the report. I
would like to refer first to the chapter on delivering
results for people most in need. Despite the hard work
to achieve the Millennium Development Goals, we
note with concern, as the report states, that although

09-54411

the overall poverty rates in the developing world will
still continue to fall, they will do so at a slower pace as
a result of the world economic crisis.
Furthermore, we are not encouraged by forecasts
for the crisis’s impact on food security, progress in
primary and secondary education, the struggle for
gender equality and women’s empowerment, child
mortality and developments in health care, in particular
expanding coverage for the poorest and most
vulnerable people. The economic crisis has been and
remains a tough test of the goals agreed at the
Millennium Summit.
Given the context of the crisis and the global
economic recession, the international community must
step up its efforts in jointly supporting those most in
need and adopting additional measures that will make
it possible to achieve the Millennium Development
Goals, which must be reaffirmed as a central priority of
our Organization.
In that regard, we welcome the proposal in
paragraph 33 of the report regarding the development
of a comprehensive response of the United Nations
through the creation of a global impact and
vulnerability alert system. That tool would allow us to
closely follow the effects of global crises on the poor
and most vulnerable. Member States should support the
development,
establishment
and
system-wide
implementation of that important initiative, and of
national development plans and strategies.
For its part, the chapter on securing global goods
addresses topics that the Colombian State also
considers to be essential and priorities on the world
agenda. Climate change, global health, the fight against
terrorism and disarmament must indeed be matters of
particular importance to the United Nations. As
President Alvaro Uribe Vélez recently said in his
address to the General Assembly (see A/64/PV.4),
Colombia has made significant progress in developing
biofuels without affecting food security; implementing
environmentally friendly mass transport systems;
protecting its water sources and conserving
biodiversity, the latter at the world level; and
developing clean energy. All those initiatives help to
combat climate change.
The conservation of our jungle of 578,000 square
kilometres, over 51 per cent of the territory, is also a
significant contribution in that regard. The Family
Forest Wardens programme implemented in Colombia

7

A/64/PV.15

is monitored by the United Nations and has received its
highest approval. Through that programme, more than
90,000 rural families have become involved in the
collective work of tending the jungle and preventing
the destruction that follows upon the cultivation of
crops used to produce illicit drugs.
We welcome and note with hope United Nations
activities to promote awareness and the political
commitment of all Member States, accompanied by
concrete action, to address climate change. We trust
that the Copenhagen Conference will produce
substantial progress in that field.
With regard to health care, Colombia is
implementing policies that have made it possible to
expand coverage, in particular for the least protected,
with tangible results. In March 2009, 90 per cent of the
population — over 40 million Colombians — belonged
to a health-care programme. Over half of those had
access to State-subsidized support, which benefits the
unemployed and people working in the informal
sectors, those living in poverty, indigenous people and
the displaced, among others. The major objective for
social security health care is to achieve universal
coverage by 2010.
On the other hand, Colombia has supported and
will continue to support the various initiatives of the
international community to combat terrorism and the
danger that related crimes, such as arms trafficking,
money-laundering and the trade in illicit drugs, pose to
the stability of all States. We highly value the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, a plan with
concrete steps to address that scourge, in full respect
for and observance of human rights.
It is also important to underscore the efforts of
the Secretariat to institutionalize the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, which
would make it possible to coordinate and streamline
the entire system. Likewise, we urge all Member States
to revive efforts to conclude and to adopt the
comprehensive convention on terrorism.
It is well known that my country has adopted
strict measures against the production and trafficking
of illicit drugs. We call on the international community
to shoulder its share of responsibility in that process by
discouraging the permissive consumption of illicit
drugs. Each gram illicitly consumed fuels violence,
arms trafficking, death, damage to the jungle and water
pollution.

8

Colombia joins the recent appeal of heads of
State, world leaders and the Secretary-General for
disarmament. The context is conducive to progress
towards nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation.
That will should give rise to more resolute action with
regard to the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. It should also promote greater cooperation in
combating anti-personnel mines. In a few weeks, the
Second Review Conference of the Ottawa Convention
will take place in Cartagena de Indias, Colombia. We
hope that the current resolve in favour of disarmament
will be reflected in full support for and broad
participation in the Cartagena Conference on antipersonnel mines.
My delegation would also like to highlight the
effort of the Secretariat and the Organization towards
creating a stronger United Nations, as the report
suggests. Actions to change the system should produce
the strengthened instruments and resources that the
Organization requires to fulfil its mandate. The steps
taken by the Secretary-General in that regard,
described in the report, constitute support for the
Organization’s efficient work. System-wide coherence,
intergovernmental machinery that ensures the
participation of civil society, and cooperation with
regional organizations must be part of that process.
Complementary to that are the activities of
Member States towards the revitalization of the
General Assembly and Security Council reform. Those
measures, carried out in a harmonious and coordinated
way, can contribute to the strengthening and the
flexibility that the Organization needs in order to adapt
to the responsibilities entrusted to it and to the
challenges of multilateralism in the twenty-first
century.
The international community needs multilateralism
to be ever more vigorous, genuine and dynamic. In a
world increasingly interconnected and interdependent,
no nation can confront alone the tremendous challenges
imposed by the new world realities. We share one
destiny. The United Nations is indispensable to building
that shared future and to ensuring that the aspirations
and hopes of future generations are fully realized.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): Since this is the first
time that I am taking the floor on behalf of my
delegation at the sixty-fourth session, please allow me
to congratulate you, Sir, on your election as President
of the General Assembly and to assure you of our

09-54411

A/64/PV.15

delegation’s support in ensuring the success of this
session. My delegation also wishes to thank the
Secretary-General for his report on the work of the
Organization at the sixty-third session (A/64/1).
Today the world is facing multiple challenges —
underdevelopment, poverty and hunger, the global food
and financial crises and the scourges of war and
terrorism, to name but a few. I believe that it is only
through a strong commitment to multilateralism
through the United Nations that we in the international
community can address those crises in order to create a
better life for those we represent. The SecretaryGeneral’s report highlights many of these areas.
The eradication of dehumanizing poverty and
hunger must remain central to the work of the United
Nations. The Organization must continue to work
harder to unite the world in working towards the total
eradication of poverty and to put an end to the
suffering of the world’s poor and marginalized.
Developing countries did not cause the economic
and financial crisis, but they are severely affected by it,
and this is especially true for Africa. South Africa
shares the concern expressed by the Secretary-General
about the grave impact of the current financial and
economic crisis on the poor and the most vulnerable,
especially in Africa. It is a fact that the crisis has
severely affected Africa’s growth rate and thereby its
capacity to address poverty and to achieve
internationally agreed development goals, including
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
The report correctly states that Africa has indeed
achieved impressive rates of growth over the past
decade, which has allowed the continent to
progressively move towards achieving sustainable
development, which in turn has contributed to the
peace, security and stability that we see on the
continent. However, a confluence of crises, such as the
global food and financial crises, has had a severe
impact on Africa and is likely to reverse these positive
developments. Those crises have contributed to a
substantial increase in unemployment and a slowdown
in trade resulting in lower export earnings, ultimately
affecting the livelihoods of the people of the continent.
Therefore, the United Nations must play a
significant role in finding solutions to the global
economic crisis. In this regard, we concur with the
Secretary-General that the international community
must implement its renewed commitments made at the

09-54411

General Assembly high-level meeting on Africa’s
development needs held last September.
Similarly, the impact of climate change on Africa
is devastating and will severely undermine
development and poverty eradication efforts. In
Copenhagen we must reach a binding, inclusive, fair
and effective global agreement on this critical
challenge. The agreement must recognize that solving
the climate change problem cannot be separated from
the struggle to eradicate poverty. Developed countries
bear the greatest responsibility for climate change and
its impact. Our goal should be to significantly reduce
emissions across the globe without constraining
development in the countries of the South.
We have noted with concern the impact that the
global downturn has had on women and children
especially. In this regard, the Secretary-General’s
assessment of the implementation of the MDGs
relating to child and maternal mortality is grim, and we
agree with his conclusion that those areas require
urgent attention from the entire international
community in order to stop and reverse the worsening
of the situation.
We are pleased that the United Nations has
worked to strengthen its support for Africa’s
development agenda. However, this work is not yet
complete. Our delegation is of the opinion that we need
to further enhance cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union and various other
regional organizations in Africa, such as the Southern
African Development Community. We therefore will
work hard with other States Members of the United
Nations to ensure that the African Union’s participation
at the United Nations will allow for this enhanced
cooperation.
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union is even more essential with regard to
peace and security. We are pleased to note that the
Secretary-General states in his report that the
relationship between the two organizations is a steadily
expanding strategic one. South Africa will continue its
work during this session, within both the General
Assembly and the Security Council, to further enhance
that relationship. In this regard, we look forward to the
Secretary-General’s bold report on the financing of
peacekeeping operations undertaken by the African
Union, including the use of assessed contributions.

9

A/64/PV.15

We agree with previous speakers that it is
essential for us to move forward on the reform of this
Organization, especially the Security Council. South
Africa will continue to participate in the
intergovernmental negotiations on the reform of the
Security Council to ensure that the historic injustice
against Africa is corrected and that the Council’s
membership is increased in both categories. It is also
essential that the Council’s working methods be
improved.
With regard to disarmament and non-proliferation,
South Africa remains committed to the goals of
disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control,
including the illicit trade in small arms, and will
continue actively to pursue and promote the importance
of the multilateral approach in this regard during this
session. We appreciate the recent pronouncements by
some nuclear-weapon States of their intentions to
reduce their nuclear arsenals. We should take up this
new momentum and utilize the opportunity of the 2010
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to recommit
ourselves to the full implementation of obligations
under the Treaty.
Finally, I wish to reiterate my delegation’s
commitment to the full and effective implementation of
the outcomes of the United Nations Durban Review
Conference and the World Conference against Racism,
Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related
Intolerance. In our continued commitment to fight to
rid the world of the scourge of racism, we will continue
to advocate the set of values our continent is known
for. It is with this in mind that our delegation will
present a draft resolution to this Assembly calling for
the celebration of an international Nelson Mandela day
every 18 July.
We will also submit a draft resolution in the
coming days on the 2010 World Cup of the Fédération
internationale de football association, which our
country is proud to be hosting on behalf of Africa. The
draft resolution celebrates the fact that it is the first
time that this prestigious event will be hosted by our
continent, Africa, and acknowledges the broad appeal
of football in promoting peace and development. My
delegation humbly calls for the Assembly’s support for
these two draft resolutions.
The President: I now call on the observer of the
Observer State of the Holy See.

10

Mr. Swanepoel (Holy See): I make the following
statement on behalf of the Permanent Observer of the
Holy See, Archbishop Celestino Migliore.
My delegation wishes to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report on the work of the organization
(A/64/1) and its clear call for the membership to
restore hope and solidarity so that the sixty-fourth
session of the General Assembly becomes a point of
renewal for this Organization.
This past year the global community became
more aware of the fragility of prosperity and growth.
The world was hit by an economic crisis that has led to
their security and the ability to provide even the basic
necessities for their families. This crisis raised a
number of questions about the causes and
consequences of the economic downturn and created
even more questions as to what the future will hold.
Therefore, as we begin this sixty-fourth session of the
General Assembly, one year after the deepening of the
financial crisis, we do so with a new sense of purpose
to learn from the mistakes and renew our commitment
to the need for cooperation.
One area for a renewed sense of commitment to
addressing the world’s problems is in working to lift
the burdens placed upon so many in this world due to
lack of economic resources. On numerous occasions,
my delegation has pointed to the need for greater
global solidarity in order to tackle the moral
implications that currently face the world and to give a
renewed priority to the poor. We welcome the
Secretary-General’s recognition of the moral grounds
underlying the need to give priority to the most
vulnerable in this endeavour.
For such an effort, my delegation stresses the
urgency of the need for the United Nations and
developed countries to come together to give assistance
to the many nations that are unable to respond to the
financial crisis and that continue to face security and
development challenges. For some of the countries
lagging behind the rest of the world, the precarious,
drifting economic situation was not created but rather
exacerbated by the current financial crisis.
Development aid will be effective only to the extent
that local governments and civil society confront the
situation with the impetus generated by the sense of
responsibility needed to address chronic political,
administrative and social malfunctioning.

09-54411

A/64/PV.15

My delegation welcomes the Secretary-General’s
calls for an increased commitment to peacebuilding
and peacekeeping, for these are the vital cornerstones
upon which the United Nations was created. All this
will be achieved only in the context of a renewed
commitment to responsible sovereignty at both the
national and international levels.
The upcoming Copenhagen Conference on
Climate Change will test the ability of the international
community to work together on a problem that has both
global and local consequences. At the heart of the
climate-change debate is the moral and ethical need for
individuals, companies and States to recognize their
responsibility to use the world’s resources in a
sustainable manner. With this responsibility comes the
duty of all States and international corporations that
have somehow disproportionately used and abused
global resources to shoulder their fair share in solving
the problem.
In the light of the agreement to work towards a
legally binding instrument on the import, export and
transfer of conventional arms, the Convention on
Cluster Munitions and the recent consensus among
major nuclear Powers to reduce nuclear stockpiles,
there has been an increasing commitment by some
States to address this fundamental issue. However, the
ongoing proliferation of nuclear arms and the desire by
some States to continue to spend disproportionate
amounts of money on weapons suggest that further
efforts are needed if we are to make serious progress in
controlling
and
unilaterally
disarming
these
instruments of destruction.
Our efforts to renew the work of the United
Nations will remain unfulfilled unless the international
organizations and individual States are able to
incorporate the voices of civil society into all aspects
of the work of the Organization. Civil society partners
are critical players in delivering humanitarian relief,
promoting the rule of law and bringing to light gross
violations of human rights.
In this regard, faith-based organizations play a
vital role in providing insight into the local needs of
communities, delivering care and fostering solidarity
both locally and internationally for the needs of people
around the world. My delegation welcomes the
Secretary-General’s recognition of the critical role of
civil society actors, and we hope to work with the
delegations to further include civil society organizations
in providing lifesaving care to those in need.

09-54411

Widespread corruption, health pandemics,
persistent maternal mortality in some regions of the
world, economic crisis, terrorism, food security,
climate change and migration all illustrate that in an
increasingly globalized world, national solutions are
only one part of the formula for contributing to peace
and justice. These global problems call for an
international response, and it is therefore imperative
that the United Nations and other international
organizations look inward and outward in order to
make the necessary reforms to respond to the
challenges of this interconnected world.
In
commending
the
Secretary-General’s
leadership, my delegation looks forward to working
with you, Mr. President, and the membership in the
next year to help create an Organization guided by
duty, morality and solidarity with those in need.
The President: May I take it that the General
Assembly takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the work of the Organization contained in
document A/64/1?
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 107.
Agenda item 114
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/64/L.1)
The President (spoke in Arabic): We shall now
proceed to consider draft resolution A/64/L.1. We will
adopt this resolution without a vote, by consensus.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with draft
resolution A/64/L.1, entitled “High-level United
Nations Conference on South-South Cooperation”, I
wish to put on record the following statement of
financial implications on behalf of the SecretaryGeneral, in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of operative paragraph 1 of the
draft resolution, the General Assembly would decide:
“that the High-level United Nations Conference
on South-South Cooperation:

11

A/64/PV.15

“(a) Will be held at Nairobi from 1 to
3 December 2009;
“(b) Will be held at the highest possible
level;
“(c) Will have the overarching theme
‘Promotion of South-South cooperation for
development’;
“(d) Will consist of plenary meetings and
interactive multi-stakeholder round tables on the
following sub-themes;
“(i) Strengthening the role of the United
Nations system in supporting South-South
and triangular cooperation;
“(ii) South-South and triangular cooperation
for
development:
complementarities,
specificities, challenges and opportunities;
“(e) Will result in an intergovernmentally
agreed outcome;
“(f) Will also result in summaries by the
Chairperson”
and, under operative paragraph 12, would decide
“to postpone the sixteenth session of the Highlevel Committee on South-South Cooperation
from 2 to 5 June 2009 to one convenient day in
January 2010”.
The High-level Conference on South-South
Cooperation — which I shall refer to as the Conference
hereafter — had already been included in the calendar
of meetings for 2009 on the understanding that the
Conference would be held in New York, in accordance
with the headquarters principle embodied in General
Assembly resolution 40/243, and no later than the first
half of 2009, according to Assembly resolution
62/209 of 19 December 2007. Had the Conference
been held at the established headquarters of its body,
i.e., New York, in the first half of 2009, as decided in
resolution 62/209, the required conference services
would have been provided from the existing conference
service capacities, without programme budget
implications.
The aforementioned understanding, reached at the
time of drafting the calendar of meetings for 2009, is
no longer valid, as the venue would be changed from
New York to Nairobi, from 1 to 3 December 2009.

12

According to paragraph 5 of resolution 40/243,
United Nations bodies may hold sessions away from
their established headquarters when a Government
issuing an invitation for a session to be held within its
territory has agreed to defray, after consultation with
the Secretary-General as to their nature and possible
extent, the actual additional costs directly or indirectly
involved. Therefore, the offer by the Government of
Kenya to host the High-level United Nations
Conference on South-South Cooperation requires the
Government of Kenya to reimburse to the United
Nations the actual additional costs directly or indirectly
involved as a result of the change of venue of the
Conference from New York to Nairobi.
Consequently, the related programme budget
implications set out in this oral statement include only
the estimated direct costs of providing the required
level of conference services as if the Conference were
still to be held in New York — which I shall hereafter
refer to as “the New York cost” — while the
Government of Kenya would defray any difference
between the New York cost and the actual costs
incurred by the United Nations in order to provide the
required conference services and other related
incidental support services, including, inter alia,
protocol services, sound engineering, safety and
security and webcasting services.
It is estimated that the Conference would require
meeting services for 13 meetings, with interpretation in
all six official languages and document services for
76 pages of documentation in all six official languages.
The costs of providing such services in New York are
estimated at $333,000, including $163,600 for meeting
services and $169,400 for documentation services.
Since the Conference has already been included in the
calendar of meetings for 2009, those costs in New York
could be met from within the approved appropriation
under Section 2, General Assembly Affairs and
Economic and Social Council Affairs and Conference
Management for the biennium 2008-2009.
As regards the postponement of the sixteenth
session of the High-level Committee on South-South
Cooperation from 2 to 5 June 2009 to one convenient
day in January 2010, it is determined that no additional
resources would be required, on the understanding that
the specific date of the meetings of the sixteenth
session of the High-level Committee would be decided
in consultation with the Secretariat.

09-54411

A/64/PV.15

In summary, should the General Assembly adopt
the draft resolution, there would be no programme
budget implications for the programme budget for the
biennium 2008-2009, on the condition that the
Government of Kenya would defray the actual
additional costs directly or indirectly involved, in
accordance with resolution 40/243.

South-South cooperation is a common endeavour
of peoples and countries of the South and must be
pursued as an expression of South-South solidarity and
a strategy for the economic independence and selfreliance of the South, based on their common
objectives and solidarity. South-South cooperation and
its agenda must be driven by the countries of the South.

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/64/L.1, entitled “Highlevel United Nations Conference on South-South
Cooperation”. I should like to announce that, since the
introduction of the draft resolution, the following
countries have become sponsors: Kenya, Mexico, Saint
Lucia, Suriname and Thailand.

We also maintain that South-South cooperation
must not be seen as a replacement for North-South
cooperation. Strengthening South-South cooperation
must not be a measure for coping with the receding
interest of the developed world in assisting developing
countries. In addition, cooperation between countries of
the South must not be analysed and evaluated using the
same standards as those used for North-South relations.

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/64/L.1?
Draft resolution A/64/L.1 was adopted (resolution
64/1).
The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
position on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Mohamad (Sudan): Following the adoption
of resolution 64/1, I have the honour to deliver this
statement on behalf of the States members of the Group
of 77 and China (G-77).
We greatly value South-South cooperation and
look forward to a successful outcome of the
Conference to be held from 1 to 3 December 2009 in
Nairobi. I wish to take this opportunity to express the
Group’s gratitude to the Government of Kenya for its
generous offer to host the Conference. The Group also
wishes to express its appreciation to our dear friend
and colleague His Excellency Mr. Nassir Abdulaziz
Al-Nasser, President of the High-level Committee on
South-South
Cooperation
and
Permanent
Representative of the State of Qatar to the United
Nations; Mr. Raymond Landveld of Suriname,
facilitator; Mr. Nor Eddine Benfreha of Algeria, G-77
coordinator; and all delegations for their support and
commitment in this important process.
I wish to stress the G-77’s conceptual framework
for and principles of South-South cooperation as set
out in the Yamoussoukro Consensus and reaffirmed at
the recent 33rd Annual Meeting of Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the G-77, held here in New York on
25 September 2009.

09-54411

Furthermore, we maintain that financial
contributions from other developing countries should
not be seen as official development assistance from
those countries to other countries of the South. They
are merely expressions of solidarity and cooperation
born of shared experiences and sympathies. SouthSouth cooperation is a development agenda based on
premises, conditions and objectives that are specific to
the historical and political context of developing
countries and to their needs and expectations.
South-South cooperation deserves
separate and independent promotion.

its

own

South-South cooperation respects national
sovereignty in the context of shared responsibility, and
it strives for strengthened multilateralism in the
promotion of an action-oriented approach to
development challenges.
South-South cooperation also promotes the
exchange of best practices and support among
developing countries in the common pursuit of their
broad development objectives, and not just in the
traditional economic and technical areas. South-South
cooperation is based on the collective self-reliance of
developing countries. The modalities and mechanisms
for promoting South-South cooperation are based on
bilateral, subregional, regional and interregional
cooperation and integration, as well as on multilateral
cooperation.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate our commitment
to, and support for, this process. We shall continue to
work towards the successful outcome of the High-level

13

A/64/PV.15

Conference on South-South Cooperation, as well as to
engage in a constructive dialogue with all our partners.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of Qatar, who will speak in his capacity
as President of the High-level Committee on SouthSouth Cooperation.
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar), President of the Highlevel Committee on South-South Cooperation (spoke in
Arabic): It is a source of great satisfaction for me that
the General Assembly has adopted resolution 64/1, on
the
High-level
Conference
on
South-South
Cooperation, which is to be held at the highest level at
Kenya’s capital of Nairobi from 1 to 3 December 2009.
The resolution sets out the Conference’s timing,
objectives, methods and organizational arrangements. I
am very grateful to the Government of Kenya for its
generous offer to host the Conference in Nairobi. I am
confident that it will live up to the expectations of
Member States.
I am also certain that the Conference will be
among the most important milestones in promoting and
enhancing South-South cooperation. South-South
cooperation is a component of triangular cooperation,
which also includes cooperation between the countries
of the North and the South on the economic, financial
and technical levels. This nexus of cooperation cannot
be broken, as its components are interdependent and
complementary to one another.
The adoption of the resolution was the
culmination of the tireless efforts that I have exerted in
my capacity as President of the High-level Committee
on South-South Cooperation. In that undertaking, I
enjoyed the support of the President of the General
Assembly, who will now launch negotiations on the
draft outcome of the Conference. I am grateful for the
sincere desire of Member States to hold the Conference
no later than the end of the current year, so that it can
coincide with the thirtieth anniversary of the Buenos
Aires Plan of Action for Promoting and Implementing
Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries.
I am also grateful to the delegation of Mexico,
which supported one of the options raised during our
meeting last August, subsequently building upon it
until Member States were able to reach a consensus
formula on the substance of standards that are
important to all, in the North and South alike. That
took place in the context of a series of conferences,
decisions and outcome documents related to the

14

promotion of cooperation among developing countries.
They include the Doha Declaration on Financing for
Development, the Havana Programme of Action, which
was adopted during the South Summit, the Marrakesh
Framework for the Implementation of South-South
Cooperation and the Doha Plan of Action, which was
adopted by the second South Summit.
As members are aware, the Conference is
intended to evaluate the progress made in South-South
cooperation, reaffirm goals and commitments to
enhance that cooperation, exchange best practices and
lessons learned and identify obstacles and constraints
and the necessary measures and initiatives to overcome
them, including significant measures for implementing
the recommendations and obligations emanating from
previous conferences, as well as to address new
challenges and emerging issues. The Conference is also
intended to provide an opportunity for decision makers
to take advantage of the momentum in South-South
cooperation, which can serve to strengthen their
development strategies to achieve internationally
agreed development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals.
As is clear from the text of the resolution, it is
proposed that the Conference be convened under the
theme of “Promotion of South-South cooperation for
development”. The Conference will consist of plenary
sessions and round tables on the following sub-themes:
strengthening the role of the United Nations system in
supporting South-South and triangular cooperation;
and South-South and triangular cooperation for
development. The Conference will result in an
intergovernmentally agreed outcome.
I wish to express my deep gratitude to the Special
Unit for South-South Cooperation for its efforts to
provide substantive and technical support to the
preparatory process for the Conference, as called for by
the resolution.
In order to ensure that the Conference comes to a
successful conclusion, I appeal to Member States, the
United Nations and its specialized agencies and
programmes, international organizations, regional
commissions, international financial institutions, civil
society organizations and representatives of the private
sector to contribute to the preparations and to establish
the conditions necessary for its success. I also urge
them to participate in it, in accordance with the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.

09-54411

A/64/PV.15

I also call upon Member States to provide
financial assistance to developing and least developed
countries, through the United Nations Fund for SouthSouth Cooperation, to enable them to participate in the
Conference. I would also like to take this opportunity
to encourage Member States to provide voluntary
contributions to support the Government of Kenya in
successfully preparing for the Conference, especially in
the light of the current difficult global economic and
financial conditions.
I also hope that the outcome of the Conference
will include a declaration and plan of action agreed
upon by Governments to strengthen and enhance the
future of South-South cooperation and to make such
cooperation pivotal in assisting countries of the South
to achieve sustained economic growth and combat the
scourges of unemployment, poverty and other
development challenges that affect the interests of the
international community as a whole.
Mrs. Masot Planas (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of Cuba would like to express its
gratitude for the hospitality of the Government of
Kenya and for the efforts made by the Government of
Qatar through its presidency of the High-level
Committee on South-South Cooperation, as well as
those of Suriname as facilitator of the process.
The delegation of Cuba joined the consensus on
resolution 64/1, which was adopted today and which
decides to convene the High-level United Nations
Conference on South-South Cooperation. That is an
illustration of the importance we attach to the
Conference.
Everyone is aware of Cuba’s position throughout
the negotiations, which became unnecessarily difficult.
The main goal of the Group of 77 and China was to
submit a procedural draft resolution that set aside
substantive issues for consideration during negotiations
on the Conference’s outcome document. It is for that
reason that we would like to express our views with
regard to the reference in the resolution to the Doha
Declaration on Financing for Development. That
reference is intended to establish a link between the socalled principles of aid effectiveness and South-South
cooperation — a goal championed by developed
countries during the process.
South-South cooperation constitutes a step
forward in the economic and political paradigms of
developing countries — this can be seen from the

09-54411

efforts we undertake on our own initiative in favour of
development, through the mobilization of resources
that exist in the South. Through South-South
cooperation, our countries — with their diverse
economic, social, cultural and geographical structures,
as well their diverse endowment with natural
resources, among other things — have found
opportunities
to
work
in
an
economically
complementary fashion, and a way to promote the
exchange of ideas, experience, know-how, technical
advances, capacities and practical results, without any
conditionality or interference in the internal affairs of
other States, and on the basis of solidarity and mutual
respect.
As various United Nations resolutions reflect,
South-South cooperation is not a substitute for but a
complement to North-South cooperation. If there exists
a genuine interest in helping the countries of the South
to achieve their sustainable development goals, then
we wonder: why do the countries of the North continue
to fail to meet their commitment to give 0.7 per cent of
GDP as part of official development assistance? Why is
there an effort to focus attention on the so-called
principles for making “effective” use of aid? This is
part of the tired discourse of the donors, seeking to
impose their conditions and to interfere in decisions
that should be taken by the countries of the South
alone. Cuba rejects the attempt to use these
“principles” as a foundation for South-South
cooperation — cooperation in which our countries
engage on the basis of solidarity and respect.
Cuba does not consider the specific mention of
the Doha Declaration on Financing for Development
necessary in a procedural resolution. In the same way,
we will reject any attempt to prejudice the final
document of the Conference with elements that have
no relation to the principles relevant to South-South
cooperation.
I should like to conclude by reiterating the
unequivocal commitment of the Cuban delegation to
the holding of the Conference on South-South
Cooperation. Together with the rest of the countries of
the South which share in such cooperation, Cuba has a
great deal to contribute to the Conference, stemming
from the experiences and initiatives carried out by our
country across the economic, social, technical and
cultural fields. We hope that the Conference will
contribute to financing intraregional and interregional
agreements on cooperation, and that it will be a step

15

A/64/PV.15

forward towards achieving the goals of eradicating
hunger, eliminating poverty, providing access, as a
basic right, to education and health to all citizens, as
well as closing the gap that separates the countries of
the North and the South.
Ms. Loza (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation associates itself with the statement made by
the representative of the Sudan on behalf of the Group
of 77 and China. We express our gratitude to the
delegations of Kenya, Qatar, Suriname and Algeria for
their efforts.
Resolution 64/1, entitled “High-Level United
Nations Conference on South-South Cooperation”, is
the result of broad consultations and negotiations to
achieve consensus. However, my delegation should
like to explain its position and its understanding
regarding certain points contained in the resolution we
have just adopted.
Nicaragua does not accept and will never accept
any type of conditionality applicable to South-South
cooperation. Nor will it accept the imposition of
guidelines that are not in line with the basic principles
of South-South cooperation. In this sense, the only
reason my delegation joined the consensus on citing
the Doha Declaration on Financing for Development is
the linkage with triangular cooperation that appears in
that document. We do not see our acceptance of that
reference as extending to other points covered in that
document.
In our view, the notion of aid effectiveness and its
principles are not applicable to South-South
cooperation, which has its own fundamental principles.
The intention on the part of developed countries to
include it in this context is yet another attempt to elude
their responsibilities with respect to meeting their
official development assistance commitments and to
impose conditionalities on cooperation that is based on
solidarity among the countries of the South.
It is offensive to see how developed countries —
in particular, those that do not meet the guideline of
0.7 per cent of GDP for official development
assistance — are trying to impose a series of rules that
run counter to the very basis of South-South
cooperation. That is something that we will simply not
allow.
Today, more than ever, the people of Nicaragua
enjoy, among other things, free health care and

16

education. Our sons and daughters benefit from a
school feeding programme that the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations has
held up as one of the four best in the world. And this is
thanks to South-South cooperation — disinterested and
unconditional aid from countries of the South.
In this context, Nicaragua reaffirms the principles
of South-South cooperation — in particular, solidarity,
complementarity, fair treatment, equal sovereignty of
States,
self-determination
of
peoples
and
non-interference in the internal affairs of States. All of
those principles are contained in the various documents
of the Group of 77 and China relating to South-South
cooperation, including the Buenos Aires Plan of Action
and the Havana Programme of Action.
Similarly,
we
underline
the
strictly
complementary nature of South-South cooperation with
regard to North-South cooperation. When the idea of a
United Nations conference on South-South cooperation
arose, the point was to find a way in which the United
Nations could support developing countries with
concerted actions and measures to strengthen and
improve cooperation among ourselves. We hope that
this goal will be met through an action-oriented final
document that will be based on the guidelines for
South-South cooperation and will enable developing
countries to strengthen our cooperative trade and reach
our national development objectives.
Mr. Bachmann (Switzerland): After a long
negotiation process on modalities, Switzerland
expresses its gratitude to all the delegations that
participated, to the President of the High-Level
Committee for South-South Cooperation and to the
distinguished facilitator from the Republic of Suriname
for their tireless efforts.
As the importance of South-South cooperation, as
a complement to North-South cooperation, has grown
enormously in recent years, we find it timely for the
General Assembly to consider constructively what has
been achieved so far, the lessons learned and what
recommendations can be made for future action.
We believe in the potential complementarity
between South-South and North-South cooperation,
including through triangular cooperation, and we hope
synergies can be developed between them. For this to
happen, it is important to clarify the complementarities
and commonalities between South-South and NorthSouth cooperation. If traditional donors are to increase

09-54411

A/64/PV.15

emphasis on South-South cooperation, it is essential
that we understand its functioning, its potential impact
on national capacities and its accountability
mechanisms.
As there is only a short time left before the start
of the Conference, we hope that the preparation
process will be efficient. The presentation of a
workplan, so that we can harmonize agendas with other
processes, would be most welcome.
Finally, I should like to thank, again, the
Government of Kenya for agreeing to host this
important Conference and for the patience it has shown
throughout the process so far. Thirty years after Buenos
Aires, South-South cooperation deserves a successful
international conference to celebrate its achievements
to date and to contribute to effective and better
integrated South-South cooperation.
Mr. Muita (Kenya): I take this opportunity to
express appreciation to you, Sir, as well as to your
predecessor, His Excellency Mr. Miguel d’Escoto
Brockmann, for your spirited efforts to ensure that the
High-level United Nations Conference on South-South
Cooperation takes place as agreed in resolutions
62/209 and 63/233. I also wish to thank His Excellency
Mr.
Nassir
Abdulaziz
Al-Nasser,
Permanent
Representative of the State of Qatar, in his capacity as
President of the High-level Committee on South-South
Cooperation, for his enthusiasm and tireless efforts in
this regard.
The Government of Kenya welcomes the
adoption of resolution 64/1 and strongly believes in
South-South cooperation as a viable mechanism for
promoting the development of countries of the South,
including through sharing of experiences, promotion of
trade, transfer of appropriate and affordable
technology, and investment. We underscore the
complementary role of South-South cooperation to the
traditional North-South cooperation. The important
role played by development partners in promoting
South-South cooperation cannot be overemphasized.
Equally important is the role of the United Nations in
nurturing and promoting South-South cooperation.
It is within the context of the above
understanding that Kenya offered to host the
Conference as part of our contribution to what we
consider a noble objective. I wish, however, to observe
that negotiations on the modalities of the resolution
introduced some anxious moments. For instance, there

09-54411

were times when Kenya was tempted to reconsider
altogether its decision to host the Conference.
However, thanks to the encouragement and
determination shown by many delegations, we decided
to stay the course.
In the midst of global and national challenges, I
have the confidence that the adoption of resolution
64/1 on the High-level United Nations Conference on
South-South Cooperation this afternoon provides all
delegations a momentous opportunity to show the
world that there is no crisis or issue that can shake the
unity and focus of the United Nations. This is the spirit
that should guide us as we proceed forward.
With less than two months to go before the early
December 2009 date for the Conference, the Kenya
delegation calls upon all Member States, the United
Nations system and other stakeholders to fully
cooperate and support the final preparatory processes
with a view to ensuring a successful conference.
The adoption of this resolution brings a high
sense of urgency to all stakeholders. Each one of us has
a responsibility that we must discharge efficiently and
effectively. As this is a United Nations conference, the
Kenya delegation has full trust and confidence, Sir, in
your leadership and guidance. The Kenya Government
is ready to do its part. Furthermore, my delegation calls
upon all delegations to demonstrate a high sense of
commitment, cooperation and diligence in the
negotiation of the outcome document and other related
issues, so that the Conference will reflect our common
endeavour for successful South-South cooperation.
To conclude, I express our appreciation to all
delegations for accepting the offer of Kenya to host the
Conference. I take this early opportunity to welcome
all Member States to Nairobi. We shall soon be sharing
with you information regarding the logistics and
facilitation for the Conference.
The President (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of
the General Assembly, I thank Kenya and its
Government for kindly offering to host this important
Conference and for their continued support. The
Conference will undoubtedly be very successful.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 114.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

17
