General Aa1embly-Twenty-fint Ses1ion

M

2180 (XXI). Reports of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Development Programme
The General Assembly
Takes note of the reports of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Development Programme on its
first 20 and second21 sessions.
1488th plenary meeting,
9 December 1966.
2186 (XXI). Establishment of the United Nations
Capital Development Fund
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1521 (XV) of 15 December
1960, by which it decided in principle to establish a
United Nations capital development fund,
Recalling further its resolutions 1706 (XVI) of
19 December 1961 and 1826 (XVII) of 18 December
1962,
Taking into consideration the recommendation contained in annex A.IV.7 of the Final Act of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development,2l1
Recognizing that the developing countries can usefully absorb substantial amounts of capital over and
above those that the existing financial institutions, with
their present resources and institutional set-up, can
provide,
Bearing in mind that the terms on which the developing countries currently obtain financial assistance
tend, in most cases, to offset the advantages derived
therefrom,
Recognizing that external resources should be made
available to the developing countries on terms and conditions which would help to accelerate their economic
and social progress,
Taking note of the report of the Committee on a
United Nations Capital Development Fund on its fifth
session, 28

Decides to bring into operation the United Nations
Capital Development Fund (hereinafter referred to as
the Capital Development Fund) as an organ of the
General Assembly which shall function as an autonomous organization within the United Nations in accordance with the provisions set forth below.
ARTICLE I

Purpose
The purpose of the Capital Development Fund shall
be to assist developing countries in the development
of their economies by supplementing existing sources
of capital assistance by means of grants and loans, particularly long-term loans made free of interest or at
low interest rates. Such assistance shall be directed
towards the achievement of the accelerated and selfsustained growth of the economies of those countries
and shall be oriented towards the diversification of their
economies, with due regard to the need for industrial
development as a basis for economic and social progress.
20 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Fortyfirst Session, Supplement No. 11 (E/4150).
21 fbid., Supplement No. 11A (E/4219).
22 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, vol. I, Final Act and Report (United Nations
publication, Sales No.: 64.II.B.ll), p. 47.
28 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Annexes, agenda item 38, document A/6418.

ARTICLE II

Guiding principles
1. Tqe provision of assistance shall be in conformity
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the

United Nations.
2. Assistance from the Capital Development Fund
shall not serve as a means for economic and political
interference in the internal affairs of assisted countries
and shall not be influenced by considerations relating
to the nature of their economic and political systems.
3. Assistance from the Capital Development Fund
shall be of a kind and in a form consistent with the
wishes of the recipients and shall not involve any
unacceptable conditions for them, whether political,
economic, military or other.
ARTICLE III

General economic provisions
1. Assistance from the Capital Development Fund
may be given to the Government of a State Member
of the United Nations or member of a specialized
agency or of the International Atomic Energy Agency
or to a group of Governments of such States or, at the
request of the Government of one of these States, to
an entity having juridical personality within the territory of that State. Assistance provided to Non-SelfGoverning Territories shall be of advantage to the
economy of the recipient territory in accordance with
the provisions of article I a hove.
2. Assistance from the Capital Development Fund
shall be provided in such forms and on such terms as
are compatible with the continued economic development of the assisted countries, taking due account of
their balance-of-payments position and prospects.
3. Assistance from the Capital Development Fund
shall be given in a flexible manner and shall not necessarily be limited to specific projects or groups of
projects and should be given to support general development plans, where such plans exist, or to meet general
development requirements.
4. Every effort shall be made to co-ordinate tht
assistance rendered by the Capital Development Fund
with assistance from other sources, so as to achieve the
maximum permanent beneficial effect on the economies
of the developing countries, taking into account the
need to preserve the autonomy and the multilateral
character of the Fund.
ARTICLE IV

Resources
1. The expenditure of the Capital Development
Fund shall be classified in the following categories :
(a) Expenses for administrative activities;
( b) Expenses for operational activities.
2. Expenses for administrative activities shall be
borne by the regular budget of the United Nations,
which shall include a separate budgetary provision for
such expenses. The General Assembly shall fix a ceiling
for such expenses in the light of the voluntary contributions received for operational activities.
3. Expenses for operational activities shall be met
from the voluntary contributions made to the Capital
Development Fund, in cash or in kind, by Governments
of the States Members of the United Nations or mem-

SS

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Seeond Committee

hers of the specialized agencies or of the International
Atomic Energy Agency. An annual pledging conference,
at which Member States will announce their contributions, will be convened by the Secretary-General of
the United Nations, the first such conference to be
convened early in the twenty-second session of the
General Assembly.
4. In determining the size of their contributions
under paragraph 3 above, Member States should take
due account of the following considerations:
(a) The resources of the Capital Development Fund
should be large enough to make a significant contribution to the achievement of the accelerated and selfsustained economic growth of the developing countries ;
( b) Contributions to the Capital Development Fund
should ensure the provision of assistance on a long-term
and continuing basis. In this connexion, it is desirable
that contributions should be pledged or indicated as far
as possible for a number of years ;
( c) While the resources of the Capital Development
Fund should be derived from contributions by all States
Members of the United Nations or members of the
specialized agencies or of the International Atomic
Energy Agency, the bulk of the contributions should
come from the economically more developed countries
in a readily and economically usable form.
5. The Secretary-General may invite voluntary contributions from sources other than Governments. The
Capital Development Fund may accept such contributions subject to the provision contained in paragraph
6 ( d) of the present article and on terms and conditions
to be approved by the Executive Board.
6. (a) Contributions shaII be made predominantly
in cash. They may be made either in currencies that
are readily and economically usable by the Capital Development Fund or in national currencies. In the latter
case. the contributing States shall extend all possible
facilities for the maximum use of such contributions
towards meeting the needs of the recipient countries;
( b) In consultation with the Managing Director,
contributions may also be made in kind, that is, in the
form of equioment, machinery and other materials which
will be readily usable for the purposes of the Capital
Development Fund, aiming primarily at industrial development. Such contributions shall not be of such a
nature as to affect adversely the economies of the primary commodity producing countries;
( c) The Managing Director shall, consistent with
the criteria set forth respecting the nature and the utilization of contributions, endeavour to make the fullest
possible use of available currencies and of contributions
in kind;
( d) Contributions shall be made without limitation
to a specific recipient country or for a specific project;
( e) To the end that the multilateral character of the
Capital Development Fund shall be strictly respected,
no contributing State shaII receive special treatment
with respect to its contribution nor shall negotiations
for the use of contributions take place between contributing and receiving countries.
ARTICLE V

Forms of assistance: operations
1. The Capital Development Fund shaII extend both
grants and loans.

2. Loans extended by the Capital Development Fund
shaII have long periods of amortization, low rates of
interest, or be free of interest and generally be extended
on terms comparing favourably with those of loans extended by other international lending institutions.
3. Assistance shall be extended after the conclusion
of an agreement between the Capital Development Fund
and the recipient Government. In the case of loans, the
agreement shaII specify the date of maturity, rate of
interest and currency of repayment of the loan, taking
into consideration the recipient State's economic position, as shown, for example, by its balance of payments.
4. The Capital Development Fund may, when and
to the extent it deems appropriate in the light of all the
circumstances, including the financial and economic
situation and prospects of the recipient State, agree, subject to such conditions as it may determine, to a relaxation or other modification of the terms on which any
loan shall have been provided.
ARTICLE VI

Formulation, submission and consideration of requests
for assistance
1. In requesting assistance from the Capital Development Fund, Governments shall present precise statements concerning the use they intend to make of such
assistance, and appropriate data relating to the technical
nature and economic appraisal of projects or plans of
general economic development for which assistance is
requested.
2. Governments requesting assistance from the Capital Development Fund shall inform the Fund of their
current or intended efforts either with regard to the
specific projects to be assisted by the Capital Development Fund or with regard to related projects or other
economic programmes.
3. Each Government, in requesting assistance from
the Capital Development Fund, shall designate an appropriate authority with which the Capital Development
Fund may communicate with regard to questions which
might arise from the request~
4. In considering requests for assistance, the Capital
Development Fund shall :
(a) Be guided by considerations such as the economic merits of the development plan or project envisaged and its potential contribution to the country's
over-all economic development ;
( b) Give importance to the desirability of maintaining a reasonable geographical balance in allocations ;
( c) Utilize as much as possible the experience and
services of the United Nations, including the regional
economic commissions, the United Nations Economic
and Social Office in Beirut, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and the United Nations Development Programme, and the specialized
agencies, and also those of the regional development
banks.
ARTICLE

VII

General responsibilities of recipient Governments
1. Recipient Governments should ensure the effective
utilization of the assistance furnished by the Capital
Development Fund.
2. Recipient Governments shall maintain the records
required by the Capital Development Fund in connexion
with the administration of its assistance and shall report

General Aseembly-Twenty-first Session

36

fully on the utilization of the assistance granted by the
Capital Development Fund either directly to Governments or to any entity having juridical personality.
ARTICLE VIII

Organization and management
1. The immediate intergovernmental control of the
policies and operations of the Capital Development
Fund shall be exercised by an Executive Board. It shall
have final authority for the approval of grants and loans
submitted to it by the Managing Director. It shall adopt
its own rules of procedure.
2. The Executive Board shall review all the activities
of the Capital Development Fund and shall report annually to the General Assembly through the Economic
and Social Council. The Council may transmit to the
Capital Development Fund and to the General Assembly such comments on the report as it may deem necessary.
3. The General Assembly will review the progress
and the general policies of the Capital Development
Fund as a separate item of its agenda and make any
appropriate recommendations.
4. The Executive Board shall consist of the representatives of twenty-four States Members of the United
Nations or members of the specialized agencies or of
the International Atomic Energy Agency.
5. The members of the Executive Board shall be
elected by the General Assembly. The first election shall
take place at the twenty-second session of the General
Assembly.
6. There shall be equitable representation on the
Executive Board of economically more developed countries, on the one hand, having due regard to their
contributions to the Capital Development Fund, and of
developing countries, on the other hand, taking into
account the need for equitable geographical distribution
among the latter members.
7. The members of the Executive Board shall be
elected for a term of three years, provided, however,
that, of the members elected at the first election the
terms of one third of the members shall expire at the
end of one year and the terms of a further one third of
the members at the end of two years. Retiring members
shall be eligible for re-election.
8. The Executive Board shall meet at least once a
year and as often as may be necessary for the conduct
of the Fund's work.
9. The Managing Director of the Capital Development Fund shall participate without vote in the deliberations of the Executive Board.
ARTICLE IX

Managing Director and staff
1. The chief executive officer of the Capital Development _Fun1 shall ~e the Managing Director, who shall
exercise his functions under the general direction of
t~e E~ecu!ive Board. Subj_ect to such general and specific d1recttyes as_ may be given by the Executive Board,
the Managing Director shall have the over-all responsibility for the operations of the Capital Development
Fund. He shall submit to the Executive Board together with his recommendations, requests for g;ants
and for loans by Governments. He shall report to the
Executive Board on the operations of the Capital De-

velopment Fund, including the status of contributions
and other financial matters.
2. The Managing Director shall be appointed by the
Secretary-General of the United Nations. The appointment shall be subject to confirmation by the General
Assembly.
3. The Managing Director shall be appointed for a
term of four years, the first term to begin on 1 January

1968.
4. The Managing Director shall be assisted by the
requisite number of staff members. He may also, as
required, engage expert consultants. The selection of
the officials and consultants shall be made in accordance
with Article 101 of the Charter of the United Nations.
5. The Managing Director shall, to the maximum
extent possible, make effective use of the existing facilities of the United Nations, including those of the regional economic commissions, the United Nations Economic and Social Office in Beirut, the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization, the United
Nations Development Programme, the regional development banks, the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency.
ARTICLE X

Co-operation and co-ordination with other organs of the
United Nations and other organizations
1. Without prejudice to the independence of its activities, and in accordance with this statute, the Capital
Development Fund shall establish and maintain close
and continuing working relationships with the competent organs and agencies within the United Nations
system.
2. In its relations with such organs and agencies the
Capital Development Fund shall act in conformity with
the responsibilities of the Economic and Social Council
under the Charter of the United Nations, particularly
those of co-ordination, and with the relationship agreements with the agencies concerned.
3. There shall be a close and continuous working
relationship between the Capital Development Fund and
the regional economic commissions, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the United
~ ations Development Programme, the specialized agencies concerned with those fields of activity in which the
Capital Development Fund will operate and the International Atomic Energy Agency and also with the
regional development banks.
4. Appropriate methods shall be devised to achieve
the purpose set forth in paragraph 2 of this article.
Provision shall be made for the participation in the
meetings of the Executive Board of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the Executive Director
of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme or their representatives, and of
rep:esentatives_ of the specialized agencies, the International Atomic Energy Agency, the regional developmen! banks,. a~d, when appropriate, the regional economic commissions.
ARTICLE XI

Fmancial administration
The financial regulations for the Capital Development
Fu1;1d shall _be d~afted by th~ Secretary-General of the
Umted Nations, m consultation with the Managing Di-

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

rector, for approval by the General Assembly on the
recommendation of the Executive Board. In the preparation of these regulations, account shall be taken of
the special requirements of the Capital Development
Fund's operations.
ARTICLE XII
Future institutwnal arrangements
The General Assembly shall review, in the light of
experience, the effectiveness and further evolution of
these institutional arrangements with a view to deciding
upon such changes and improvements as might be necessary in order to meet fully the growing needs for development finance.
1492nd plenary meeting,
13 December 1966.
2187 (XXI). United Nations Institute for Training
and Research

The General A;ssembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1827 (XVII) of 18 December 1962, 1934 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963 and
2044 (XX) of 8 December 1965, and Economic and
Social Council resolutions 985 (XXXVI) of 2 August
1963, 1037 (XXXVII) of 15 August 1964, 1072
(XXXIX) of 26 July 1965 and 1138 (XLI) of 29
July 1966, relating to the United Nations Institute
for Training and Research,
Taking note of the Statute of the Institute, promulgated by the Secretary-General,24
Recognizing the importance of the role that the Institute can play in assisting the members of the United
Nations family of organizations through its various
programmes and activities, in particular those related
to the needs of developing countries,
1. Takes note of the report of the Executive Director
of the United Nations Institute for Training and Research to the General Assembly ;211
2. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution 1138 (XLI) ;
3. Welcomes the progress made by the Institute in
its various programmes and activities ;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments,
private institutions and individuals that have already
made or pledged financial contributions to the Institute.
1492nd plenary meeting,
13 December 1966.
2188 (XXI). General review of the programmes
and activities in the economic, social, technical co-operation and related fields of the
United Nations, the specialized agencies, the
International Atomic Energy Agency, the
United Nations Children's Fund and all other
institutions and agencies related to the
United Nations system

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the vital importance of the work of
the United Nations family of organizations in the field
of economic and social development,
:H Ibid.,
211 ilbid.,

agenda item 48, document A/6500, annex I.
document A/6500.

37

Conscious of its responsibilities under Chapter IX of
the Charter of the United Nations, and in particular
under Articles 58 and 60 thereof,
Reaffirming the central role assigned to the Economic
and Social Council in the economic, social and human
rights fields under Chapter X of the Charter,
Noting the agreements concluded between the United
Nations and the specialized agencies, under Articles 57
and 63 of the Charter, and the International Atomic
Energy Agency,
Bearing in mind the fact that the resources being made
available to carry out the work of the United Nations
family of organizations in the field of economic and
social development are limited, especiaUy in relation to
the growing needs of the developing countries,
Considering that this work, which has expanded
rapidly, grown more complex and changed its nature,
has evolved over a period of more than twenty years
on the basis of unrelated proposals rather than in accordance with a co-ordinated plan,
Considering further that this situation, among other
factors, has impaired not only the ability of the Economic and Social Council to co-ordinate the work of
the United Nations family of organizations in these
fields but also the ability of Member States to benefit
from that work,
Welcoming the enlargement of the Economic and
Social Council and the steps recently taken to enable
it to perform more purposefully its co-ordinating role
through its resolutions 1147 (XLI), 1151 (XLI) and
1154 (XLI) of 4 August 1966, and 1156 (XLI), 1171
(XLI), 1172 (XLI), 1173 (XLI), 1174 (XLI), 1175
(XLI), 1176 (XLI), 1177 )XL!) and 1181 (XLI) of
5 August 1966,
Welcoming further· the steps at present envisaged,
under General Assembly resolution 2150 (XXI) of 4
November 1966, to implement the recommendations of
the Ad H oc Committee of Experts to Examine the
Finances of the United Nations and the Specialized
Agencies,
Recognizing nevertheless that, in order to avoid the
duplication of programmes in the future and in order
to derive the maximum benefit at reasonable cost from
the operational and research activities of the United
Nations family of organizations in the field of economic
and social development, a full review of those activities,
without prejudice to the continuing work of the Economic and Social Council, is urgently required by Member States,
Recalling its resolution 2098 (XX) of 20 December
1965,
Convinced that such a review would bring about a
better organization of the international effort to attain
the objectives of the United Nations Development
Decade,
1. Requests the Economic and Social Council at its
resumed forty-first session, for the purpose of undertaking t_he tasks enumerated in paragraph 2 below, to
enlarge its Committee for Programme and Co-ordination
by five ~dditional Member States, to be designated by
the President of the General Assembly for a period not
exceeding three years and with due regard to equitable
geographical distribution; the enlarged Committee shall
be responsibl: to the Assembly and, under its authority,
to the Council ;
2. Requests the enlarged Committee to undertake,
as a matter of priority and in the light of the continuing
