s

UNITED
NATIONS

Security Council

Distr.
GENERAL
S/20988
22 November 1989
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH AND FRENCH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL
Following consultations with the members of the Security Council, the
President of the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the Council, at
its 2894th meeting, on 22 November 1989, in connection with the Council's
consideration of the item entitled "The situation in the Middle East",
"The members of the Security Council express their cleep indignation and
dismay over the assassination of Mr. Ren~ Moawad, President of the Lebanese
Republic, earlier today in Beirut. They pxpress their sympathy and
condolences to the family of the late President, to the Prime Minister and to
the Lebanese people.
"The members of the Security Council strongly condemn this cowardly,
criminal and terrorist act for what it is, an attack upon the unity of
Lebanon, the democratic processes and the process of national reconciliation.
"The members of the Security Council recall their statement of
7 November 1989, and reaffirm their support for the efforts undertaken by the
Tripartite High Committee of the League of Arab States and for the Taif
dgreement. These remain the only basis for guaranteeing th~ full sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity of Lebanon.
"The members of the Security Council reiterate their call of
7 November 1989 to all sectors of the Lebanese people to continue the process
of achieving the goals of the restoration of the Lebane~e State and the
establishment of renovated institutions that had started with the election of
Prasident Moawad and the appointment of Prime Minister Selim El-Hoss.
Democratic Lebanese institutions must be strongly supported and the process of
netional reconciliation must go forward. This is tho only way that Lebanese
national unity can be fully restored,
"The members of the Security Council solemnly reaffirm their support for
the Taif agreement, ratified by the Lebanese Parliament on 5 November 1989,
In this regard, they urge all Lebanese people to exercise restraint, to
rededicate themselves to the urgent task of national reconciliation and to
demonstrate their commitment to democratic processes.
89-30034

1297e (E)

I •••

S/20988

English
Page 2
"The members of the Security Council are convinced that all those who
seek to divide the people of Lebanon through such cowardly, criminal and

terrorist acts of violence cannot, and will not, succeed,"

,..

....
