S/PV.8103

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8103rd meeting

Wednesday, 15 November 2017, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cardi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Italy)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Allen
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (S/2017/907)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-38373 (E)
*1738373*

S/PV.8103

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 11 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (S/2017/907)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Bintou
Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/907, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Keita.
Ms. Keita: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the latest developments
in Darfur. I will provide a brief update on the situation
on the ground and on the efforts of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) to implement its mandate since the
publication of the latest report of the Secretary-General
of 27 October (S/2017/907). I will also touch upon the
ongoing reconfiguration of UNAMID.
The political process aimed at reaching a
settlement to the conflict through negotiations with
the non-signatory parties to the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur remains at an impasse. At the same
time, armed clashes between the Government and
those non-signatory parties have subsided, without any
incidents during the reporting period. Meanwhile, the
Government has begun the next stage of its disarmament
campaign — the compulsory arms collection — in
most parts of Darfur, for which it reportedly deployed
approximately 10,000 Rapid Support Forces (RSF)
to Darfur.
2/7

15/11/2017

As noted in the Secretary-General’s report, the
process has brought to the surface tensions involving
militia groups that are not part of Government forces.
Confrontations between Government forces and militias
were reported in Kass, South Darfur, and Kutum,
North Darfur, on 21 and 23 October, respectively.
On 10 November, Government forces supported by
Antonov aircraft clashed with the militia group allied
with Musa Hilal near Korma, North Darfur, resulting
in an unconfirmed number of casualties on both
sides. Government forces entered the Korma camp for
internally displaced persons (IDPs) in their search of
the militias, but no one was found or arrested.
In Zalingei, Central Darfur, Government forces
initiated house-to-house searches for weapons. They
attempted to enter the UNICEF compound in search
of weapons on 5 November, and local authorities have
since been warned to avoid such incidents. In South
Darfur, following demonstrations and clashes in the
Kaima IDP camp, which resulted in the death of five
IDPs. On 22 September, RSF in more than 100 gunmounted and armoured vehicles blocked roads within
the camp and detained one of the IDPs briefly on
2 November. Local authorities subsequently claimed
that that operation was a reconnaissance mission and
not part of the disarmament campaign.
Intercommunal violence also persists, particularly
in connection with Arab nomadic herders, albeit with
less intensity than in previous years. The number of
intercommunal incidents has gradually decreased from
11 cases recorded from April to June as compared to
10 cases from June to August, and eight cases from
August to October. The total number of casualties
in 2017 thus far numbers 234, compared to nearly
2,000 in 2013. Nevertheless, there were two cases of
intercommunal clashes in West Darfur in October.
In one of the incidents, near Kulbus, on 17 October,
Zaghawa and Rezeigat herders clashed over livestock,
and eight Rezeigat and 15 Zaghawa were killed. In
South Darfur, armed members of the Salamat tribe
killed three Fallata, near Graida, on 24 October, and
Fallata and Fur returnees were once again attacked by
Arab nomads near Menawashei on 27 October, and five
of them were killed.
In Sortony, North Darfur, tensions involving
internally displaced persons, the Arab community, and
the Sudan Liberation Army/Popular Defence (SLA/PD)
continue. On 7 November, UNAMID prevented a group
of armed Arabs allegedly looking for their livestock
17-38373

15/11/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

from entering the IDP site. During the encounter,
UNAMID observed armed SLA/PD elements assuming
offensive positions in the mountains surrounding
the camp. On 10 November, UNAMID once again
intercepted a group of Arab nomads firing randomly
in the outskirts of Sortony and claiming that their
livestock had been stolen by SLA/PD elements hiding
within the camp. They threatened to attack the IDP
camp unless SLA/PD withdrew from the site.
It is evident that Darfur today is different from what
it was like during UNAMID’s initial deployment, given
the overall level of improvement in terms of security.
The armed groups have largely been defeated, and the
ferocity of intercommunal violence has also decreased
over the past year. No new large-scale displacement has
taken place. However, those positive developments have
not resulted in the voluntary and sustainable return
of IDPs. Nearly one-third of the population in Darfur
remains displaced. That reflects anxiety over security,
uncertainty concerning the occupation of their land
and the lack of confidence regarding their present and
future prospects.
A key reason for that dilemma is the slow progress
that has been made in addressing critical issues for the
people of Darfur, such as land and other scarce-resource
management, accountability and security sector
reform. In that regard, the Government has been less
than proactive in the implementation of the outstanding
provisions of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
The remaining commissions and the fund of the Doha
Document remain inoperative and lack clear political
guidance and funding from the Government, which is
hampering efforts to address root causes.
UNAMID continues to do its utmost in the
context of its fulfilling its mandate by working with
local authorities and communities to promote grassroots reconciliation and stabilization. In that context,
it is equally important to augment the capacity of the
United Nations country team to support longer-term
peacebuilding-oriented activities. UNAMID and the
country team have finalized the integrated strategic
framework for 2017-2019, which sets out common
priorities and the division of labour concerning three
main themes: the rule of law and human rights, durable
solutions, and peacebuilding for human security. The
Secretariat is working with UNAMID and the country
team to develop a joint financing strategy for the
implementation of the framework to ensure that the

S/PV. 8103

drawdown of the peacekeeping mission is accompanied
by adequate transitional support.
With the closure of 11 team sites and the
accompanying reduction of military and police
personnel, the civilian staffing structure has been
reviewed and readjusted according to which the
Mission budget for 2017-2018 was revised. Regarding
the new two-pronged approach of UNAMID, the
Mission is devising State-focused stabilization plans
in cooperation with the United Nations country team,
which will focus UNAMID’s activities addressing
the specific needs of the population in the five states.
The Jebel Marra task force will become operational
on 1 January, and its concept is being finalized at
the moment.
In that connection, I regret to report that the
allocation of land for a new team site in Golo remains
pending, despite the intensive engagement with
the Government in Central Darfur, Khartoum and
here in New York. As Council members are aware,
the establishment of a new team site in Golo for the
Jebel Marra task force is an essential component
underpinning the concept of the reconfiguration of
UNAMID, and goes hand in hand with its withdrawal
from the more stable parts of Darfur. Despite the efforts
of the Sudanese Government to combat criminality, the
arms collection campaign and the deployment of the
Rapid Support Forces will require careful management
in order to minimize security risks. A further escalation
of tensions relating to disarmament could also affect
the communal dynamics among the militias, their
communities and other competing groups on the ground.
The Doha Document for Peace in Darfur is one of the
integral instruments for addressing such underlying
communal tensions and issues. Its full implementation
is an entry point for sustaining peace, as it touches
on the causes and consequences of the decades-long
conflict, including land, displacement and relationships
with nomadic herders, among other things.
The level of cooperation between UNAMID
and the Government of the Sudan has been positive
overall, although challenges remain in terms of access
restrictions and customs clearances at Port Sudan.
The Government’s commitment to complying with the
status of forces agreement, which also applies to the
allocation of land for a new team site in Golo, would
be greatly appreciated. In conclusion, I would like to
thank the Council for its continued support for the work
of UNAMID.

17-383733/7

S/PV.8103

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The President: I would like to thank Ms. Keita for
her comprehensive and interesting briefing.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I would first like to thank the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, Ms. Bintou
Keita, for her presentation of the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2017/907), and to take this opportunity to
congratulate her on her successful work.
Uruguay emphasizes the report’s message that
while there have been no open clashes between Sudanese
Government forces and armed groups in recent months,
the security and human rights situation in Darfur is still
unstable. We should also point out that the principal
remaining flashpoints continue to be intercommunal
clashes and hostilities, despite the reconciliation efforts
by the local authorities with the support of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and the United Nations country team.
My delegation believes it is critical that the
Government of the Sudan and the armed movements
abide by their unilateral declarations on the cessation
of hostilities and move on to the next steps in the peace
process, facilitated by the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel with support from the Special
Envoy for Sudan and South Sudan and the Joint Special
Representative and Head of UNAMID. Progress in
those areas would help to create the conditions needed
to effectively address root causes of the conflict such as
intercommunal conflicts and to safely return the more
than 2 million internally displaced persons in Darfur to
their homes.
We are pleased that UNAMID is moving ahead
with the reconfiguration process, in accordance with
the Council’s decision in resolution 2363 (2017). We
reiterate once again that the cooperation of the Sudanese
Government with the Security Council and UNAMID
is essential to the success of this transition. In that
connection, I should acknowledge the Government’s
cooperation and support in the repatriation of uniformed
units and the closure of operations bases. We call for
finalizing the preparations for the establishment of
a temporary operations base in Golo. We also note
that the general environment in which UNAMID is
operating has continued to show signs of improvement
and that we have seen a drop in the crime rate and in
restrictions on movement.
4/7

15/11/2017

However, the Mission is still dealing with various
logical challenges that continue to hamper its work,
including delays in issuing visas, especially for human
rights workers. We therefore urge the Government of
the Sudan to step up its efforts to remove the remaining
operational restrictions, fulfil all its obligations in that
regard and maintain the positive spirit that characterized
UNAMID’s review process. Although the Mission is in
a drawdown phase, we want to highlight the important
and still necessary role that it plays in protecting
civilians, for example by monitoring human rights
violations, conducting daily patrols and supporting
mediation in intercommunal conflicts.
In conclusion, I would like to express Uruguay’s
appreciation to all UNAMID personnel, the United
Nations country team in the Sudan and the humanitarian
workers who work tirelessly and often in difficult
conditions to achieve sustainable peace in Darfur.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, Ms. Bintou
Keita, for her presentation of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) (S/2017/907) and for
the progress that has been made in implementing the
recommendations established in the wake of the latest
strategic review of UNAMID.
We want to highlight some of the positive aspects
mentioned in the report, which we see as the result of
the joint efforts of the African Union, the Government
of the Sudan and the United Nations. In the first place,
the fact that there were no clashes between the Sudanese
Government and rebel groups in Darfur during this
period is a major improvement, enabling the parties to
focus their efforts on the political process, address the
root causes of the conflict and promote development
and peacebuilding in Darfur.
We appreciate the Government’s efforts to promote
the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur. As we have frequently said, the only possible
solution to the situation in Darfur is through a political
process that can enable the parties to resolve their
pending issues, especially disputes about land ownership
and management, intercommunal conflicts, disarming
the civilian population and the militia, and a permanent
ceasefire. We must settle the differences regarding the
Document and we call on the non-signatory parties to
engage in constructive dialogue with the Government.
17-38373

15/11/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In that regard, we commend the initiatives taken by
Mr. Thabo Mbeki, the Chairperson of the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel tasked with
implementing the recommendations for the Sudan and
South Sudan, and Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo, the Joint
Special Representative for Darfur, together with all
the staff of UNAMID and Mr. Nicholas Haysom, the
Special Envoy for Sudan and South Sudan.
Secondly, we would like to underscore the
improvements in the operating environment and the
decrease in obstructions to the free movement of
UNAMID and humanitarian personnel, as well as
in crime. There have been no obstructions of aerial
movements, humanitarian activities have not been
significantly restricted, and in Jebel Marra progress
has even been made in obtaining visas and authorizing
the passage of cargoes from Port Sudan, as well as
preparations for establishing an operations base in
Golo. That is all significant progress. While some
problems will still have to be addressed, there have been
clear improvements. We encourage the Government to
continue its cooperation with UNAMID in accordance
with the status of forces agreement.
Thirdly, the relative stability in the humanitarian
situation and the fact that no major displacements
have been reported in Darfur is a good sign. However,
the spread of disease and the effects of flooding are
worrying. We support the efforts of the World Health
Organization, UNICEF and humanitarian workers to
contain the situation and urge them to cooperate and
facilitate their work so as to help those affected as
effectively as possible. We must also continue our efforts
to improve the humanitarian situation for the internally
displaced. Although the cases of abuse, human rights
violations and other crimes have decreased compared
with the previous period, we must redouble our efforts
to put a stop to cases of illegal detention and violence
against women and girls, particularly sexual and
gender-based violence, and promote access to justice
for women.
It is clear that one of the major current challenges
ahead lies in reducing tensions surrounding the weapons
collection, demobilization and reintegration promoted
by the Government. We believe that the success of
these processes is necessary to ensure lasting peace
and that we must avoid any possible division while
encouraging the engagement of the civilian population
and militia with this process. This governmental
campaign, which is in line with the peacebuilding

S/PV. 8103

process led by the United Nations, needs the support of
the international community.
Today, the Sudan requires the joint work of the
African Union, the United Nations and the international
community in general in order to pursue its development
and peacebuilding efforts in Darfur. It is critical to
ensure State authority over its entire territory; that the
rule of law is established; that institutions, the police
and justice are strengthened; and that processes of
reconciliation and development projects are promoted.
Regarding the latter, we welcome the measures being
taken to address the difficult economic situation in
Darfur, such as the lifting of the unilateral sanctions
imposed by the United States on the Sudan. We also
believe that the time has come for the sanctions imposed
by the Security Council to be lifted.
In closing, we commend the progress made in
reconfiguring UNAMID. We must strengthen the
capacities of the United Nations country team so
as to ensure the successful withdrawal of the hybrid
operation. This must be a joint effort of the Government
and interested parties, together with the United Nations.
We thank UNAMID for its dedication and efforts in
seeking to restore peace in Darfur.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for the report submitted on his behalf to the Council
(S/2017/907). I would also like to thank the Under
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations for his
report. I further thank the Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Ms. Bintou Keita, and
express our great appreciation for the briefing she has
just delivered. We welcome her as a messenger for
peace to New York, as she was a messenger for peace in
Darfur before assuming her new position here.
It is probably appropriate to mention the fact that
the 2011 Doha agreement is an international agreement
concluded under the auspices of the United Nations,
the African Union and the League of Arab States.
However, up until June, the agreement — in our
view and in general — has been partially flouted by
the Council. Nevertheless, through our rather limited
national resources, we have continued to implement
the agreement with the support of a few countries,
particularly the State of Qatar. Today, and as in all similar
instances when a peace agreement is achieved — for

17-383735/7

S/PV.8103

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

example, as was the case in Colombia recently — we
believe that the United Nations should take a collective
stand for peace and leverage all of its weight to advance
the peacebuilding stage in Darfur, specifically in terms
of the need for humanitarian assistance.
In that regard, we believe that resolution 2363
(2017) is appropriate. It calls for the onset of the
gradual drawdown and reconfiguration of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), paving the way for the situation in Darfur
to advance to a new stage of peacebuilding and the
consolidation of stability, security and peace in all
states of Darfur, except for a pocket of land that is rather
limited in terms of surface area, located in Jebel Marra.
Jebel Marra, as the Council is aware, is a region of
Central Darfur state, which is one of the five states that
constitute greater Darfur. The resolution further echoes
the ongoing calls of the Sudanese Government since
2015 with respect to the need to take into account and
adapt to the major changes that Darfur has experienced
and that have transformed the dynamics of the conflict.
Today the fighting has stopped between the
Government and armed groups, which have become
active outside the country. Furthermore, the steady
implementation of the provisions of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur and of significant
measures adopted to resolve the conflict has enabled
the Sudanese Government and its partners to pursue
projects that address the root causes of the conflict
and, at the same time, to tackle phenomena arising
from this conflict, such as displacement and the
circulation of weapons, through development projects
and the delivery of services. We are fully aware of the
challenges plaguing this phase, and we urge the Council
to continue its collaboration in order to enable us to
tackle these challenges together. We would also point
to the important measures adopted by the Sudanese
Government, including the arms collection campaign.
If I may, I should like to clarify a few points.
First, the Government of the Sudan, in dealing
with the phenomena arising from the conflict, has
announced a campaign to collect arms voluntarily
from the hands of citizens, under the supervision of
the First Vice-President of the Republic and the Prime
Minister, who have conducted the campaign with the
relevant parties at the state and federal levels. The
campaign is beginning to bear fruit. The first stage
has been concluded to the letter of the announced plan.
6/7

15/11/2017

All reports point to the fact that it has enjoyed deal
success. The second stage will be launched shortly to
implement the law on weapons and munitions so as to
limit their possession to the regular armed forces and
those with permits from the competent authorities. All
those who breach this law will be stripped of their arms
and brought to justice.
Before the Council, we hereby announce that the
Government of the Sudan is determined to continue
implementing this plan and its provisions in order to
ensure that the law prevails over those who violate
it, regardless of any other consideration. UNAMID
plays an important role in assisting the Government
in the arms collection campaign and in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. This constitutes
a fundamental priority in the current stage and an
important aspect of the UNAMID mandate.
With regard to the unverified, albeit insignificant,
information echoed in the report, we would like to draw
the Council’s attention to a point raised in the past by
the former Under-Secretary General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Hervé Ladsous, to the effect that it
is high time for the United Nations to rely on its own
information rather than on information from other
sources. The same remarks were echoed by the former
Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki Moon, and are currently
underscored by Secretary-General Guterres.
We commend the measures adopted by UNAMID to
date within the framework of the implementation of the
recommendations of resolution 2363 (2017). Pursuant
to that resolution, UNAMID has closed 11 sites as a
first step, and we trust that this action will continue in
order to implement the second stage of its drawdown
and reconfiguration plan, which was adopted by the
Council in June in order to pave the way for the further
drawdown of UNAMID forces and their ultimate
withdrawal from the Sudan as soon as possible.
I would like to reaffirm the Government’s longstanding position in favour of enabling UNAMID to
fully implement its mandate. Previous reports and the
current report have attested to this cooperation in all
areas, particularly with regard to the customs clearance
of containers and the issuance of visas and access and
movement permits for the Mission and the humanitarian
partners, as well the response to UNAMID’s request to
open a temporary operational base in the Golo region,
for which the procedures are being conducted in a
proper manner.
17-38373

15/11/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Fifteen years have passed since some outlaws
from the remnants of armed groups took up arms
and persistently refused throughout all these years to
take part in any national, regional or United Nations
initiatives for peace. Today, as we approach 2018,
the only thing left for them to do is spread false and
misleading information. We are confident that the
Secretariat will not attribute much importance to such
allegations and that it will fully verify any information
prior to endorsing it, as required by the relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions.
Council members may rest assured that the
Government of the Sudan is doing everything it can
to achieve lasting peace and stability in Darfur. In
several areas, the Government is striving to deal with
the phenomena that have arisen from the conflict.
For example, the Sudanese Government has set up
development plans and programmes that would lift
Darfur from the cycle of poverty into productivity and
self-sufficiency.
The nature of the conflict in Darfur has shifted and
there have been no clashes with armed groups for almost
two years. We are entering a new phase in which the
State will be able to enjoy absolute sovereignty through
its different manifestations. Therefore, logically and
politically, it is necessary to revisit the sanctions that
were imposed 12 years ago when resolution 1591
(2005) was adopted in 2005. There is no doubt that
this step would constitute a recognition of the reality
of the current situation, as we have previously stated.
We are awaiting a positive response and are certainly

S/PV. 8103

open to ideas and proposals from the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.
The humanitarian situation remains a key priority
for the Government of the Sudan. In spite of an increase
in the number of displaced persons voluntarily returning
to their villages, the continuing presence of refugee
camps in Darfur is no longer justified following the
restoration of peace, stability and security, especially
given that the peace partners in Darfur have made
considerable efforts to prepare and equip villages,
thereby ensuring better conditions for people to
voluntarily return by providing basic services. Local
and international efforts must continue in order to
encourage displaced persons to return voluntarily, and
we have developed a plan to address the situation based
on three options that could produce effective solutions
to this phenomenon.
In conclusion, we commend the tireless efforts
being made to conclude the peace process. We once
again welcome this step towards peace, which is
synonymous with development and will certainly help
us to end the conflict. My country’s delegation would
like to thank UNAMID for its efforts in all areas, as
well as the peacekeepers for their sacrifices over the
years. We also thank the troop- and police-contributing
countries and stand ready to cooperate with all regional
and international partners until all UNAMID personnel
are withdrawn from the Sudan, following the full and
successful completion of their mandate.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

17-383737/7
