V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committe~_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _l_2_7

financing of agricultural development, and through an
increase in lending by the World Bank to the agricultural
sector in Africa;
8. Takes note of the efforts already undertaken by
African countries in the field of food and the formulation
of agricultural policies, and encourages them to pursue and
strengthen these efforts, especially in the definition and
implementation of national food strategies, plans and programmes;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session, through the Economic and Social Council at its second regular session of
1985, a progress report on the implementation of the present resolution, with particular emphasis on the role and
activities of the United Nations system in assisting the
African countries towards the solution of their food and
agricultural problems.
103rd plenary meeting
I 7 December 1984

39/166. Food and agricultural problems
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration and the Programme of Action
on the Establishment of a New International Economic
Order, contained in its resolutions 320 I (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of I May 1974, the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States, contained in its resolution 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 1974, its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of I 6
September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation, and the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade, contained in the annex to its resolution 35/56 of 5
December 1980,
Stressing the imperative need to keep food and
agricultural issues at the centre of global attention,
Having considered the grave situation of food and agriculture in many developing countries, especially the critical and deteriorating situation in Africa, further exacerbated by prolonged drought and accelerating desertification,
and the persistent problem of food shortages in food-deficit developing countries, particularly the least developed
countries,
Recognizing that, although the overall aggregate world
food supply situation has steadily improved over the past
decade, the numbers of hungry and malnourished are
increasing and the risks of food insecurity are now greater
for many developing countries, and that the situation thus
demands additional efforts,
Reaffirming that food and agricultural problems in
de'1eloping countries should be considered in a comprehensive manner in their different dimensions, as well as in
their immediate short-term and long-term perspectives,
Reaffirming the Universal Declaration on the Eradication of Hunger and Malnutrition, adopted ten years ago by
the World Food Conference, 14 and the Programme of
Action adopted by the World Conference on Agrarian
Reform and Rural Development, 15
I. Reaffirms its resolutions 38/ 158 of 19 December
1983 on food problems and 38/159 of I 9 December 1983
on the critical situation of food and agriculture in Africa,
as well as all other relevant resolutions concerning food
14 Report of the World Food Conference, Rome, 5-16 Novemher /9 7 4
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E. 75.11.A.3), chap. I.
1S See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Report o/
the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development, Rome,
12-20 July 1979 (WCARRD/REP), part one

and agriculture, and calls for their immediate and effective
implementation;
2. Welcomes the conclusions and recommendations of
the World Food Council at its tenth ministerial session,
held at Addis Ababa from 11 to 15 June 1984; 12
3. Welcomes the ninth annual report of the Committee
on Food Aid Policies and Programmes; 16
4. Urges the international community, on the occasion
of the tenth anniversary of the World Food Conference, to
rededicate itself to the objective of that Conference and
intensify concerted efforts for the fulfilment of its commitment to eliminate hunger and malnutrition as soon as possible, and definitely by the end of the present century, and
in this regard, calls upon Governments and international
organizations to give particular attention to the measures
agreed to by the World Food Council at its tenth ministerial session as the major tasks for achieving the objectives
of that Conference;
5. Reaffirms that the maintenance of peace and security and the strengthening of international co-operation in
food and agriculture are important for improved economic
conditions and enhanced food security;
6. Reaffirms that the right to food is a universal human
right which should be guaranteed to all people, and, in that
context, believes in the general principle that food should
not be used as an instrument of political pressure;
7. Reaffirms that urgent action should be taken to
increase food production, which is one of the most important elements in meeting the food needs of the developing
countries, and that, in this regard, sustained efforts at the
national, regional and international levels should be pursued and that the national food strategies, plans and programmes of developing countries should play a central role
in the process of establishing priorities, in co-ordinating
national and international funding and in the application
of technology, in order to promote food production and
increase the national self-reliance of the developing
countries;
8. Calls upon the international community to support
the efforts of the developing countries facing constraints in
the development of their food and agricultural production
to enable them to achieve self-reliance;
9. Stresses that measures taken by developed countries
to reduce future food and agricultural production should
not adversely affect the food problems faced by developing
countries;
I0. Calls upon the international community to accord
greater support towards realization of the enlarged and
integrated concept of world food security, focusing on the
adequacy of food supplies and production, stability of food
supplies and markets, and security of access to supplies, as
defined by the Committee on World Food Security of the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
at its eighth session; 17
11. Stresses that significant advances in food and
agricultural research and technology and their application
in developing countries need to be sustained, improved
and made more widespread to encompass all of those
countries; in this context, the needs of the African
countries and the least developed countries should be given special attention;
12. Emphasizes the need to reverse any declining
trends in aid commitments to food and agriculture and
1" WFP CFA: I 71 I 9: transm11ted to the Economic and Social C'ounnl as
document E/ 1984/1 I 7.
1' See 0/ficiu/ Records of th<' (il'llerul Assemh/v, Thmr-e1ghth Ses.rnm.
,\'111111!,·mcNi N(i_ /Q (A '38 f9}, part one, para. 44 •
1

128

General Assembly- Thirty-ninth Session

calls upon the international community, particularly the
developed countries, to increase the flow of resources to
adequate levels, through all channels, in support of programmes and policies for increasing food and agricultural
production and raising nutritional standards in the developing countries, particularly in Africa and the least
developed countries, keeping in view the proposal made
by the Executive Director of the World Food Council at its
tenth session for increases of at least $5 billion in external
resources over five years, starting in 1986, in roughly equal
proportions for both capital and programme assistance, to
be channelled through existing agencies and programmes; 18
13. Stresses the need for the successful completion of
the first replenishment of the International Fund for
Agricultural Development, and urges all countries concerned, bearing in mind the particular contribution of the
developed countries, to reach agreement on a priority basis
for the second replenishment, in order to enable the Fund
to continue its effective contribution at an adequate level;
14. Further urges developed countries to provide supplementary financing for the seventh replenishment of the
International Development Association in order to cover
the shortfall and enable the Association to increase its
assistance to developing countries, particularly in the
development of food and agriculture;
15. Further stresses the need to ensure achievement of
the agreed target for regular resources of the World Food
Programme of $1.35 billion for the biennium 19851986; 19
16. Emphasizes the need for effective implementation
of the 1980 Food Aid Convention, 20 which has been
extended until 30 June 1986;
17. Expresses deep concern that the food-financing
facility of the International Monetary Fund has been used
only on limited occasions since its establishment and, in
this regard, looks forward to the upcoming review of the
facility by the Fund;
18. Considers that improvement of the conditions of
farmer groups particularly affected by the small size of
holdings or other constraints is critical;
19. Emphasizes the role of women as part of the rural
family, calls for more policy attention to the role of
women in relation to food systems, and stresses the need
to involve women in the formulation, implementation and
follow-up of national food strategies, plans and projects;
20. Urges the international community to respond
immediately, adequately and in a concerted manner to the
initiative of the Secretary-General and the appeal of the
Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in favour of the African
countries threatened by severe food shortages by continuing and increasing emergency food and technical assistance
to those countries, as well as by augmenting all forms of
assistance towards rehabilitation of their food and
agricultural sectors;
21. Notes that the proliferation of import restrictions
and increasing export subsidization are seen to have contributed to international market instability and to growing
resource allocation distortions in developed and developing countries, that all countries should demonstrate the

requisite political will by refraining from creating tariff
obstacles to agricultural imports, especially those from
developing countries, and that exporting countries should
endeavour to limit export subsidies and analogous practices which might hinder trade, especially that of developing countries;
22. Stresses, inter alia, that in order to attain an overall
solution of food and agricultural problems, efforts should
be made to resolve the serious financial problems in general, and liquidity problems in particular, confronting the
developing countries, which are caused to a large degree by
the impact of the increases in interest rates;

18 Jbid., Thirty-ninth Session. Supplement No. /9 (A/39/19). part one.
para. 57.
19See WFP/CFA:15119, para. 42.
20 For the text of the Convention. sec TDIWHEA T.6/ 13.
21 See Official Records of the General Assemhfr. Thtrtv-first Se.rnon. Sup
plement No. 25 (A/31/25). annex I.
22 /hid .. Thtrtr-second Se.rnon. Supplement _i,;o }., (A/32125). annex I

23 /hid .. Thmv-sixth Session. Supplement No. 25 (A/36/25 and Corr. I).
annex I.
24 lhtd .. Thtrty-se,·enth Sessum, Supplement No. 25 (A/37125). pan two.
annex.
25 See A/311197. annex IV. sect. B.
·' 6 see A/351419-Sll4129. annex I.

23. Reaffirms the commitment to sustained and
increased development assistance in the food sector, with a
strengthened role for multilateral co-operation and
improved international assistance co-ordination;
24. Stresses the need for strengthening subregional,
regional and interregional co-operation for the promotion
of food security and the development of agriculture in
developing countries and, in this context, calls upon the
relevant entities of the United Nations system to accord
priority support to economic and technical co-operation
among developing countries in food and agriculture;
25. Welcomes the comprehensive and systematic
review of the progress in agrarian reform and rural development carried out by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in the context of the implementation of the Programme of Action as adopted by the
World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development and looks forward to a similar review in four
years.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December I 984

39/167. Remnants of war
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3435 (XXX) of 9 December
I 97 5, 35/71 of 5 December 1980, 36/ l 88 of 17 December
1981, 37/215 of 20 December 1982 and 38/162 of 19
December 1983 concerning the problem of remnants of
war,
Recalling also decisions 80 (IV) of 9 April 1976,11 lO I
(V) of 25 May 1977, 22 9/5 of 25 May 1981 23 and 10/8 of
28 May 1982 24 of the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme,
Recalling further resolution 32 adopted by the Fifth
Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries, held at Colombo from 16 to 19 August
1976, 25 and resolution 26/ 11-P adopted by the Eleventh
Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers, held at
Islamabad from 17 to 22 May I 980, 26
Convinced that the responsibility for the removal of the
remnants of war should be borne by the countries that
planted them,
Recognizing that the presence of the material remnants
of war, including mines, in the territories of developing
countries seriously impedes their development efforts and
causes loss oflife and property,
