S/2006/997

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 December 2006
Original: English

Note by the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith a letter dated 18 December 2006 from
the Chairman of the Informal Working Group of the Security Council on General
Issues of Sanctions addressed to the President of the Security Council, enclosing the
report of the Informal Working Group (see annex).

06-68506 (E) 100107

*0668506*

S/2006/997

Annex
Letter dated 18 December 2006 from the Chairman of the
Informal Working Group of the Security Council on General
Issues of Sanctions addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith the report of the Informal Working
Group on General Issues of Sanctions, which represents a year-long effort of the
members, pursuant to their mandate “to develop general recommendations on how
to improve the effectiveness of United Nations sanctions” (see S/2005/841 of
29 December 2005).
I would appreciate it if the present letter and its annex were brought to the
attention of the members of the Security Council and issued as a document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Adamantios Th. Vassilakis
Chairman
Informal Working Group on General Issues of Sanctions

2

06-68506

S/2006/997

Report of the Informal Working Group of the Security
Council on General Issues of Sanctions
Contents
Page

I.

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

4

II.

Sanctions design, implementation, evaluation and follow-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2–7

4

III.

A.

Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

4

B.

Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4–6

5

C.

Evaluation and follow-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7

6

Monitoring and enforcement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8–13

6

A.

Working methods of expert groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

7

B.

Implementation of the recommendations of expert group reports . . . . . . . . . .

10

7

C.

Roster of experts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

11

8

D.

Information management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

8

E.

Visits to the region by chairpersons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

13

8

IV.

Committee working methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

14–16

9

V.

Methodological standards for reports of sanctions monitoring mechanisms
(criteria and best practices) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

17–32

10

A.

Common methodological standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

19–20

10

B.

Possible steps for clarifying methodological standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

21–30

11

C.

Other factors that affect methodological standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

31–32

12

Criteria and best practices for a standard format for reports of sanctions
monitoring mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

33–54

12

A.

Technical format of the reports of monitoring mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

34–40

13

B.

Standard contents of the reports of monitoring mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

41–54

13

VI.

06-68506

Paragraphs

3

S/2006/997

I. Introduction
1.
The members of the Informal Working Group on General Issues of Sanctions
held seven informal consultations pertaining to its mandate to “develop general
recommendations on how to improve the effectiveness of United Nations sanctions”
(S/2005/841), and approved the following best practices with respect to sanctions
design, implementation, evaluation and follow-up, committee working methods,
monitoring and enforcement, and methodological standards and reporting format for
expert groups.

II. Sanctions design, implementation, evaluation and follow-up
2.
For targeted sanctions to be effective, appropriate action must be taken at all
decision-making levels: the Security Council, the sanctions committee, Member
States and their administrative agencies. Proper design, implementation, ongoing
evaluation and follow-up of sanctions regimes are key elements that contribute to
the effectiveness of sanctions.

A.

Design
3.
Pre-assessment or early assessment and standard language and terminology are
essential ingredients for effective sanctions design, including accurate targeting. The
Security Council should:
(a) In drafting resolutions, give due consideration to the feasibility of
targeted sanctions and their implications, as well as the most appropriate mix of
targeted measures. If it is feasible and appropriate to prepare pre-assessment or early
assessment reports, they should be clear regarding the behaviour the Security
Council is seeking to change; the identity of the responsible actors/entities; the
means available to the target to take evasive action; and the possible humanitarian,
political, and economic impacts;
(b) Utilize standard language and terminology and consider the following
elements in its sanctions resolutions:
(i) To the extent possible, and as deemed feasible and appropriate, define in
general language dual-use items that are intended by the Council to be
included under the arms embargo;
(ii) Clearly define the scope of the sanctions, as well as the conditions and
criteria for their easing or lifting;
(iii) Standardize humanitarian and other exemptions to all targeted measures,
including arms embargoes, travel restrictions, aviation bans and financial
sanctions;
(iv) Provide for a credible mechanism to monitor the sanctions regime, and
ensure that full account is taken of logistical and budgetary support needed by
expert groups to fulfil their mandates, including the provision of an adequate
time period for inquiry and reporting. Failure to anticipate, budget and supply
adequate support, financial and otherwise, to expert groups can result in costly

4

06-68506

S/2006/997

delays in their field inquiries, in incomplete inquiries, and in unduly long gaps
between mandates;
(v) Encourage committees to draw up guidelines to ensure that the selection
of individuals and entities for listing is based on fair and clear procedures;
(vi) Encourage committees to conduct regular reviews of names on the list; to
ensure, to the degree possible, maximum specificity in identifying individuals
and entities to be targeted; and to adopt guidelines based on fair and clear
procedures for delisting early in a sanctions regime;
(vii) Urge donors, including States and international and regional
organizations with the capacity to do so, to offer appropriate technical and
financial assistance to States that need such assistance.

B.

Implementation
4.
Throughout a sanctions regime, the relevant committee should encourage
Member States to identify/establish national coordination mechanisms to improve
implementation of the sanctions regime by:
(a)

Maintaining commitment and ensuring national coordination:

(i) Inform and periodically remind Member States of the purpose of the
sanctions and of their duties under the relevant resolution;
(ii) Extend public recognition to Member States that complete their reporting
and implementation measures fully and in due time;
(iii) Encourage Member States to establish effective interdepartmental
coordination between relevant agencies and to identify central contact points
for the transmission of information about the implementation of targeted
sanctions;
(iv) Encourage Member States to cooperate through regional organizations to
identify best practices, cooperate with expert panels and sanctions committees
and report violations;
(b)

Assisting in building national capacity:

(i) Ensure that a lack of capacity to implement sanctions effectively is
specifically addressed by States lacking such capacity in their reports to
committees;
(ii) Invite States to seek technical assistance if they lack the capacity to
implement sanctions effectively;
(iii) Determine best practices for capacity-building and disseminate them to
Member States;
(iv) Seek resources for the Secretariat to establish a database of available
technical assistance for capacity-building;
(v) Encourage donors to bear in mind that any downward adjustment in the
level of aid and assistance to populations in targeted States, particularly in
cases where certain economic sectors (such as timber or diamonds) are

06-68506

5

S/2006/997

targeted, could affect how the population in the targeted State perceives the
aim of sanctions.
Strengthening Secretariat capacity
5.
It is recommended that the Security Council take note of the informal
background non-paper prepared by the Security Council Subsidiary Organs Branch,
stating that the proliferation of expert groups has strained its ability to provide
needed substantive, administrative, logistical and analytical support. The Security
Council should request the Secretary-General to explore ways to ensure that the
Secretariat is adequately staffed to fulfil effectively its mandated tasks. This could
be accomplished by retaining the current structure of ad hoc expert groups and
reallocating Secretariat resources to the Subsidiary Organs Branch so that it can
adequately provide support to expert groups.
6.
The Security Council should request the Secretary-General to explore ways to
provide the Secretariat with the necessary resources for maintaining an information
management system for the storage, retrieval and sharing of information among
expert groups. Such an information management system should use and integrate to
the fullest extent possible design elements that are already in use in the database of
the Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee.

C.

Evaluation and follow-up
7.

It is recommended that the Security Council:

(a) Conduct periodic review and evaluation of sanctions regimes, their
political impact and their unintended effects on civilian populations, bearing in mind
State obligations according to international law, and make adjustments, as
appropriate;
(b) Devise a communications strategy (targeted sanctions must be clearly
described and understood as measures to maintain international peace and security,
not as a punitive measure) and maintain continuous public information efforts
oriented towards civilian populations in the target State and in neighbouring States
on the rationale of sanctions in order to encourage compliance.

III. Monitoring and enforcement
8.
One of the significant innovations in the work of the Security Council in
recent years is the creation of independent expert groups to monitor the
implementation of sanctions. Monitoring arrangements are in place for most of the
active sanctions regimes, including Al-Qaida/Taliban, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Liberia, Somalia and the Sudan. These groups have made a
valuable contribution to the effort to detect and correct violations and to the overall
goal of enhancing compliance.

6

06-68506

S/2006/997

A.

Working methods of expert groups
9.
The working methods of expert groups have developed through a system of
trial and error. Any perception of less than rigorous standards in the conduct of any
aspect of their work can call into question the integrity of their entire reports. Some
recommended actions are:
(a) To establish clear guidelines for expert groups to consult in order to
ensure that, while these groups maintain their independence, their inquiries and
findings meet appropriately high standards (including reliability of sources; validity
of information; identifying names; and right of reply to individuals, entities and
States). The guidelines would be based on best practices, drafted in consultation
with monitoring experts and possibly other relevant parties, including Member
States, and take into consideration the distinct nature of Security Council sanctions
regimes and mandates;
(b) To establish, in consultation with monitoring experts, minimum standard
criteria for the format of expert group reports, taking into consideration the distinct
nature of Security Council sanctions regimes and mandates, and encourage a
practical and action-oriented approach;
(c) To encourage expert groups to clarify the terms of reference for their
work with the Committee at the outset, or at any time during their mandate;
(d) To promote increased cooperation and interaction among the various
expert groups to increase efficiency and decrease duplication of effort;
(e) To address the problem concerning the time required for the Secretariat
to appoint monitoring mechanisms and process their reports;
(f) To address the problem concerning the limited time available to the
monitoring experts to conduct their work (and how this affects the quality of their
work on the ground and report drafting).

B.

Implementation of the recommendations of expert group reports
10. A number of steps should be taken to improve the implementation of expert
group recommendations that are approved by the Security Council:
(a) Committees agree on a standardized format for the presentation of
experts’ recommendations for consideration, and prioritize recommendations
according to criteria such as urgency and ease of implementation;
(b) Identify the appropriate actor for each recommendation and initiate
action and follow-up;
(c) Write to States where an individual or State authority is alleged to have
violated sanctions, requesting a prompt response and corrective action and followup as the Committee deems necessary;
(d) Continue, on a case-by-case basis, to invite relevant parties, including
neighbouring States, to come to the Committee to exchange information on
sanctions implementation; seek further information from States alleged to have
violated sanctions; and make the outcome of the discussion public, perhaps in the
committee’s annual report;

06-68506

7

S/2006/997

(e) Incorporate guidance on committee follow-up action in the guidelines for
the conduct of work;
(f) The Security Council should seek to provide, in the event it chooses to
refrain from implementing a recommendation proposed by an expert group, an
explanation for its reasons, if and when it deems it appropriate.

C.

Roster of experts
11. In order to establish a standardized and transparent system for identifying
candidates for expert groups, the Secretariat set up some years ago an expert roster
of candidates drawn from a variety of sources, including Member State submissions,
academia and non-governmental organizations. Selection is based on the criteria of
specialized expertise in the area of competence and academic qualifications, with
due regard to equitable geographic distribution, gender balance and references. This
system could be improved by:
(a) Continuing periodic review of the interest and availability of candidates
and revising the roster accordingly;
(b) Instituting a transparent system of performance evaluation for members
of expert groups;
(c) Considering the possibility of engaging monitoring experts for longer
periods of time while avoiding the risk of compromising their independence;
(d) Increasing efforts to seek candidates with cultural and country-related
knowledge relevant to the mandates of monitoring mechanisms.

D.

Information management
12. The project to design a centralized, retrievable database for the documents and
information accumulated by expert groups and monitoring mechanisms should use
and integrate to the fullest extent possible design elements that are already in use in
the Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee-related database. Steps should also
be taken to:
(a) Identify additional ways to enhance the institutional memory of the
Secretariat with regard to the practice and precedent of sanctions administration;
(b) Establish a system for making such material available to expert groups at
the outset of their mandate.

E.

Visits to the region by chairpersons
13. Committee chairpersons should continue the practice of visits to the region of
targeted countries to monitor sanctions implementation, in accordance with the note
by the President of the Security Council dated 29 January 1999 (S/1999/92), and
report to the Council in instances of significant or serious non-compliance.

8

06-68506

S/2006/997

IV. Committee working methods
14. Increased information sharing in the sanctions process would enhance
transparency and contribute to better implementation of the sanctions measures. In
addition, providing populations in target States with more information about the
scope and purpose of sanctions would reduce their vulnerability to anti-sanctions
propaganda.
15. Increased transparency in the work of sanctions committees as well as
outreach to international media are some ways to address these issues. More use
could be made of advanced communication technology to increase the interaction of
various actors with the committees, while minimizing costs.
16.

The following are suggested ways to improve committee working methods:

Procedures
(a) Committees to harmonize guidelines, as they deem appropriate, including
procedures for listing and delisting, and publicize guidelines by note verbale to all
Member States, as well as by posting on committee websites;
(b) Make States’ reports publicly available on committee websites unless a
State specifically requests that its report be kept confidential;
(c) Provide a standard template to assist States in meeting reporting
requirements;
(d) Chairpersons to issue press releases and use other means to publicize
which States have submitted reports on implementation and encourage States, which
have not submitted reports, to do so, subject to the approval of the concerned
committee (currently, annual reports list only those States that have reported);
(e) Chairpersons to meet frequently to discuss common concerns, best
practices and ways to improve mutual cooperation;
(f) Committees, if they deem it appropriate, to include in their guidelines a
provision for regular reviews of “holds” placed by members;
Outreach
(g) Chairpersons to regularly brief (singly or jointly) non-members on the
status of the monitoring and implementation of sanctions. Open meetings of the
Security Council could also be convened for this purpose;
(h) Committees, as they deem feasible and appropriate, to announce all
meetings to the public (in the Journal of the United Nations and/or on their
websites) and seek to provide a provisional agenda and brief summary of decisions;
(i) Chairpersons to engage with the international media (including United
Nations Radio and Television in the field) to provide information on (i) the rationale
behind sanctions; (ii) the criteria for their lifting; (iii) problems involved with
monitoring and implementation; and (iv) sanctions violations and non-compliance
by States;
(j) Committees to improve public dissemination of the published reports of
the expert groups, while preserving the confidentiality of classified documents;

06-68506

9

S/2006/997

Interaction
(k) Committees to encourage regular inputs from target and neighbouring
States as to challenges they face in sanctions monitoring and implementation;
(l) Improve methods for routine engagement of regional and subregional
organizations in support of sanctions implementation by establishing channels for
exchanging information with such organizations (e.g. Economic Community of West
African States, African Union), including providing assistance to and receiving
assistance from such regional organizations;
(m) Improve communication links between the United Nations and
specialized international organizations, drawing their attention to actions in their
area of competence mentioned in Security Council resolutions, and to matters within
their competence identified in expert group reports (e.g. International Civil Aviation
Organization, World Customs Organization, Interpol, Kimberley Process);
(n) Strengthen interaction with non-governmental organizations, when
deemed necessary, on issues where they maintain a regional presence and explore
options to increase the opportunities for consultation with key private-sector actors
on sanctions-related issues.

V. Methodological standards for reports of sanctions
monitoring mechanisms (criteria and best practices)
17. The establishment of sanctions monitoring mechanisms is an important
innovation in the structure of Security Council sanctions regimes, which has
contributed to more effective sanctions implementation. Through their inquiries in
States affected by sanctions, these mechanisms have shed significant light on how
targeted sanctions, including arms embargoes, are implemented, as well as on
various possible ways that sanctions are violated. These mechanisms have
contributed to an understanding of both the nature and scope of obstacles to more
systematic compliance, thereby enhancing the overall capacity of the United Nations
to refine and tighten targeted sanctions measures.
18. The methodological standards used by monitoring mechanisms have evolved
with experience gained through their fact-finding work. Insufficiently supported
allegations of non-compliance and sanctions violations publicized in a United
Nations report could call into question the integrity of the entire report. For this
reason, there is room for further improvement of, as well as agreement on,
methodological standards for sanctions monitoring mechanisms.

A.

Common methodological standards
19. Sanctions monitoring mechanisms are established by the Security Council in
support of subsidiary organs. As such, they are organs with different and distinct
mandates, of independent, expert and non-judiciary character, with no subpoena
powers, whose primary role is to provide sanctions-related information to the
relevant committees. However, given that the findings of the monitoring
mechanisms (either their reports or documents or testimonies of their individual

10

06-68506

S/2006/997

members), may be used by judicial authorities, their methodological standards may
affect the credibility of the Organization.
20. Common methodological standards, allowing for differing mandates and
drawing on the best practices and lessons learned from the accumulated experience
of past and present sanctions monitoring mechanisms, could provide a useful
reference point for such mechanisms for identifying and verifying sanctions
violations and for evaluating the reliability of sources.

B.

Possible steps for clarifying methodological standards
Transparency and sources
21. Whenever possible, monitoring mechanisms should identify the sources of
information contained in their reports, ensure that such information is as transparent
and verifiable as possible to protect the credibility of findings and the integrity of
the process, and check and corroborate all citations and facts.
Documentary evidence
22. Monitoring mechanisms should rely on verified documents and, wherever
possible, on first-hand, on-site observations by the experts themselves, including
photographs.
Assertions corroborated by independent verifiable sources
23. Monitoring mechanisms should endeavour to ensure that their assertions are
corroborated by solid information and that their findings are substantiated by
credible sources.
Confidential sources
24. Monitoring mechanisms should take particular care when analysing the
reliability of confidential information, keeping in mind the identity and role of the
source of such information. Upholding the confidentiality of sources of information
regarding sanctions-busting or non-compliance may be necessary to ensure the
personal safety of individual sources. In all cases, efforts should be made to ensure
the veracity of information gained in confidence against independent and verifiable
sources.
25. While maintaining the confidentiality of certain sources, experts could provide
more clarification on such sources by attributing such information received from
States to an “official but confidential” source. Similarly, confidential information
obtained from an individual could be identified by referring to the office or
professional position of the individual.
Stating methodological standards
26. Monitoring mechanisms should, where appropriate, state their methodological
standards at the outset of each report and adhere to those standards.

06-68506

11

S/2006/997

Briefing on available sources
27. Monitoring mechanisms are assisted in their work by being informed of, or
receiving copies of guidelines and material from, previous monitoring mechanisms
and by being made aware of relevant resources available to them through the United
Nations system.
Opportunity to review, comment and respond
28. Monitoring mechanisms should emphasize impartiality and fairness during the
report drafting process, and make available to relevant parties (State authorities,
entities or individuals), if appropriate, any evidence of wrongdoing for their review,
comment and response, within a specified deadline. Rebuttals, with an assessment
of their credibility, and corrections regarding already published allegations, should
be included in subsequent reports.
Secretariat briefings
29. The Secretariat briefs newly established monitoring mechanisms at the outset
of their work, including on the legal status of individual experts and bodies,
coordination with other United Nations bodies on the ground, relationship with the
Security Council and the Secretary-General, administrative and personnel issues and
methodological standards.
30. Such briefings should be available when a monitoring mechanism is
established and each time it is re-established, in particular to ensure that all newly
appointed experts are briefed. In addition, these briefings could usefully be
expanded with respect to best practices and monitoring mechanisms could benefit
from access to legal advice from the Secretariat during the entire period of their
missions.

C.

Other factors that affect methodological standards
31. Ensuring the quality and reliability of monitoring mechanism reports can be
facilitated by the appointment of the best qualified experts.
32. The Security Council and its committees should be as precise and
unambiguous as possible concerning the measures imposed by resolutions and the
tasks mandated to monitoring mechanisms and should provide all guidance
requested by the mechanisms in a timely manner.

VI. Criteria and best practices for a standard format for reports
of sanctions monitoring mechanisms
33. In order to improve the format of the reports of sanctions monitoring
mechanisms and to make use of the best practices which these mechanisms have
developed over time through their experience with report writing, common
guidelines should be provided as a reference point for such mechanisms. The
common guidelines should take into account that monitoring mechanisms have
distinct mandates and work under different conditions. As such, these guidelines
should be non-binding.

12

06-68506

S/2006/997

A.

Technical format of the reports of monitoring mechanisms
34. The language of the reports of the monitoring mechanisms should be clear,
focused and concise.
35. The software used for the reports as well as the applied font, font size, spacing,
page numbering, etc. should adhere to a common standard set by the Secretariat and
provided to each monitoring mechanism in template form.
36. Illustrative material (including graphs, charts, maps and photographs) to be
included in the reports should be submitted digitally in a format which can be
imported by the standard software used for the reports.
37. Names of individuals, entities and places need to be spelled out consistently
throughout the document, and abbreviations should be avoided as much as possible.
When used for the first time, abbreviations should be spelled out and clearly
identified in the “abbreviations” section preceding the introductory section of the
report.
38. Reports should to be submitted to the Secretariat in an electronic format as
well as in a hard copy at least four weeks before the expected date of issuance stated
in the text of the resolution in order to allow sufficient time for editing and
translation. Monitoring mechanisms should nominate a single member to liaise with
the Secretariat on editing and translation matters.
39. The recommended 35-page limit for all United Nations reports should also
apply, to the greatest extent possible, to the reports of the monitoring mechanisms.
This limit should not include annexes, footnotes, photos, graphics or any other
additions to the main body of the report.
40. Monitoring mechanisms may wish to consider that experience has shown that
assigning one member of the monitoring mechanism to draft the report facilitates its
coherence, focus and consistency in drafting style.

B.

Standard contents of the reports of monitoring mechanisms
41. The following elements should be standard in any monitoring mechanism
report.
Abbreviations and glossary
42. Abbreviations should be used sparingly and be listed, together with a glossary
of terms used, for quick reference.
Summary
43. An executive summary not exceeding two pages is useful for identifying the
main findings and recommendations of a report.
Introduction
44. The introduction should state the monitoring mechanism’s mandate or refer to
relevant Security Council resolutions.

06-68506

13

S/2006/997

Composition of the monitoring mechanism
45. Reports may identify the members of the monitoring mechanism and their
areas of expertise, and name consultants that have assisted the monitoring
mechanism in its work.
Methodology
46. A section on methodology is vital as it allows the reader to become familiar
with the methodology through which the monitoring mechanisms arrived at their
conclusions. In this section, the monitoring mechanisms could also elaborate on the
challenges encountered in carrying out their work.
Political context
47. Most monitoring mechanism reports make reference to the relevant political
situation. This section should be brief and concise and confine itself as much as
possible to issues that bear directly on the mechanism’s mandate.
Analysis of the implementation of sanctions
48. The basis on which the analysis of the implementation of sanctions is made
and the arguments leading to its conclusions should be clearly spelled out. Case
studies should be applied and backed up with primary documents to allow for
greater depth and emphasis regarding the analysis.
Recommendations
49. Whether placed at the end of each section of the report, or grouped at the end
of the report, recommendations should prescribe specific and practical steps to be
taken based on critical findings or observations. Whereas grouping
recommendations at the end of a report may facilitate easy access, they may be
placed within a text as well when they flow from a particular argument.
Accuracy in reporting
50. When drafting reports, monitoring mechanisms should provide concrete
information concerning allegations of non-compliance or sanctions violations and
pay due attention to accurate wording in describing such allegations and in
identifying names, whether of States, individuals or entities.
Annexes
51. Annexes should be used to provide as much “hard” evidence (images, copies
of documents and tables containing detailed technical information) as possible to
substantiate the findings contained in the report. Annexes need to be legible and
illustrative and should be retyped when appropriate.
52. Annexes that reproduce documentation, such as false end-user certificates, are
particularly effective. If figures are provided, a footnote indicating the source
should be included, for example, for figures of the value or volume of shipments in
sanctioned commodities.

14

06-68506

S/2006/997

Activities and meetings
53. Reports should include an annex summarizing the activities of the monitoring
mechanisms and listing relevant meetings.
Index
54.

06-68506

The inclusion of an index could be useful for a selective reading of the report.

15
