United Nations

A/RES/59/254

General Assembly

Distr.: General
3 March 2005

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 38 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 23 December 2004
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/59/L.33/Rev.1 and Add.1)]

59/254. New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in
implementation and international support
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 57/2 of 16 September 2002 on the United Nations
Declaration on the New Partnership for Africa’s Development,
Recalling also its resolution 57/7 of 4 November 2002 on the final review and
appraisal of the United Nations New Agenda for the Development of Africa in the
1990s and support for the New Partnership for Africa’s Development and resolution
58/233 of 23 December 2003 entitled “New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and international support”,
Bearing in mind that African countries have primary responsibility for their
own economic and social development and that the role of national policies and
development strategies cannot be overemphasized, also the need for their
development efforts to be supported by an enabling international economic
environment, and in this regard recalling the support given by the International
Conference on Financing for Development to the New Partnership, 1
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General entitled “New
Partnership for Africa’s Development: second consolidated report on progress in
implementation and international support”, 2
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;2

2.
Reaffirms its full support for the implementation of the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development; 3
3.
Also reaffirms its full support for the implementation of the Declaration
of Commitment on HIV/AIDS, adopted at the twenty-sixth special session of the
General Assembly on 27 June 2001; 4
_______________
1

See Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico,
18–22 March 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
2
A/59/206.
3
A/57/304, annex.
4
Resolution S-26/2, annex.

04-49150

A/RES/59/254

4.
Recognizes the progress made in the implementation of the New
Partnership as well as regional and international support for the New Partnership,
while acknowledging that much needs to be done in the implementation of the New
Partnership;
Welcomes the establishment of a Peace and Security Council within the
5.
African Union, stresses that conflict prevention, management and resolution and
post-conflict consolidation are essential for the achievement of the objectives of the
New Partnership, and welcomes, in this regard, the cooperation and support granted
by the United Nations and development partners to the African regional and
subregional organizations in the implementation of the New Partnership;
I
Actions by African countries and organizations
6.
Welcomes the progress made by the African countries in fulfilling their
commitments in the implementation of the New Partnership to deepen democracy,
human rights, good governance and sound economic management, and encourages
African countries, with the participation of stakeholders, including civil society and
the private sector, to continue their efforts in this regard by developing and
strengthening institutions for governance and the development of the region;
Also welcomes the progress that has been achieved in implementing the
7.
African Peer Review Mechanism, including through the establishment of a trust
fund to support the activities of the Mechanism, to which participating countries
will make financial contributions, and the launching of support missions to several
African countries;
Further welcomes the efforts made by African countries in developing
8.
sectoral policy frameworks and implementing specific programmes of the New
Partnership, including by establishing expenditure targets in sectoral priority areas
of the New Partnership, and encourages them to continue to integrate the priorities
of the New Partnership into their national development plans and frameworks,
including poverty reduction strategies, where they exist;
Emphasizes the importance for African countries of continuing to
9.
coordinate, on the basis of national strategies and priorities, all types of external
assistance, including that provided by multilateral organizations, in order to
integrate effectively such assistance into their development processes;
10. Welcomes the commitment of African countries to advance the
implementation of the New Partnership, acknowledges, in this regard, the role of the
Heads of State and Government Implementation Committee of the New Partnership
in furthering the implementation of the New Partnership, and welcomes the New
Partnership summits held so far, as well as the upcoming summits;
11. Also welcomes the approval by the Heads of State and Government
Implementation Committee of the New Partnership of priority infrastructural and
capacity-building projects to be implemented by the regional economic
communities;
12. Encourages the further integration of the priorities and objectives of the
New Partnership into the programmes of the regional structures and organizations,
as well as programmes for the African least developed countries;
13. Appreciates the increasing efforts of African countries in mainstreaming
a gender perspective and empowerment of women in the implementation of the New
2

A/RES/59/254

Partnership, and in this regard welcomes the Solemn Declaration on Gender
Equality in Africa, adopted by the African Union at its third ordinary session in
Addis Ababa from 6 to 8 July 2004, 5 and encourages the African countries to track
progress in the full integration of women into African social, political and economic
life;
14. Emphasizes that progress in the implementation of the New Partnership
depends also on a favourable national and international environment for Africa’s
growth and development, including, inter alia, measures to promote a policy
environment conducive to private sector development and entrepreneurship;
II
Response of the international community
15. Welcomes the efforts by development partners to strengthen cooperation
with the New Partnership;
16. Acknowledges the importance of various initiatives, such as the Tokyo
International Conference on African Development process, the Africa Action Plan of
the Group of Eight, initiated at Genoa, Italy, as developed at the Summit of the
Group held in Kananaskis, Canada, in 2002, and furthered at their subsequent
Summits held in Evian, France, in 2003, and at Sea Island, United States of
America, in 2004, as well as the Africa Partnership Forum in support of the
implementation of the New Partnership, emphasizes, in this regard, the importance
of effective coordination of such initiatives for Africa, and looks forward to the
forthcoming report of the Commission for Africa;
17. Welcomes the contribution made by Member States to the implementation
of the New Partnership in the context of South-South cooperation;
18. Stresses the need to mobilize additional resources for Africa’s
development through promoting South-South cooperation and trade and investment
as discussed at various forums, including the Asia-Africa Trade and Investment
Conference, held in Tokyo on 1 and 2 November 2004, under the auspices of the
Tokyo International Conference on African Development;
19. Welcomes the financial support extended by many of the development
partners to the various programmes of the New Partnership, and in this regard notes
with satisfaction that some developed countries have committed resources for the
infrastructure project preparation facility of the New Partnership and have provided
resources for institutional strengthening activities at the secretariat of the New
Partnership and in some regional economic communities;
20. Recalls that regional economic communities have a critical role to play in
the implementation of the New Partnership, and encourages development partners to
increase their support to enhance the capacities of these communities;
21. Urges continued attention to the need to continue to take measures to
address the challenges of poverty eradication and sustainable development in Africa,
including, as appropriate, debt relief, improved market access, support for the
private sector and entrepreneurship, enhanced official development assistance and
increased flows of foreign direct investment, as well as transfer of technology;

_______________
5

See African Union, document Assembly/AU/Decl.12 & 13 (III).

3

A/RES/59/254

22. Reiterates the need for the international community, relevant multilateral
institutions and developed countries to enhance coherence in their trade, investment,
aid and debt policies towards African countries;
23. Stresses the need to find comprehensive solutions for the debt problems
of African countries, and in this regard welcomes the decision to extend the sunset
clause of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative until 31 December 2006
and the ongoing work by the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank to
develop a forward-looking debt sustainability framework for heavily indebted poor
countries and low-income countries;
24. Welcomes the recent increase in official development assistance by many
of the development partners, and urges all development partners to make continued
efforts to increase the flows of all resources, public and private, to support the
development of African countries and to improve the effectiveness of aid;
25. Also welcomes efforts by development partners to align their financial
and technical support to Africa more closely to the priorities of the New Partnership,
as reflected in national poverty reduction strategies or in similar strategies, and
encourages development partners to increase their efforts in this regard;
26. Acknowledges the activities of the Bretton Woods institutions and the
African Development Bank in African countries, and invites those institutions to
continue their support for the implementation of the priorities and objectives of the
New Partnership;
27. Requests the United Nations system to continue to provide assistance to
the secretariat of the New Partnership and to African countries in developing
projects and programmes within the scope of the priorities of the New Partnership;
28. Notes that the entities of the United Nations system have been actively
using the regional consultation mechanism as a vehicle for fostering collaboration
and coordination at the regional level, and encourages them to intensify their efforts
in developing and implementing joint programmes in support of the New
Partnership at the regional level;
29. Encourages the United Nations funds, programmes and specialized
agencies to continue to strengthen further their existing coordination and
programming mechanisms, as well as the simplification and harmonization of
planning, disbursement and reporting procedures, as a means of enhancing support
for African countries in the implementation of the New Partnership;
30. Notes the growing collaboration among the entities of the United Nations
system in support of the New Partnership, and requests the Secretary-General to
promote greater coherence in the work of the United Nations system in support of
the New Partnership, on the basis of the agreed clusters;
31. Invites the High-level Plenary Meeting, which is to be held at the
commencement of the sixtieth session of the General Assembly, in accordance with
the modalities set by the Assembly at its fifty-ninth session, to address the special
needs of African countries;
32. Urges the Commission for Social Development and the Commission on
the Status of Women to give prominence to the New Partnership in future priority
themes;
33. Welcomes the establishment of the Secretary-General’s Advisory Panel
on International Support for the New Partnership for Africa’s Development, and
4

A/RES/59/254

looks forward to its recommendations on the actions to be taken to enhance support
for the implementation of the New Partnership;
34. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take measures to
strengthen the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa in order to enable it to
effectively fulfil its mandate;
35. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report on
the implementation of the present resolution to the General Assembly at its sixtieth
session on the basis of inputs from Governments, organizations of the United
Nations system and other stakeholders in the New Partnership, such as the private
sector and civil society.
76th plenary meeting
23 December 2004

5
