A/63/PV.37

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

37

th plenary meeting
Monday, 3 November 2008, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Beck
(Solomon Islands), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.

(f) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)
(g) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Council of Europe

Agenda item 114 (continued)

Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations

Draft resolution (A/63/L.12)

(a) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union

(h) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Economic Community of Central African States

Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)

(i) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Economic Cooperation Organization

(b) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Asian-African Legal Consultative Organization

Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)

Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)
Draft resolution (A/63/L.7)
(c) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)
(d) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)
Draft resolution (A/63/L.9)
(e) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Caribbean Community
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)

(j) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Eurasian Economic Community
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)
Draft resolution (A/63/L.13)
(k) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the International Organization of
la Francophonie
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)
(l) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Inter-Parliamentary Union
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)
(m) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Latin American Economic System
Draft resolution (A/63/L.10)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

08-58387 (E)

*0858387*

A/63/PV.37

(n) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)
(o) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)
Note by the Secretary-General (A/63/155)
(p) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe
(q) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of American States
(r) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of the Islamic Conference
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)
(s) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Pacific Islands Forum
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)
(t) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty Organization
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)
Note by the Secretary-General (A/63/156)
Draft resolution (A/63/L.11)
(u) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Southern African Development Community
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)
Mr. Pramudwinai (Thailand): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the States members of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN):
Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar,
the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam.
We are now witnessing a blossoming of
regionalism in all corners of the world. Now more than
ever, regional organizations and arrangements have
played a pivotal role in bringing countries together and
nurturing a habit of consultation and cooperation in all
areas of common concern and interest. ASEAN
welcomes that blossoming and strengthening of
regionalism because we see regionalism as a building

2

block of, and a supporting pillar for, the effective
global multilateralism that is embodied in the United
Nations.
We are also witnessing a blossoming of
partnership between the United Nations and regional
organizations. ASEAN welcomes the increasing
emphasis that the United Nations has given to forging
partnerships with many regional organizations in all
regions of the world. Such a partnership in this
interdependent and globalized world is truly a win-win
relationship. By engaging with regional organizations,
the United Nations benefits from their in-depth and
unique understanding about the challenges, concerns,
sensitivities and nuances of those regions. At the same
time, regional organizations would benefit from the
United Nations vast wealth of expertise, best practices
and networks in a broad range of issues.
ASEAN is committed to continuing to advance
the noble principles and objectives of the United
Nations in South-East Asia. For over 40 years since its
founding in 1967, ASEAN has emerged as a stable
force for regional peace and security, for enhanced
economic integration and for the creation of a
community of caring and sharing societies. Through
ASEAN, countries of South-East Asia come together
and peacefully interact on all issues of common
concern for the region. Through habit of working
together and consensus-making, ASEAN countries
have been successful in turning enmity into amity. By
managing differences and emphasizing commonalities,
ASEAN as a group has managed to overcome
successive challenges facing the region. But ASEAN
knows that we cannot be complacent. And that is why
we are witnessing a renaissance of ASEAN in SouthEast Asia.
At the ASEAN summit in Singapore last year,
ASEAN leaders came together with common
objectives in mind: to make South-East Asia a better
place, to make ASEAN a stronger organization and to
ensure that ASEAN will continue to be a strong and
effective partner for international peace, stability and
prosperity.
At that summit in Singapore, ASEAN leaders
took a bold step forward by signing a landmark
ASEAN Charter, which will provide a legal and
institutional framework to make ASEAN a more rulesbased, people-centred, effective and efficient
organization. The signing of the ASEAN Charter was a

08-58387

A/63/PV.37

significant milestone in the ASEAN communitybuilding process, whose goal is to transform a region
that is home to over 500 million people into an ASEAN
Community by 2015. It is also important to note that,
by signing the ASEAN Charter, ASEAN leaders have
committed themselves to the principles of democracy,
the rule of law and good governance, and respect for
and protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, while respecting the fundamental importance
of amity and cooperation and the principles of
sovereignty,
equality,
territorial
integrity,
non-interference, consensus and unity in diversity.
Today, the ASEAN member States are working to ratify
the ASEAN Charter in time for its entry into force at
the fourteenth ASEAN summit, in Thailand in
December 2008.
Partnership between ASEAN and the United
Nations has been long and enduring and has grown
from strength to strength. The United Nations
Development Programme was designated an ASEAN
Dialogue Partner in 1977 and has since been working
closely with ASEAN in a wide range of regional
development issues. In 2006, ASEAN was granted
observer status in the General Assembly. In 2007, the
Secretaries-General of ASEAN and the United Nations
signed a memorandum of understanding on ASEANUnited Nations cooperation to promote a full range of
cooperation based on mutual benefits.
However, it took the tragic Cyclone Nargis in
May 2008 to really test and prove the strength and
resilience of the partnership between ASEAN and the
United Nations. In response to that natural disaster,
ASEAN firmly adhered to the ASEAN way that
emphasizes understanding, dialogue and, most
important, trust and confidence, while being clear
about the need for the group to act. Thus the ASEAN
Humanitarian Task Force for the Victims of the
Cyclone Nargis was established in May this year by
ASEAN Foreign Ministers to work closely with the
United Nations and Myanmar in coordinating
international assistance. In so doing, ASEAN
successfully acted to build a diplomatic bridge with the
international community through the United Nations.
It is evident that the ASEAN-led coordination
mechanism and the Tripartite Core Group subsequently
established on the basis of partnership between
Myanmar, ASEAN and the United Nations have played
a pivotal role in ensuring the timely, coordinated,
systematic and effective delivery and utilization of

08-58387

emergency humanitarian relief supplies, as well as
planning for recovery and rebuilding efforts over the
longer term. That partnership has been welcomed by all
sides, including the United Nations, as a successful
model of cooperation that could be applied to other
regions facing humanitarian emergencies.
We are determined to sustain and build on that
positive momentum of partnership between ASEAN
and the United Nations. In December this year, the
third ASEAN-United Nations summit will be held in
Thailand. It will provide a good opportunity for
ASEAN leaders and the Secretary-General, as well as
heads of United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes, to forge a comprehensive and systemwide partnership between ASEAN and the United
Nations.
ASEAN believes that there are many endeavours
in which ASEAN and the United Nations could benefit
from working together on critical areas of global
concern, such as mitigating the impacts of the current
global financial crisis and other pressing issues such as
attaining the Millennium Development Goals, food and
energy security, environmental management and
climate change, strengthening global and regional
cooperation on disaster management, and fighting
against deadly infectious diseases, such as HIV/AIDS,
malaria and avian flu.
This year, ASEAN will also submit a biennial
draft resolution on cooperation between the United
Nations and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations under this agenda item. The draft resolution is
based on the most recent resolution on that subject
(resolution 61/46), which the Assembly adopted by
consensus in December 2006. The draft resolution
contains factual updates on positive developments
regarding cooperation between the United Nations and
ASEAN during the past two years. ASEAN hopes that
this draft resolution will enjoy strong support from our
partners, as in the past.
ASEAN is going through an exciting time in its
evolution. It is transforming itself from a community of
ten ASEAN countries into an ASEAN community, from
a collection of different markets and production bases
into a single market and production base, and from a
community of ten identities into a community based on
a common identity.
ASEAN is confident that, together as one in the
spirit of ASEAN solidarity, we will succeed in

3

A/63/PV.37

achieving the goal that we have set for ourselves.
ASEAN’s success will be the success of the United
Nations because a stronger, more cohesive and
effective ASEAN will be a stronger and more effective
partner for the United Nations.
Ms. Banks (New Zealand): I have the honour to
present this statement on behalf of members of the
Pacific Islands Forum based in New York, namely:
Australia, the Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji,
Nauru, Palau, Papua New Guinea, the Republic of the
Marshall Islands, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga,
Tuvalu, Vanuatu and New Zealand.
At the outset, I thank the Secretary-General for
his report on cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and other organizations (A/63/228). The
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Pacific Islands Forum has gained momentum in recent
years, and we are pleased that the United Nations has
observer status at the Forum.
We encourage regular consultations between our
Forum’s Secretariat and the United Nations, as well as
United Nations participation in meetings of Pacific
Islands Forum leaders.
We welcome the cooperation of United Nations
funds, programmes and specialized agencies to help the
Pacific Islands address and overcome the ever-growing
challenges before us, especially the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) by 2015. The
United Nations “delivering as one”, processes are
already under way in the Pacific region. The
development of the United Nations development
assistance framework for the Pacific subregion, which
covers the period from 2008 to 2012 and brings
together 15 United Nations agencies located in several
different countries, has been a significant step towards
implementing this “delivering as one” approach.
We also need to work closely together to ensure
full and effective implementation of the Mauritius
Strategy for the Further Implementation of the
Barbados Programme of Action and the Johannesburg
Plan of Implementation.
Global financial and economic turbulence and the
threat of global recession pose great risks to us all.
Small, isolated economies like many of those in our
region are especially vulnerable. The Forum’s
engagement with the United Nations and its funds and
programmes helps to address those areas of

4

vulnerability and to strengthen national and regional
development, thereby strengthening our region’s ability
to engage with the international community.
We can already point to a number of areas of
valuable cooperation with the United Nations. The
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) has
supported implementation of the Forum’s Pacific Plan,
which is the overarching framework for collaboration
and cooperation among Forum countries. We also
appreciate the work done by UNDP and the Economic
and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific to
support the integration of MDGs into national
development strategies in our region. Other assistance
has been provided in the areas of disaster risk
management, human security, anti-corruption, private
sector development and disabilities issues.
Donor coordination and aid delivery in
accordance with the principles of the Paris Declaration
on Aid Effectiveness has been a growing focus in our
region. Pacific leaders have adopted the Pacific Aid
Effectiveness Principles, emphasizing the importance
of this work to all of us. We welcome the work of the
UNDP Pacific Centre on enhancing donor coordination
in the region, and we look forward to continuing to
work closely with United Nations agencies in that
respect.
We are grateful too for the work done by the
United Nations Environmental Programme in our
region on sustainable development, and for its support
for the Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment
Programme (SPREP), which is involved in a range of
environmental programmes in the Pacific. UNICEF’s
efforts that focus on improved nutrition, child
immunization, better quality child-focused data and
budgeting are much needed. We also welcome
engagement between United Nations agencies and
Pacific regional organizations in coordinating our
response on HIV and sexually transmitted infections.
These areas of cooperation, and many others not
listed, are greatly valued, as is the strengthened United
Nations presence in our region in recent years.
However, we do believe that there is still scope to do
significantly more and, in particular, to increase the
impact of the partnerships between the United Nations
system and the Pacific Islands Forum. We urge all
United Nations agencies operating in the region to
constantly assess their role and engagements against
that of Pacific regional agencies. It is critical that we

08-58387

A/63/PV.37

all look to maximize collaborative action and avoid
duplication.
Finally, we note that the Pacific Islands Forum
covers a vast region of island States and that our region
is particularly vulnerable to the effects of climate
change. A draft resolution entitled “Security and
climate change” (A/63/L.8) has been submitted by
Pacific small island developing States under agenda
item 107. We encourage all Member States to support
that draft resolution.
Mr. Butagira (Uganda): I have the honour of
speaking on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference (OIC) Group in New York. I would like to
thank and commend the Secretary-General for the
comprehensive and informative biennial report on
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and other organizations (A/63/228). From the outset, I
wish to reiterate the commitment of the OIC to
deepening its cooperation with the United Nations.
I would also like to acknowledge the successful
outcome of the biennial general meeting on
cooperation between the United Nations and the OIC,
held in Geneva from 8 to 10 July 2008. The SecretaryGeneral’s report captures some of the major outcomes
of this meeting, some of which I would like to
highlight today as they merit inclusion in the upcoming
resolution on OIC-United Nations cooperation.
First, the report enumerates the efforts undertaken
by the two organizations in enhancing practical
cooperation and building complementarity through
regular meetings at the level of the Secretaries-General
and through consultations among other critical actors,
including the Special Adviser on the International
Compact with Iraq, the Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and the High-level Coordinator on the issue of the
repatriation or return of all Kuwaiti and third country
nationals or their remains.
Secondly, the report draws attention to the
International Conference on Terrorism, held in
November 2007 in Tunisia and coordinated by the two
organizations in partnership with the Government of
Tunisia, where a fruitful exchange of views took place.
Participants dispelled misapprehensions about Islam,
identified vulnerable areas exploited by terrorists in the
social, cultural, ethical and ideological spheres, and
recommended solutions to make those areas less
conducive to their use.

08-58387

Thirdly, the report notes that the Geneva meeting
of the representatives of the United Nations system and
OIC and its specialized institutions in July reviewed
cooperation in various fields, including science,
technology, trade, development, implementation of the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), refugees,
human
resource
development,
food
security,
agriculture, environment, health, population, arts,
crafts and promotion of heritage. Both sides also
agreed to improve follow-up mechanisms by
identifying focal points and exchanging lists of
officials specializing in areas of common interest.
Fourthly, the report notes that the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has been
developing a dialogue with OIC to reach out to
non-governmental
organizations
and
other
humanitarian actors in Islamic countries, and that
UNICEF has been exploring ways to develop and
formalize its partnership with OIC, including specific
initiatives linked to the MDGs as part of the OIC TenYear Programme of Action.
I
commend
the
Secretary-General
for
highlighting the aforementioned developments and
urge follow-up in the implementation of agreed
activities and programmes.
I would now like to draw attention to several
other equally important issues, undertakings and
decisions
pertaining
to
OIC-United
Nations
cooperation that did not appear in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, which also require follow-up and
implementation.
First is the general meeting’s acknowledgement
that the OIC remains an important partner to the United
Nations in peace and security and in fostering a culture
of peace at the global level, and the agreement between
the two sides to continue cooperation in conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
Second is the United Nations offer to inform the
OIC of and invite it to seminars and other training
opportunities in the areas of conflict prevention,
negotiations, mediation and elections organized by and
for the United Nations.
Third are the efforts of the two organizations to
promote and facilitate the Middle East peace process in
accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions,
particularly resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and
1515 (2003), General Assembly resolution 194 (III),

5

A/63/PV.37

the Arab Peace Initiative, the Road Map and the
commitments of the Annapolis Conference. Those
should be recognized, and inter-organizational
cooperation in all fields that serve that goal should be
encouraged.
Fourth, the OIC proposal for greater interaction
between the two Secretariats beyond the current
biennial arrangement to include a periodic review of
cooperation should be acknowledged through
appropriate follow-up directives.
Fifth is the close cooperation between the OIC
Secretariat and the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations in advancing dialogue and intercultural
understanding, including the Secretary-General’s
participation in the OIC summit inviting the Alliance to
all major OIC conferences, and holding meetings
between the OIC Secretary-General and the High
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Alliance of Civilizations to institutionalize cooperation
between the two organizations and finalize a
memorandum of understanding between the two
organizations.
Sixth is multifaceted cooperation among the OIC
and the United Nations and its specialized agencies in
humanitarian affairs, which should be welcomed. There
is a need to pursue greater proactive engagement,
resulting in the implementation of concrete
programmes in capacity-building, emergency assistance
and strategic partnerships.
Seventh, the two organizations should strengthen
cooperation in fighting poverty in Member States to
promote sustainable development and achieve the
MDGs.
Lastly, at the Annual Coordination Meeting of the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Member States of the
Islamic Conference, held on 26 September 2008 here at
the United Nations, it was decided to celebrate the
fortieth anniversary of the OIC in 2009 with national
and international programmes on different aspects of
the OIC, highlighting its activities, evolution and
reform. The OIC looks forward to collaborating with
the United Nations in the commemoration.
I would like to conclude by underlining the
essential role that cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and other organizations can play
in the achievement of international peace and
prosperity, including the MDGs. However, our

6

approach must be pragmatic and holistic to ensure that
agreed activities are implemented. That will require the
wider international community to lend its full support
to attaining that objective. The OIC Group will be
tabling a draft resolution under agenda item 114 —
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and other organizations — and we look forward to the
full support of all our partners.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Building a collective approach, which is
crucial to overcome temporary threats and challenges
effectively, requires a gradual strengthening of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, based on the firm
foundation of the United Nations Charter, especially
Chapter VIII.
The United Nations and regional organizations
are intended to complement each other harmoniously
and to make use of their specific comparative
advantages. With respect to the United Nations, that
means above all universality of membership and of
areas of activity and universally recognized legitimacy.
In turn, regional organizations often have a better
understanding of local circumstances and more suitable
equipment, as well as their own sources of financing. A
clear division of labour, while maintaining the
prerogatives of the United Nations and its Security
Council, will make it possible to increase the capacity
in the international community for dealing with crises.
We think that regular meetings of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations with leaders of regional
organizations are extremely relevant. The United
Nations agenda of cooperation with its regional
partners is becoming more ambitious and multifaceted.
To peacekeeping and peacebuilding goals have been
added combating the spread of weapons of mass
destruction and the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, resolving other destabilizing cross-border
problems, fighting drug trafficking and organized
crime and contributing to solving the various complex
socio-economic issues around the world.
The Russian Federation continues to strongly
support further strengthening multifaceted cooperation
between the United Nations and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization (CSTO), the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) and the Eurasian Economic
Community (EURASEC), which has made significant
contributions to overcoming contemporary problems

08-58387

A/63/PV.37

and challenges at both the regional and global levels.
We welcome the already solid ties those regional
mechanisms have with the United Nations and their
joint implementation of a number of projects and
programmes.
Integrated processes in our region have become
more mature and active and have increasingly drawn in
countries from neighbouring subregions. The legal,
institutional and financial basis for that kind of
cooperation is becoming firmly established. Within the
CIS, CSTO and EURASEC, systematic and
comprehensive interaction is under way, including in
such areas as ensuring security, peacekeeping, fighting
organized
and
cross-border
crime,
economic
development and trade, environmental protection,
humanitarian relief operations and regulation of
migration.
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
CSTO has considerable potential. Within the CSTO,
very intensive work is under way to establish its own
in-house peacekeeping potential, including for use in
the framework of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. There are considerable opportunities for
pooling the efforts of those two organizations.
Cooperation between CSTO member States on
United Nations issues is based not only on common
positions on many of the current problems on the
United Nations agenda, but also on an understanding of
the need to strengthen its leading role in international
affairs. We are interested in maximizing the collective
mechanisms and potential of the United Nations in
neutralizing challenges to regional security arising
from international terrorism and in contributing to
economic development.
The Shanghai Cooperation Organization is
playing an increasing role in ensuring stability in the
Eurasian region. Its members favour further developing
their cooperation with the United Nations in a number
of very important areas, including fighting
international terrorism and the illegal drug trade, thus
contributing to the post-conflict reconstruction of
Afghanistan.
In the very near future, the States of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization intend to raise the issue of
including on the agenda of the Assembly’s sixty-fourth
session a new item on cooperation between the United
Nations and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.

08-58387

We also support further strengthening cooperation
between the Eurasian Economic Community and the
United Nations. EURASEC is developing rapidly at
present. Cooperation is under way on a number of key
issues, including transport cooperation, energy,
tourism,
environmental
protection,
overcoming
emergency situations, migration, education and other
areas. Within the Community, steps have been taken to
establish a customs union, a free trade area and a single
energy market.
Now that intensive and practical activity is fully
in line with the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals and further strengthens the
commitment to the principles of the United Nations
Charter, which is enshrined in the constitutive
documents of the Community. The Eurasian Economic
Community furthermore has played a key role in the
extensive structures of multilateral cooperation in the
region aimed at ensuring sustainable development,
stability, peace and security. That makes it an
important partner of the United Nations system in our
region and points to the need to further step up efforts
to develop cooperation between the two organizations.
According to the report of the Secretary-General,
the main achievements in that area have been
highlighted. We welcome those achievements, but we
believe it is necessary to further strengthen
cooperation. With a view to strengthening the results of
that cooperation, Russia has, together with Belarus, the
current president of the Community, submitted to the
United Nations a draft resolution on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Eurasian
Economic Community. We attach great importance to
the adoption of the draft resolution by consensus and
wish to thank all delegations that have taken part in its
elaboration and have joined its original two sponsors.
We also think that the potential for mutually
beneficial cooperation between the United Nations and
other integration mechanisms in the territory of the
Commonwealth of Independent States is far from
having been exhausted. In that context, we expect more
activity, initiative and openness to dialogue from the
leadership of the United Nations agencies. Russia is
ready to do its part to work towards further
strengthening that cooperation.
I would like also to mention the issue of
cooperation between the United Nations and the Black
Sea Economic Cooperation Organization (BSEC).

7

A/63/PV.37

Russia is an active and concerned member of that main
comprehensive forum for Black Sea cooperation. We
support efforts to further increase the work of that
organization and to adapt it to current realities. We are
convinced that ensuring stable development, prosperity
and security in the region will require the
implementation of long-term mutually beneficial
economic projects carried out in the framework of the
Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization. We
think that projects such as the circular motorway
around the Black Sea and the establishment of a
circular Black Sea electric power grid are excellent
examples of that kind of project.
We support the work already under way in the
BSEC to create a common energy strategy for countries
in the region. We think that cooperation between the
BSEC and the European Union should be based on
equal footing and mutual benefit and the Community
preserve, even augment, its own identity. The BSEC is
also ready to cooperate with countries outside the
region. That participation should be based on the
principle of non-interference in the development of
multilateral cooperation between the countries of the
region on the basis of their interests, capacities, skills
and
experience.
It
would
be
especially
counterproductive to try to politicize economic ties in
the region and cooperation in the framework of the
BSEC.
We believe the BSEC has an excellent future. The
organization is a functioning part of the overall
European cooperation system and the integration
processes on the continent and is able to play a role in
bringing the peoples of the region closer together and
is finding balance and common ground in the Black
Sea region. By strengthening its cooperation with the
United Nations, we will further contribute to that
progress. Russia fully supports the draft resolution on
the matter and has become one of its sponsors.
We also think that cooperation between the
United Nations and the Council of Europe is moving
along nicely. The development of cooperation between
those two organizations will contribute to ensuring
peace and security and will protect human rights, not
only in Europe but around the world as a whole.
The draft resolution on the cooperation between
the United Nations and the Council of Europe
(A/63/L.12), which is being considered by the General
Assembly today, fully meets those goals, and we hope

8

that, just as it was two years ago, it will be adopted by
consensus.
We would like to see further development of
cooperation between the United Nations and other
European organizations, including the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the European
Union, where mechanisms for reacting to emergencies
are being developed. What is essential there is to fully
recognize the primary responsibility of the United
Nations Security Council for the maintenance of
international peace and security, including the
imposition of mandatory sanctions and political control
over peace enforcement operations. That fundamental
principle based upon Chapter VIII of the Charter
should also govern cooperation between the United
Nations and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
We must further increase positive cooperation
between the Organization and regional and subregional
partners in Africa, including the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Southern African Development Community and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
An important role in seeking peaceful solutions to
the many problems of their regions will be played by
the League of Arab States, the Cooperation Council for
the Arab States of the Gulf, the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, the Organization of American
States and various Latin American organizations.
Russia has established and is developing dynamic
relationships with all of those organizations.
Mr. Menon (Singapore): Allow me to first thank
the Secretary-General and the Secretariat for the report
on cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations (A/63/228). We would
also like to associate ourselves with the statement
made by Thailand on behalf of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and commend the
Secretary-General for his leadership and support in
fostering and strengthening cooperation between the
United Nations and ASEAN.
Much of our work in this session has been
clouded by bad news. The lack of progress in the Doha
Round, the food and fuel price crises, the financial
meltdown on Wall Street and the resultant economic
turmoil across the globe have all cast a long shadow
over our deliberations at the sixty-third session of the
United Nations General Assembly. We have had
debates on the role that the United Nations can and

08-58387

A/63/PV.37

should play to restore global confidence during this
time of economic, social and political crises. Smaller
countries like mine have a strong vested interest in
seeing international institutions strengthened, so that
they can better deal with the various problems.
While reform of the United Nations and the
Bretton Woods institutions is important and urgent, we
can also make these international institutions more
effective by encouraging them to forge strong
partnerships with regional institutions that play useful
roles in fostering regional peace and development.
Indeed, even the United Nations Charter recognizes the
role that regional arrangements can play in helping the
United Nations to achieve its various objectives. Take
ASEAN as an example: many of you will recall that,
when Cyclone Nargis hit Myanmar in May this year
and caused a humanitarian crisis in the country, there
was for several days a stand-off between the Myanmar
Government and the international community over the
provision of assistance. ASEAN had to step in and
build a bridge of trust between the Myanmar
Government and the international community.
A tripartite organization involving the United
Nations, ASEAN and the Myanmar Government
worked effectively to overcome problems on the
ground and ensured that international aid reached the
furthest corners of the affected area. It also prevented a
second wave of deaths from hunger or disease. ASEAN
on its own did not have the capabilities to help
Myanmar in a major way, but ASEAN working
together with the United Nations and other
international agencies was able to make a huge
difference. In the process, we in ASEAN also learned a
great deal about disaster management from bodies like
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the World Food Programme.
Mr. Nsengimana (Rwanda), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
However, it is also a fact that every region has its
own distinctive characteristics, which must be taken
into account when building partnerships between the
United Nations and the particular region. It may or
may not be possible to replicate what ASEAN was able
to achieve with the United Nations in the case of
Cyclone Nargis, in other parts of the globe. In short,
there is no one-size-fits-all model for cooperation
between the United Nations and regional institutions.
To expect otherwise would be to ignore the fact that

08-58387

every region has its own unique characteristics,
priorities and needs. The Secretary-General’s report
makes that point and shows how wide-ranging such
models of partnership can be.
Unfortunately, instead of celebrating the rich
diversity that exists in the global community, my
delegation has observed a tendency on the part of some
Member States to try to impose some of their values
and practices at the regional level on the rest of the
global community. They expect the rest of us to
welcome those values and practices, which are peculiar
to their region, and to embrace them as universal
values.
Some members may recall that, in 2004, my
delegation took the floor during the debate on this
same agenda item to object to an attempt by the
Council of Europe to impose its views regarding the
death penalty upon the rest of us through its resolution
on cooperation with the United Nations. In that regard,
my delegation was baffled by the attempt by the
Council of Europe again this year to slip similar and
even more controversial elements into its draft
resolution and to expect all of us to go along with it.
Fortunately, consensus on that resolution was
preserved, at least as of now, because the Swedish
chair of the informal consultations exercised strong
leadership and professional objectivity during the
negotiations.
All of us should acknowledge that in a universal
organization such as the United Nations, there will be
some occasions when we will not necessarily be able to
agree with one another because of our different values
or practices. Our task will certainly be more
complicated if some delegations insist on disregarding
the valid concerns of others and attempting to impose
their views on the rest of the United Nations
membership.
When we are confronted by multiple crises, either
at home or at the global level, we should all rise to the
challenge and work in collaboration to strengthen the
United Nations and regional organizations. This is no
time to be running roughshod over each other’s views.
We can only achieve a “we community” — a concept
that the President of the General Assembly has often
talked about — when we learn the basic rule of respect
and empathy for each other’s views, and that has to
start here in the Assembly.

9

A/63/PV.37

Mr. McNee (Canada) (spoke in French):
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations is an essential tool for the achievement
of the objectives of the United Nations and its various
bodies. That cooperation is key to peace and security
efforts. The expertise of and means of regional
organizations complement those of the United Nations,
and thereby enhance the contributions of each.
Canada has established partnerships with various
players, such as the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States, the Southern Africa
Development Community, the Organization of
American States (OAS), the Caribbean Community, the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), on a host of issues. Those partnerships
illustrate the importance we place on the involvement
of regional players.
We would also like to reiterate the
responsibilities of Member States to support
cooperation between the United Nations and various
organizations in order to ensure that such cooperation
is effective. For example, donors and countries
contributing troops to peace missions under the aegis
of various organizations must ensure that those troops
are endowed with the resources they need to carry out
their mandates.
The partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union in Darfur illustrates a number of
possibilities and demonstrates the challenges which
such cooperation poses. That cooperation is still
necessary to foster African solutions to threats to peace
and security on that continent. Because peace and
security in Africa are closely related to the human
rights situation, governance and development,
extensive cooperation among the relevant bodies of the
United Nations and the African Union is also
necessary.
I would like to highlight further examples of
cooperation with regional partners that are relevant to
the United Nations. Canada’s working, for example, to
develop practical approaches to cooperation with the
ASEAN Regional Forum. In addition, we are
monitoring the cohesion between the efforts of the
OAS and other regional institutions in the Americas.
We are also following cooperation efforts between the
OAS and all of the parties that support development in
Haiti. We would also like to highlight the joint

10

cooperation between the United Nations and NATO in
Afghanistan. We welcome the cooperation between the
United Nations and the OSCE, particularly in Kosovo
and Georgia.
The United Nations and regional organizations
must also cooperate closely to integrate fragile States
into the world economy. The United Nations must also
work with regional economic organizations in order to
participate in development efforts.
I would like to take this opportunity to
specifically address cooperation between the United
Nations and the International Organization of la
Francophonie (OIF). The OIF has diplomatic
capabilities in the areas of prevention and mediation
that we would like to see strengthened so that the
Organization can help resolve international crises more
effectively, particularly in certain francophone
countries, and fully participate in finding collective
and realistic solutions.
A few days ago, the twelfth francophone summit
was held in Quebec City, with some 30 heads of State
or Government, the Secretary-General of the OIF and
the Secretary-General of the United Nations in
attendance. The summit was an opportunity to discuss
issues that are mobilizing the international community,
such as the financial crisis, and to focus on four other
major issues within the francophone world: democracy
and the rule of law; governance and economic
solidarity; the environment; and the French language.
The heads of State or Government adopted the
Quebec City declaration, which contains specific and
concrete commitments on each of those major issues.
Armenia’s status changed from observer to associate
member at the summit, and Thailand and Latvia were
admitted as observers. The OIF is now comprised of
70 States and Governments.
A high point in cooperation between the United
Nations and the francophone world came on 28 March
2008, when the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the Secretary-General of the OIF reviewed
international policy issues and welcomed the similarity
of their views on world peace, peaceful conflict
resolution, the implementation of the Convention on
the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of
Cultural Expressions, and the dialogue among cultures
and civilizations. They also expressed the desire to
implement operational mechanisms to facilitate
consultations, the ability to refer issues to one another

08-58387

A/63/PV.37

and coordination between the two organizations in the
context of preventing, managing and resolving
conflicts that may arise in the francophone world.

determine how cooperation between the United
Nations, especially the Security Council, and regional
organizations develops.

Cooperation between the two organizations also
requires the enhancement of the OIF’s involvement in
mobilizing francophone contingents in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. More than half of the troops
deployed by the United Nations are serving in
francophone countries. While the number of such
missions is increasing, the number of French-speaking
personnel engaged in those operations is declining,
which is causing communications problems on the
ground.

Mr. Mansour (Tunisia) (spoke in French): The
debate that brings us together today gives us an
excellent opportunity to examine the state of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations and to reflect on how we can strengthen
their links of synergy and interaction.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the
OIF also necessitates a stronger OIF presence in
Peacebuilding Commission activities, in particular in
the country-specific configurations for Burundi,
Guinea-Bissau and the Central African Republic. Other
areas of cooperation, in particular electoral observation
and assistance, may also be enhanced.
Finally, cooperation between the United Nations
and the International Organization of la Francophonie
is also key to the successful implementation of
resolution 61/266, on multilingualism, adopted last
year.
Resolution 61/7 currently defines the framework
for cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Organization of la Francophonie. In the
coming days, Canada will submit a draft resolution
designed to update the parameters of that framework in
the wake of the recent adoption of the Quebec City
declaration a few days ago, with a view to guiding joint
activities in the coming years. We are delighted at the
thought of seeing the results of that cooperation in the
coming months, which will pave the way for the
preparations for the next Francophonie summit, to be
held in Madagascar in 2010.
(spoke in English)
In conclusion, Canada, in cooperation with other
Member States, will continue to ensure that
cooperation between the two organizations remains
productive so that francophone experience is used to
the fullest extent in carrying out the United Nations
mission, and so that the relationship becomes a model
of complementarity between United Nations action and
that of regional organizations. Our capacity to manage
effectively the wide range of issues facing us will

08-58387

I take this opportunity to thank the SecretaryGeneral for the information he has provided in his
summary report on cooperation activities undertaken
these past two years (A/63/228). The report clearly
shows the genuine will of the United Nations and the
regional organizations concerned to consolidate and
diversify in various areas and at various levels their
cooperation and their capacity to be complementary.
My delegation welcomes that fact because it is therein
that the objective of full cooperation between United
Nations and regional organizations takes on real
significance and relevance.
My delegation feels that regional cooperation, the
structure and scope of which have become increasingly
multidimensional and integrated, is now more than
ever a supplementary tool for United Nations action
and for the development of multilateralism.
Developments on the international scene have clearly
shown that the universality of the United Nations and
the regional approach can work together towards the
same objectives and optimize, upstream and down,
their action and capacity to better serve the needs of
development, peace and human understanding, and to
do so without a conflict of competence or mandate.
Given the growing role that regional
organizations play in international governance and in
the consensual approach to the situations facing the
world, my delegation feels that the organizations
involved should, in that respect, be integrated as full
partners in the United Nations dynamic. The regional
cooperation dimension is also part of the revitalization
of the United Nations and the achievement of its
development goals, particularly the Millennium
Development Goals.
We should remember in that respect that the
September 2005 World Summit Outcome Document
stressed that aspect by recommending that we identify
and adopt measures to strengthen cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations.

11

A/63/PV.37

Moreover, the various biennial reports adopted under
item 114 evidence the growing interest that the United
Nations community accords to increasing cooperation
and coordination and to the added value that the
regional organizations provide at various levels.
Additionally, my delegation would like to take
advantage of this debate to remind regional
organizations
to
strengthen
consultation
and
cooperation among themselves, since they are guided
by the common ideals of peace, development and
dialogue among civilizations.
As a member of a number of regional
organizations, Tunisia is convinced that such valuable
cooperation in various areas should be duly
appreciated, better supported and better structured. In
that regard, cooperation activities between the United
Nations and the League of Arab States — the vitality
and strengthening of which we welcome, particularly
in the area of peace — should be further extended to
other sectors more directly linked to development. In
point of fact, a number of meetings and joint activities
have taken place, including the coordination meeting in
Geneva in July 2008 between the two parties that led to
the launching of various projects of common interest in
the economic, social, environmental, technical and
cultural domains, attesting to the shared will to
strengthen institutional links, as well as the scope of
and base for cooperation. The follow-up mechanism
established on that occasion is certainly an important
pillar in the edifice of cooperation. We would have
wished that the report of the Secretary-General had
given more information with regard to the mandate and
the functioning of that mechanism, in particular its
ability to make periodic assessments of the status of
cooperation.
My delegation welcomes the fact that, over the
past two years, cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union has taken on another
dimension and opened up new perspectives. There have
been many successes, and we are now attempting to
address the specific needs of our continent, particularly
in the area of peace and conflict management, in
keeping with the priorities established in the Ten-Year
Capacity-Building Programme for the African Union,
presented in the declaration Enhancing United NationsAfrican Union Cooperation: Framework for the TenYear Capacity-Building Programme for the African
Union, the text of which was signed in Addis Ababa in
November 2006.

12

In that respect, the decision to set up a
coordination and consultation mechanism between the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union and
the Security Council of the United Nations, as well as
joint meetings to be held regularly between those two
bodies in that framework undoubtedly meets the needs
of our time, given that Africa is the theatre of most
conflicts, and particularly since it provides edifying
proof that structured, targeted and coordinated
cooperation between the African Union and the United
Nations can contribute to the creation of an African
capacity for conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding.
By dint of the political sensitivity of its basic
structure, cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union on the issues of peace and security
has monopolized attention, downplaying other aspects
of cooperation — such as economic and social
support — that while requiring less involvement and
fewer resources, are nevertheless important. The goal
is to support the process, of development in particular
the achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals, at the national, regional and subregional levels,
especially since Africa is clearly behind with regard to
the agreed deadlines.
Before concluding on that point, I would like to
stress that my delegation can only welcome the
significant efforts of the United Nations and its
Member States in the area of peace and security in
Africa, and hopes that questions of economic and
human development will enjoy the same level of
attention and commitment. The development of Africa
today is at the heart of the United Nations agenda and
of the international community.
My delegation notes with satisfaction the
strengthening of cooperation between the United
Nations and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference (OIC) in diverse and important economic,
political, social and humanitarian fields. The OIC and
its specialized agencies are deployed in various
domains and with numerous partners in order to
contribute to the efforts of the international community
in the service of development, peace and security.
In that framework, the international conference
convened by the United Nations and the Organization
of the Islamic Conference in Tunis in November 2007,
in cooperation with the Tunisian Government, on the
theme
“Terrorism:
Dimensions,
Threats
and

08-58387

A/63/PV.37

Countermeasures”, has enabled us to identify solutions,
to recommend paths of action and, in particular, to
clear up a good number of misunderstandings at the
heart of a certain erroneous perception of Islam. The
conference illustrated the extent to which cooperation
and exchanges enable us to take the road less travelled
and to find common ground on subjects that are
apparently controversial or even conflictual.
On another level, the meeting held in Geneva in
July 2008 between the United Nations system and the
OIC and its specialized institutions enabled us to assess
the level of cooperation and where it could be
strengthened.
It is a fact that the world today faces many
challenges, and the fact that they are getting worse is
indisputable. The only way the international
community can rise to those challenges is with
everyone’s help, and a collective commitment. The
process of complementarity between the universal
action of the United Nations and the constructive
contribution of regional organizations itself arises from
that imperative.
Ms. Negm (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to start by expressing our appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his excellent report on the cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and other
organizations (A/63/228). Egypt attaches special
importance to such cooperation for its significant role
in helping to achieve the goals of the United Nations in
its three main fields of work: international peace and
security, development in its political and economic
dimensions, and the effective promotion of human
rights and fundamental freedoms.
The Secretary-General’s report demonstrates the
depth of the relationship between the United Nations
and regional and other organizations and the increasing
levels of steady cooperation between them. In that
context, the delegation of Egypt welcomes the report’s
focus on the growing cooperation between United
Nations bodies and specialized agencies, on the one
hand, and the African Union, on the other, in the areas
of peace and security; the African Union’s institutional
capacity-building; mediation and conflict resolution;
the holding of elections; peacekeeping and support in
implementing the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development (NEPAD) programmes; disarmament,
especially with respect to small arms and light
weapons; and other areas associated with the

08-58387

promotion and development of industry, environmental
protection, refugee issues, and food and food security.
In the field of development, cooperation must be
strengthened between both parties in order to confront
the world’s exceptional food, energy, global financial
markets and climate change crises. Those crises will
affect Africa more than another region. I also wish to
stress the need to implement the political declaration
issued at the recent high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on Africa’s development needs as well as the
proposals put forward by the leaders at the high-level
event on the Millennium Development Goals. Those
proposals aim at increasing financing for Africa and to
give it special consideration during the Follow-up
International
Conference
on
Financing
for
Development to Review the Implementation of the
Monterrey Consensus.
In the area of international peace and security, we
welcome the Secretary-General’s initiative to form a
joint United Nations-African Union panel, chaired by
former Italian Prime Minister Prodi, in support of
African peacekeeping operations. We look forward to
receiving the panel’s report. Concurrently, we
emphasize the importance of continuing to strengthen
cooperation between the Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union so
that Africa can also contribute to maintaining
international peace and security in other regions of the
world.
In the same context, I would like to refer to the
important role played by the Peacebuilding
Commission in African countries emerging from
conflict and its achievements during the first two years
of its existence. The United Nations and the African
Union should encourage, sustain and support the
Commission’s role. We also stress the need to assist
and strengthen the capacities of the Commission by
providing the necessary financial resources from the
regular budget of the United Nations, and to take the
regional dimension of the process of reviewing the
work of the Peacebuilding Fund into consideration in
2009 and 2010, in a manner that would help to
strengthen cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union.
Cooperation between the Organization of the
Islamic Conference (OIC) and the United Nations is
gaining importance in the light of the negative
campaign against Islam and its symbols and of the

13

A/63/PV.37

efforts of some to defend that campaign by citing
freedom of expression. This issue requires both
organizations to step up their role in correcting the
erroneous image of the Islamic world and in deepening
cooperation among all peoples, regardless of their
religions and faiths. That, in turn, would require
working together in the fields of culture and education
through dialogue among civilizations, cultures and
religions. In that regard, the delegation of Egypt
encourages the holding of seminars and conferences in
cooperation with the member States of both
organizations so that such cooperation will produce
concrete results in promoting the culture of peace. It is
our hope that the high-level meeting to be held in the
middle of this month will constitute a further basis for
strengthening cooperation among all countries in that
important area.
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States is of equal and increasing
importance, not only because of the leading role of the
United Nations in the process of the peaceful
settlement of the Middle East question and its role in
the diplomatic Quartet, but also in promoting the
international process of addressing the case of the
Palestinian refugees and ensuring their access to
urgently needed humanitarian assistance, and in
confirming the fact that the United Nations remains at
the centre of the political process aimed at establishing
an independent, viable Palestinian State with Jerusalem
as its capital.
In that regard, it is necessary to immediately
commence the implementation of the agreement
between the two organizations to strengthen the
institutional links between their secretariats. The
process will lead to the sharing of experience and of
lessons learned, promote their joint efforts, and
enhance their coordination with other regional
organizations for the achievement of international
peace and security.
Regarding cooperation between the AsianAfrican Legal Consultative Organization (AALCO)
and the United Nations, the delegation of Egypt
welcomes the consultations between both organizations
in the various fields of international law. The Egyptian
delegation reiterates and affirms the importance of
strengthening such cooperation, especially with respect
to the activities of AALCO’s Centre for Research and
Training to build capacities in the field of international

14

law in all its branches and to ensure effective national
implementation of international law obligations.
The delegation of Egypt also affirms the
importance of strengthening cooperation between the
United Nations and the International Organization of la
Francophonie; of expanding it from merely cultural
cooperation to cooperation in the fields of early
warning,
conflict
prevention,
peacebuilding,
peacekeeping capacity-building; and of developing,
establishing and implementing national strategies for
development and other important areas that would
enhance the goals of both organizations.
The delegation of Egypt follows with keen
interest the growing cooperation between the United
Nations and the Inter-Parliamentary Union since the
signing of the 1996 Cooperation Agreement between
them; the adoption in 2002 of resolution 57/47 granting
the Union observer status; the organization of hearings
and common interactive debates on the sidelines of
successive sessions of the General Assembly; and the
participation of parliamentarians in the official
delegations of their countries to the General Assembly.
That growing cooperation clearly highlights the nature
of the organic relationship between strengthening the
principles of democracy, ensuring good governance at
the national and international levels and broadening the
basis for parliamentary participation in the multilateral
international sphere.
Owing to the complexity and multifaceted nature
of cooperation between the two organizations with
regard to participation in relevant United Nations
conferences, issues of international peace and security
and efforts to promote and enhance economic and
social development, democracy and human rights, and
given Egypt’s leading role in promoting such
cooperation during the chairmanship of Mr. Fathi
Sorour, Speaker of the People’s Assembly, we support
the Secretary-General’s recommendation, set out in
paragraph 139 of the report, that the General Assembly
positively consider devoting a specific agenda item to
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Inter-Parliamentary Union. Egypt will participate
actively in the consultations on that subject, which will
be considered during negotiations on the annual draft
resolution on this item.
The delegation of Egypt has closely followed the
increasing cooperation between the United Nations and
many organizations in Europe, Asia and Latin America,

08-58387

A/63/PV.37

in particular the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, the Black Sea Economic Cooperation
Organization, the Caribbean Community, the Council
of Europe and other organizations covered in the
report. We will follow up on efforts to enhance such
cooperation in the future with a view to achieving the
purposes and principles of the United Nations.
Mrs. Ithete (Namibia): The Inter-Parliamentary
Union (IPU), the world organization of national
parliaments, is the natural institutional link between
the United Nations and the world of national
parliaments. Namibia is particularly honoured that The
Honourable Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab, Speaker of the
National Assembly of the Republic of Namibia, was
elected as President of the IPU. We believe that his
experience as a former Prime Minister, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and President of the General Assembly
will certainly contribute to the strengthening of the
partnership between the United Nations and the IPU.
In order to bridge the implementation gap with
regard to United Nations decisions and resolutions and
to ensure greater democratization of the United Nations
system, it is important to engage more closely with
national parliaments and parliamentarians all over the
world. Such engagement would give parliamentarians a
better understanding of the importance of translating
international commitments into national legislation and
policies. It would also provide greater political
momentum for achieving the Millennium Development
Goals and addressing the major global challenges of
our time.
The report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)
goes a long way in highlighting the importance of
cooperation among the United Nations system, national
parliaments and the IPU. Namibia supports the
conclusions and recommendations contained in the
report, particularly those related to the circulation of
the outcome document of the joint United Nations-IPU
annual parliamentary hearing at the United Nations as
an official United Nations document and the allocation
of a separate General Assembly agenda item to explore
cooperation among the United Nations, national
parliaments and the IPU.
As at previous sessions, the General Assembly
will be requested to adopt the draft resolution on
cooperation between the United Nations and the IPU.
The draft resolution will, inter alia, encourage the
United Nations and the IPU to continue to cooperate

08-58387

closely in various fields — in particular peace and
security,
economic
and
social
development,
international law, human rights and democracy and
gender issues — bearing in mind the significant
benefits of such cooperation between the two
organizations. It will also encourage the IPU’s
contributions to the work of the General Assembly,
including the revitalization of the Assembly, United
Nations reform and system-wide coherence. Namibia
trusts that the draft resolution will be adopted by
consensus. We therefore urge Member States to support
it.
In conclusion, let me take this opportunity to
inform Member States that Namibia will facilitate the
negotiations on the draft resolution on cooperation
between the United Nations and the IPU. We would
also like to take this opportunity to congratulate Italy
on a job well done in facilitating a similar draft
resolution in 2006.
Ms. Chen Peijie (China) (spoke in Chinese): It is
increasingly important that the United Nations, the
world’s most universal international Organization,
enhance its cooperation with other international and
regional organizations to address the challenges of
globalization and myriad issues in the international
arena. The Chinese delegation welcomes the General
Assembly’s consideration of the important item,
“Cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and other organizations”. On this occasion, I should
like to make some brief comments on the cooperation
between the United Nations and the Asian-African
Legal Consultative Organization (AALCO).
AALCO is the only influential intergovernmental
organization that is composed of Asian and African
States and dedicated to addressing legal issues.
Founded in 1956, it was a major outcome of the
famous Bandung Conference of 1955. For more than
half a century, AALCO has worked consistently to
promote cooperation and exchanges among Asian and
African States in the spirit of unity, friendship and
cooperation advocated at the Bandung Conference. It
assists Asian and African States in the practice of
international law and in their efforts to promote the
progressive development and codification of such law.
Comments and proposals made by AALCO on the
relevant items on the agendas of the Sixth Committee
and the International Law Commission serve as an
important frame of reference for Asian and African
States as they participate in discussions on the relevant

15

A/63/PV.37

General Assembly items and have great reference value
for the work of other United Nations legal bodies.
AALCO enjoys good cooperative relations with
the United Nations and its relevant organs. Over the
years, AALCO and specialized United Nations
agencies, such as UNESCO, the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Law Commission, have sent representatives to one
another’s meetings to actively participate in the
consideration of relevant items. As a result, the
cooperation among those bodies has been continuously
enhanced and broadened.
Asia and Africa have the largest number of
developing countries and the largest populations in the
world. Thanks to their efforts over many years, Asian
and African countries have achieved enormous
progress in the political, economic and social fields.
Their status and role in international affairs have
grown markedly, which has made them an important
force for world peace and shared development. As an
important platform for exchange and cooperation,
AALCO will no doubt play an increasingly positive
role in enhancing the effective participation of Asian
and African States in promoting democratization and
the rule of law in international relations.
As a State member of both the United Nations
and the Asian-African Legal Consultative Organization,
the Chinese Government has consistently supported
AALCO’s efforts to enhance cooperation and
exchanges with the United Nations. From this rostrum,
I wish to reiterate that the Chinese Government will, as
always, continue to contribute to enhancing
cooperation
among
the
Asian-African
Legal
Consultative Organization, the United Nations and
other relevant organs.
Mr. Badji (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation associates itself with the
statement made by the representative of Uganda, on
behalf of the States members of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference (OIC), on cooperation between the
United Nations and the OIC. However, Senegal, in its
capacity as Chair of the OIC Summit at its eleventh
session, would like to share with the Assembly some of
our thoughts with regard to that cooperation.
The important role of regional organizations and
others in dealing with the major issues on the agenda
of the United Nations General Assembly has been

16

reaffirmed many times since this debate began. In point
of fact, whether it is terrorism, the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, peacebuilding, human rights or even
humanitarian action, organizations such as the African
Union and the Organization of the Islamic Conference
are well-placed to understand the deep-seated causes
and to provide suitable solutions, either because of
their knowledge of the region concerned or because of
the particular membership of the organizations.
Let me say that it is with the greatest satisfaction
that Senegal notes the continued strengthening of
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, and we
welcome the attention paid to the important issues on
the OIC agenda by His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
as well as his presence in Dakar on 13 March 2008 at
the signing of the peace agreement between Chad and
the Sudan, which took place on the margins of the OIC
Summit. That is a good illustration of that ongoing
attention. Added to that is the upcoming high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on dialogue here in
New York under the auspices of His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, which will provide yet another
occasion for those two organizations to strengthen their
links.
The report of the Secretary-General (A/63/228)
notes in section L of its part II that over and above the
relations between the Secretariat and the OIC, the
cooperation between that organization and the United
Nations has also been extended to other agencies and
bodies of the United Nations system, in particular in
the form of initiatives taken with UNICEF, the World
Meteorological Organization and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
We welcome that dynamism, however we also
hope that those various areas of cooperation will go
beyond simple talks between staff of the respective
programmes for each body or agency and actually lead
to effective synergies that will have a specific impact
on projects on the ground.
In that respect, the OIC’s contribution to the
World Food Programme in November 2007, the first of
its kind, should serve as an example. In that area,
Senegal would like to propose that the United Nations,
through its competent departments and services, take
an active role in the implementation of the OIC
programme aimed at providing one half of a million
computers to poor countries that are members of the

08-58387

A/63/PV.37

Organization of the Islamic Conference. Such a
programme, if implemented, would constitute a major
contribution to the achievement by those countries of
the Millennium Development Goals, which are at the
heart of the United Nations priorities.
In conclusion, I would like to stress the fact that
virtually all of the United Nations interventions in the
area of peace and security and humanitarian action are
carried out in countries that are also members of the
OIC. That shows that these are two preferred areas for
the necessary cooperation between those organizations
and, for that reason, Senegal will spare no effort during
its time in office as Chair of the OIC to increase the
number of initiatives and joint actions in those two
areas.
Mr. Aligrudić (Serbia): As a State Member of the
United Nations, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Council of
Europe — of whose Parliamentary Assembly I am a
Vice-President — Serbia is a staunch supporter of
those organizations. By furthering their goals — the
preservation and promotion of human rights,
democracy and the rule of law and supporting political,
legal and institutional reforms — the Council of
Europe and the OSCE make important contributions to
conflict prevention, confidence-building and the
promotion of peace. Their cooperation with the United
Nations is therefore ever so important.
The importance of the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) of the United
Nations was emphasized at the third Summit of the
Council of Europe in Warsaw in 2005. The MDGs, as
well as current challenges such as terrorism and other
crimes, make it incumbent on the United Nations and
the Council of Europe to intensify their cooperation
and joint approach, drawing upon hitherto experiences
and available resources to deal with those challenges.
Those issues help to bring into focus again the validity
of the Agreement between the Council of Europe and
the United Nations Secretariat signed in 1951.
Cooperation in the field of human rights between
the Council of Europe and the United Nations, as well
as between the Human Rights Commissioners of the
two organizations, should be intensified, particularly in
the context of the establishment of international
standards and their practical implementation.
Serbia strongly supports the activities of the
Council of Europe aimed at promoting respect for

08-58387

human rights, democracy and the rule of law in Kosovo
and Metohija, the Serbian province under interim
United Nations administration, as well as the Council’s
activities, aimed at implementing international
standards, particularly with respect to members of the
non-Albanian communities. All those activities,
however, must be designed and implemented in strict
compliance with Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), which provides the only legal basis for the
activities of international organizations in Kosovo and
Metohija.
Considering that the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
Council of Europe concluded the Agreement on
Technical Arrangements in connection with the
Council of Europe’s Framework Convention for the
Protection of and National Minorities in August 2004
and that the first monitoring cycle relating to the
implementation of the Convention in Kosovo and
Metohija was completed by the adoption of a
resolution by the Committee of Ministers of the
Council of Europe on 21 June 2006, it is of vital
importance to take the appropriate measures contained
in the conclusions and recommendations of the
resolution. It is equally important to proceed with the
provisions of the letter sent by the Advisory Committee
on the Council of Europe’s Framework Convention to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Kosovo and Metohija of July 2007 and the report to the
Committee on the implementation of the resolution in
Kosovo and Metohija. It is all the more important now,
as no reply to the letter had been received by May
2008, when a new letter was sent.
Following the conclusion of the Technical
Agreement for the implementation of the European
Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment between the
Council of Europe and UNMIK in August 2004 and the
exchange of letters between the Secretary-General of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the
Secretary-General of the Council of Europe in 2006,
the experts of the European Committee for the
Prevention of Torture were given the possibility to visit
all detention and prison units in Kosovo and Metohija
in order to verify whether the provisions of the
Convention were being complied with and whether the
inspection modalities in the NATO detention units were
defined. And the fact that the first visit of the
Committee took place in March 2007 provides

17

A/63/PV.37

eloquent proof that the cooperation of international
organizations is needed and is fruitful.
Of exceptional importance to my country are
field activities related to the restoration of cultural
heritage in Kosovo and Metohija, particularly those
conducted
by
the
Independent
International
Commission for Cultural Heritage, established by the
Council of Europe, the European Commission and
UNMIK in the wake of the March 2004 riots against
non-Albanians.
The three years of activity of the Reconstruction
Implementation Commission with respect to Serbian
sacred places has confirmed the Commission’s
importance for the successful implementation of
cultural heritage projects and the promotion of
inter-ethnic cooperation and dialogue. Serbia
appreciates very much the fact that the Commission’s
activities are pursued under the auspices of UNMIK
and in accordance with Security Council resolution
1244 (1999), with the participation of the Serbian
Orthodox Church. Serbia particularly appreciates the
Council of Europe’s contribution to the Commission’s
work and expects the Council to continue to play its
cooperative role.
The question of refugees continues to be an
extremely burdensome problem for Serbia and the
entire region of South-Eastern Europe. In order to find
lasting and sustainable solutions, it is necessary to
intensify cooperation between the United Nations, in
particular the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), in order to solve this problem at the regional
level, with the full implementation of the Sarajevo
Declaration.
Serbia fully supports the continuation of the
activities of the OSCE Mission in Kosovo and
Metohija within its current mandate, under the auspices
of UNMIK and on the basis of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). This means that the activities
of the OSCE Mission in Kosovo must be status-neutral.
It is of particular importance that that Mission not
facilitate by its activities the building and functioning
of those institutions created through the unilateral
declaration of independence of the province. Serbia
expects the OSCE Mission in Kosovo to become
increasingly engaged in addressing one of the most
critical issues for Kosovo and Metohija: the security

18

and status of the non-Albanian ethnic communities
which live in very difficult conditions. In that
connection, it is necessary that, in addition to
developing democratic institutions and the rule of law,
the OSCE Mission in Kosovo accentuates in its
activities the improvement of the status of the ethnic
groups discriminated against. This implies respect for
human rights, security, freedom of movement, property
and labour rights, health protection and education. We
call on the OSCE Mission in Kosovo to devote special
attention to communities living in enclaves and to
support the Serbian proposal to establish new
municipalities which would reduce the level of
isolation of the population living in the enclaves.
A comprehensive programme for the sustainable
return of internally displaced persons must be drawn
up, to which the OSCE Mission in Kosovo may render
a significant contribution through cooperation with
competent Serbian institutions and international
organizations.
The OSCE Mission in Kosovo should also
support the protection of the property rights and
individual tenancy rights of the members of ethnic
communities discriminated against; ensure property
restitution and compensation for destroyed or
inaccessible property; and make sure that the rights of
the State of Serbia to privatized property or property to
be privatized are respected. There is no doubt that the
respect and protection of those rights are among the
preconditions for the safe and sustainable return of
internally displaced persons to their homes.
The OSCE Mission in Kosovo should invest
additional efforts in improving the situation of the
judiciary in Kosovo and Metohija. Those efforts would
be particularly important in establishing an appropriate
judiciary system in those parts of the province whose
population refuses to recognize the secessionist
Government.
In conclusion, I would like to underline the
question of the destiny of missing persons, namely
Serbs and other non-Albanians in Kosovo and
Metohija, particularly in the light of the testimony
published in the book by Carla Del Ponte, former Chief
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia. I therefore urge UNMIK to do
its utmost to ensure that all cases are properly
investigated.

08-58387

A/63/PV.37

The Acting President: In accordance with
General Assembly resolution 44/6 of 17 October 1989,
I now call on the Secretary General of the Council of
Europe, Mr. Terry Davis.
Mr. Davis (Council of Europe): Some people
argue that a world facing economic turmoil and
terrorist threats should have other priorities than
human rights. They could not be more wrong.
Recession and terrorism are two very different
things, but they both cause insecurity and fear. They
both put a strain on relations among people and among
peoples. It is at times like these that there is an even
greater need for the values of humanity; a greater need
for justice, for equality, for solidarity, for tolerance and
for mutual respect, both among people and among
peoples.
History has taught us a harsh lesson every time
this simple truth has been forgotten or ignored. It was
with that truth in mind that, 60 years ago, this General
Assembly adopted the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. And it was with this truth in mind that, 60 years
ago, a group of European countries established the
Council of Europe and, two years later, adopted the
European Convention on Human Rights.
Today, the General Assembly is discussing draft
resolution A/63/L.12, on cooperation between the
United Nations and the Council of Europe. I hope that
it will receive the broadest possible support. Its content
reflects the work which the Council of Europe is doing
to protect, promote and expand in Europe the values
and ideals which are common to us all. In our
endeavour, the United Nations is a most important and
valuable partner. Our cooperation is continuous, close,
wide-ranging, specific and meaningful.
The draft resolution contains a more detailed
description of where our cooperation stands today and
where we would like to take it tomorrow. It refers to
our activities, standards, achievements and objectives,
about all of which we feel very strongly. Some are
universally accepted; others, less so. But they were
included to inspire dialogue, not to dictate.
One omission from the draft resolution is a
reference to the abolition of the death penalty. At the
Council of Europe, we regard the death penalty as one
of the most inhumane and degrading forms of
punishment. Only one country in Europe, in fact the
only European country which is not a member of the

08-58387

Council of Europe, still uses the death penalty and we
look forward to its abolition there as well.
This is a good illustration of the fact that Europe
is not alone. We know that we are part of the majority
here in the United Nations General Assembly. That
makes my final point for me: the Council of Europe
does not presume to lecture or to impose its ideas and
values on the rest of the world; that was the old
imperialist attitude of Europe. Today we recognize that
we are only one part of the world. We are proud of our
values but we are not too proud to admit that we can
learn from other continents. We want to work together
with the rest of the world to define our common values
and translate them into reality. In short, we want to
work together with the United Nations to change the
world. I hope for the Assembly’s support.
The Acting President: In accordance with
General Assembly resolution 33/18 of 10 November
1978 and General Assembly decision 53/453 of
18 December 1998, I now call on the permanent
observer of the International Organization of la
Francophonie.
Mr. Camara (International Organization of la
Francophonie) (spoke in French): As this is the first
time that I have taken the floor, I should like, on behalf
of Mr. Abdou Diouf, Secretary-General of the
International Organization of la Francophonie (OIF),
and on my own behalf, to congratulate the President of
the General Assembly and the other Assembly officers
on the trust placed in them to lead the work of the
sixty-third session. The Secretary-General of the OIF
also requested that I commend His Excellency Mr. Ban
Ki-moon for his excellent relationship with the OIF, for
the quality of his report (A/63/228) and for his constant
availability. Indeed, the two Secretaries-General have
met three times in less than two years, which attests to
the excellent relations between the two organizations.
I thank the Group of Francophone Ambassadors,
who, since the moment that I arrived, have made me
feel welcome and have given me all the individual and
collective support that an organization can expect from
its members. In particular, I congratulate the
representatives of Latvia and the Kingdom of Thailand,
which recently joined the OIF. On behalf of the OIF
Secretary-General, I assure them that they will find
friendship and solidarity there.
of

Because of the comprehensiveness of the report
the Secretary-General (A/63/228) regarding

19

A/63/PV.37

cooperation between the United Nations and the OIF, I
need not list the significant results achieved in that area
over the past two years. As members will have noted in
the report, the OIF’s activities seek to strengthen the
pillars of the United Nations: security, development
and human rights.
I should like to quickly emphasize the areas in
which the OIF would particularly like to highlight its
cooperation with the United Nations in the coming
years: consolidating activities related to early warning,
preventive diplomacy and the OIF’s mediation at a
seminar following up on the Paris meeting, which was
mentioned this morning; further strengthening the
peacekeeping capacities of French-speaking States and
encouraging them to contribute military contingents
that include police and civilian components; increasing
electoral assistance and monitoring to consolidate the
rule of law and assist democratic transitions; and
promoting swifter ratification of major international
instruments, in particular the Convention on the
Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural
Expressions and the Optional Protocols to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, which has been
ratified by all French-speaking countries and whose
twentieth anniversary will be commemorated in 2009.
The OIF regrets the fact that the francophone
community is affected by several crisis situations. We
are convinced of the added value of our organization
and its ability to make a specific contribution to the
resolution of those crises in accordance, of course, with
the Charter of the United Nations, international law
and the sovereignty of States.
Therefore, in close cooperation with the United
Nations, the OIF will strive to increase its efforts to
promote the rule of law and the restoration of
constitutional order whenever necessary, in conformity
with
the
Bamako
Declaration;
to
promote
implementation of the Ouagadougou Political
Agreement as well as stability in Chad, the Great
Lakes region, Lebanon and Haiti; and to assist the
inclusive political dialogue process in the Central
African Republic.
The OIF participates actively in the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission within its country-specific
configurations for Burundi, the Central African
Republic and Guinea-Bissau. Here, we commend the
respective Chairs of those configurations and the
Peacebuilding Support Office.

20

The Quebec summit, which was, as recalled
earlier, the first North-South forum of heads of State or
Government to meet following the outbreak of the
financial crisis, called for reform of the international
financial system through efforts to find sustainable and
viable solutions within inclusive forums, taking into
account the concerns and sensitivities felt in all regions
throughout the world. In that regard, the OIF
commends the initiative of the President of the General
Assembly to establish an expert group to express
independent views in relevant forums. The OIF hopes
that French-speaking experts will be more closely
involved in seeking solutions to that terrible crisis.
Given the seriousness of environmental
challenges and climate change, the OIF reaffirms its
support for the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change and for the implementation of the
Kyoto Protocol and the Bali Road Map. We are
working towards the common goal of at least a
50 per cent reduction in global greenhouse gas
emissions by 2050 and are continuing, within the
framework of the negotiations under United Nations
auspices, to seek a global consensus on concrete
objectives more closely aligned with the scenarios
formulated by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change.
Based on the shared values of peace, democracy,
the rule of law and human rights, as well as the sharing
of the French language, the OIF is particularly
sensitive to respect for the status of languages. That
demand and that vigilance, which we share with all
other linguistic groups, is reflected in the
implementation
of
resolution
61/266,
on
multilingualism, which is understood as achieving
parity among the six official languages of the
Organization and between the two working languages
of the Secretariat. The twofold commemoration of the
sixtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and of the International Year of
Languages highlights all the meaning and importance
of that principle.
The Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, has
already shown the way forward. Within a very short
period of time, by virtue of his personal commitment
and political resolve, he has made statements that have
taken into account the reality of diversity. Can the
Secretary-General’s example be followed and
strengthened to serve the peoples of the United
Nations?

08-58387

A/63/PV.37

In addition to his personal commitment, the
Secretary-General followed up on one of the General
Assembly’s
recommendations
by
appointing
Mr. Kiyotaka Akasaka, Under-Secretary-General for
Communications
and
Public
Information,
as
Coordinator for Multilingualism to strengthen the
United Nations as a forum to set a global agenda. The
OIF congratulates Mr. Akasaka and assures him of its
availability and support. Promoting diversity illustrates
the old adage: instead of being right alone, let us be
right together; let us prefer being right collectively to
being right individually.
The women and men who, in the silence of
booths and behind computer keyboards, are busy
manipulating countless documents — those without
whom conferences and seminars would be monotonous
and monolingual and who work tirelessly to enable us
to understand and listen to one another — those women
and men, the translators, interpreters, editors,
proofreaders and supervisors of the language and
conference services of the United Nations system, who
restore to the world its plural identity and linguistic
diversity, deserve our undivided attention and full
consideration. On behalf of the International
Organization of la Francophone, I salute them.
The Acting President: In accordance with
General Assembly resolution 35/2 of 13 October 1980,
I now call on the observer for the Asian-African Legal
Consultative Organization.
Mr. Narinder Singh (Asian-African Legal
Consultative Organization): It is my privilege and
honour, on behalf of the Asian-African Legal
Consultative Organization (AALCO) and in my
capacity as President of the forty-seventh session of
AALCO, to address this Assembly, the most
representative and democratic forum of the world.
I extend my sincere congratulations to the
Assembly President and to his colleagues in the Bureau
on their elections to those high offices. We are
confident that, with his wisdom and experience, he will
steer the session to a very successful outcome.
The
Asian-African
Legal
Consultative
Organization was one of the tangible outcomes of the
historic Bandung Conference, which took place in
1955. It linked together States of the Asian and African
regions, sending a message to the world that whatever
may be the differences in our political, economic or
legal systems, we are inextricably linked together as an

08-58387

Asian-African identity. That message of Bandung has
had a lasting appeal, which for years has brought
Asian-African countries together in various world
forums.
AALCO has been promoting Asian-African
cooperation on legal matters during the 52 years of its
existence. The organization was originally founded by
seven States and has grown over time to comprise
47 member States and two observers. We look forward
to enlarging our membership even further, so that we
may become more representative and better promote
the views and concerns of the member States of the
region. I take this opportunity to call upon other
countries from Asia and Africa to consider becoming
members of AALCO.
The 2005 World Summit Outcome document
(resolution 60/1) acknowledged that many of today’s
threats recognize no national boundaries, are
interlinked and must be tackled at the global, regional
and national levels in accordance with the Charter and
international law, and that regional and other
organizations can play a key role in helping the United
Nations face those global challenges. Cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
should seek to capitalize on the strength of each
organization and should be complementary.
AALCO complements the work of the United
Nations in the progressive development and
codification of international law. AALCO provides an
opportunity to a large number of Asian and African
countries to contribute actively to the strengthening of
the rule of law in international relations. It has
undertaken various studies on international legal issues
of common concern and has, in cooperation with the
United Nations, played a significant role in
harmonizing the positions of Asian and African
countries in the legal area.
AALCO held its forty-sixth and forty-seventh
annual sessions in Cape Town, South Africa, in 2007
and New Delhi, India, in 2008, respectively, and during
those sessions a number of items on our agenda
complemented the work of the United Nations. At both
those sessions, we considered the work of the
International Law Commission, the law of the sea, the
status and treatment of refugees, cooperation against
trafficking in women and children, human rights,
terrorism, the environment and the United Nations
Convention against Corruption. At the Cape Town

21

A/63/PV.37

session, we focused special attention on the ongoing
Doha Round of trade negotiations and on international
cooperation in countering terrorism, while at the New
Delhi session, the topic for special consideration was
issues in international humanitarian law.
The forty-seventh session of AALCO gave rise to
mandates that are pertinent to the work of the United
Nations. For example, the secretariat has been asked to
conduct a study to find durable solutions to refugee
problems. On international terrorism, the AALCO
Secretary-General is exploring the possibility of
holding a workshop in cooperation with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to deal with legal
aspects of countering terrorism. The secretariat is
considering preparing model legislation to implement
the United Nations Convention against Corruption of
2003, while the work on model legislation against
trafficking in persons, especially women and children,
is well on its way to completion.
The topic of climate change was a priority issue
at our most recent session, and the secretariat has been
mandated to follow up on the ongoing negotiations for
an international agreement on stronger action on
climate change for the period beyond 2012, as laid
down in the Bali Action Plan. In addition, AALCO will
hold a one-day seminar entitled “Sixty Years of the
International Law Commission” in New Delhi on
2 December 2008. The wide range of topics on
AALCO’s agenda clearly illustrates the capacity of the
organization to contribute positively to collective
efforts aimed at tackling the new challenges facing the
international community.
In order to assist in the teaching, study,
dissemination and wider appreciation of international
law in the Asian-African region, AALCO has launched
an annual training programme on general international
law, whose first session will run from 3 to
14 November 2008 at its headquarters in New Delhi.
We hope to strengthen that programme further with the
support of the relevant United Nations bodies, such as
the United Nations University and the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research, with which we are
working closely.
We need to mobilize all our resources to address
the tremendous global challenges facing humankind.
Undoubtedly, strengthening cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations is a key
element in that respect. Expanding relations between

22

the United Nations and AALCO could also serve that
objective and contribute to fulfilling the purposes and
principles of the United Nations.
In conclusion, may I express our hope and
expectation for enhanced future cooperation between
our two organizations in all areas of common concern
and in the best interests of our Member States. Finally,
I would like to commend the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (A/63/228) on the subject.
The Acting President: In accordance with
General Assembly resolution 57/32 of 19 November
2002, I now call on the Secretary General of the
Inter-Parliamentary Union, His Excellency Mr. Anders
Johnsson.
Mr. Johnsson (Inter-Parliamentary Union): Last
month, Sir, one of the predecessors of the President of
the General Assembly and today the Speaker of the
Parliament of Namibia, Dr. Theo-Ben Gurirab, was
elected President of the Inter-Parliamentary Union
(IPU). He has asked me to deliver these remarks on his
and the IPU’s behalf and to assure the President that he
looks forward to working very closely with him in
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and the Inter-Parliamentary Union.
As the latest report (A/63/228) of the United
Nations Secretary-General amply attests, cooperation
between our two organizations over the past two years
has been substantive and widespread. It has covered
international peace and security, development, finance
and trade, democracy, gender and human rights.
I do not propose to dwell on the details of this
broad agenda, but I would like to highlight a few points
of particular relevance for our future work together.
Two years ago the General Assembly adopted an
ambitious resolution (resolution 61/6) on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Inter-Parliamentary
Union (IPU) which welcomed the efforts, then under
way, for a greater parliamentary contribution to the
work of the United Nations. It urged the IPU to play an
active role in relation to the newly established United
Nations bodies, in particular the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Development Cooperation Forum and
the Human Rights Council. I am pleased to report that
good progress is being made on all of these fronts.
Since then, the IPU has been working closely
with the Peacebuilding Commission, based on the
common understanding that a key prerequisite for

08-58387

A/63/PV.37

lasting peace is the establishment of strong institutions
of good governance. From this perspective, the
institution of parliament, as a forum for national
reconciliation where political parties from the majority
and opposition can forge a consensus on national
development objectives, requires particular attention.
The IPU will continue to work with the Commission,
with a view to more fully engaging national
parliaments in the countries under consideration by the
Commission in efforts to promote democratic
governance, national dialogue and reconciliation. At
the risk of stating the obvious, I will add that
democracy will not flourish in a country where the
parliament is neglected.
The IPU is also closely following the work of the
Human Rights Council, particularly as it relates to the
universal periodic review of the fulfilment of human
rights obligations and commitments by United Nations
Member States. As I speak here today, members of
parliamentary human rights bodies are meeting at IPU
headquarters in Geneva for discussions with the
Council and the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights to develop a programme of action for
parliamentary participation in the review. This is part
of our work to secure deeper involvement by
parliaments everywhere in the international human
rights monitoring and follow-up mechanisms. It means
involving members of parliament at an early stage
when the periodic country reports to be submitted to
the United Nations are being drafted. It involves
submitting the conclusions and recommendations that
emanate from those main monitoring bodies to
parliament for further consideration and action by
them, and it involves consolidating the oversight
function of parliament as it relates to the
implementation of international commitments.
As far as the Economic and Social Council
Development Cooperation Forum is concerned, the
IPU has played a part in shaping its agenda and
working procedures. In June we convened the
parliamentary segment of a Stakeholder Forum on the
role of national and local stakeholders in contributing
to aid quality and effectiveness. Its report was
introduced to the Development Cooperation Forum at
its first substantive session here in New York this July,
and it helped influence the outcome of the third HighLevel Forum on Aid Effectiveness. Indeed, the Accra
Agenda for Action speaks clearly about the
responsibility of parliaments to help design national

08-58387

development plans, ensuring greater transparency in
public financial management and overseeing sound
mutual assessment reviews.
The Secretary-General’s report offers many
examples of the IPU helping to mobilize parliaments in
support of the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs). The newly elected IPU President, who, as
President of the General Assembly, presided over the
drafting of the Millennium Declaration, is committed
to redoubling that effort. Under his leadership, the IPU
will also pursue the parliamentary campaign that it
launched last year to build political momentum in
support of the current negotiations to address climate
change.
General Assembly resolution 61/6 also called for
the development, as joint United NationsInter-Parliamentary Union events, of the annual
parliamentary hearing at the United Nations and other
specialized parliamentary meetings in the context of
major United Nations conferences. Each year we hold a
parliamentary meeting during the annual session of the
Commission on the Status of Women, seeking to
mobilize parliamentary action on the main issue under
consideration by the Commission. This year’s highlevel meeting on HIV/AIDS was accompanied by an
IPU-United
Nations
Development
ProgrammeUNAIDS organized parliamentary meeting that yielded
some very practical policy recommendations for
parliaments. This is the second year that the annual
parliamentary hearing at the United Nations will be
convened jointly by the President of the United
Nations General Assembly and the President of the
IPU. One of the subjects on our agenda for the hearing
this November is the responsibility to protect, on which
we expect a lively and constructive exchange of views.
The United Nations Secretary-General recommends, in
his report, that the report of this hearing be circulated
as an official United Nations document, a proposal
with which, needless to say, the IPU concurs. We very
much hope that we can rely on your support as well.
Last week the President convened an interactive
panel discussion for the General Assembly on the
subject of the global financial crisis. Two weeks
earlier, members of the 154 parliaments represented in
the IPU held a similar debate on the occasion of the
119th IPU Assembly. The resolution they adopted on
that occasion calls for a truly global and multilateral
response to a crisis that extends far beyond the world
of finance. The resolution refers repeatedly to the need

23

A/63/PV.37

to ensure justice, transparency and accountability. It
calls on parliaments to make sure that safeguards are in
place to avoid the emergence of similar crises in the
future and, more generally, it invites parliaments to
exercise greater democratic oversight of finance and
the economy. The resolution also exhorts Governments
to remain vigilant, notwithstanding the crisis, in
meeting international commitments to implement the
MDGs and similar internationally agreed development
goals. It concludes by giving us a mandate to organize,
as soon as possible, a global parliamentary conference
to examine the causes of the crisis and to suggest
avenues for dealing with its consequences. We very
much hope to be able to count on your support and
cooperation when we carry this proposal forward.
When the President of the General Assembly at
its sixty-third session took up office, he singled out
democratization of the United Nations as one of the
main themes for consideration by the General
Assembly in the year ahead. We can only welcome his
decision, as it is a theme to which the IPU itself has
been paying considerable attention.
Two years ago, when we last addressed the
General Assembly on the question of cooperation
between the United Nations and the IPU, the second
World Conference of Speakers of Parliament had
recently taken place here at United Nations
Headquarters in this very Hall. The parliamentary
leaders then issued a political declaration entitled
“Bridging the democracy gap in international relations:
A stronger role for parliaments”. They expressed
support for United Nations reform, including the
revitalization of the General Assembly and a more
representative Security Council, and they gave voice to
the need to make the United Nations more democratic
and accountable to the people it serves throughout the
world. They suggested that cooperation between the
United Nations, national parliaments and the IPU
needed to be significantly strengthened and developed
into a strategic partnership for that to happen.
As the Secretary-General’s report suggests, this
agenda can be advanced through a regular exchange
between the United Nations System Chief Executives
Board for Coordination and the senior leadership of the
IPU, with a view to building greater coherence in the
work of the two organizations. However, it also needs
to be placed at the forefront of deliberations here at the
United Nations. The IPU is ready to engage in such a
discussion, and we invite the General Assembly to join

24

us. In his report, the Secretary-General suggests that
the Assembly may wish to devote a specific agenda
item to this issue. We trust that Member States will be
ready to support this proposal. It would be one
important way in which the Assembly can advance its
agenda of democratizing the United Nations.
The Acting President: In accordance with
General Assembly resolution 54/5 of 8 October 1999, I
now call on His Excellency Mr. Leonidas
Chrysanthopoulos, Secretary General of the Black Sea
Economic Cooperation Organization.
Mr. Chrysanthopoulos (Black Sea Economic
Cooperation Organization): The foundations of the
Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization
(BSEC) were laid down in 1992 as a political initiative
for economic cooperation in the wake of tremendous
changes that had taken place in the world. It was a
period following the collapse of the Soviet Union. The
founding fathers of BSEC wanted to create an
organization that could promote peace and stability in
the Black Sea region through prosperity.
In those 16 years, BSEC has become a forum for
discussion and cooperation in a wide range of areas,
namely, energy, transport, trade and economic
development, small and medium-sized enterprises,
environment, tourism, culture, education, science and
technology,
telecommunications,
pharmaceutics,
agriculture, emergency relief and elimination of the
consequences of natural and human-made disasters, as
well as combating organized crime and terrorism.
Furthermore, BSEC has built a permanent and
extensive institutional framework of cooperation that
covers all levels of governance. BSEC has also
elaborated binding agreements and common action
plans on key issues of regional cooperation. The
Agreement on Combating Organized Crime and its
protocols, the agreements on cooperation in emergency
situations and the agreements on simplification of visa
procedures for business-people and for professional
lorry driver nationals are some examples.
Today, BSEC is in the process of implementing
regional projects of major significance for the Black
Sea region, as well as for the Eurasian region. These
include the Black Sea Ring Highway project and the
project on the development of the motorways of the sea
in the BSEC region. The memoranda of understanding
related to those projects were signed in 2007. The two
projects pertain to the development of transport links in

08-58387

A/63/PV.37

the region. They are expected to do much to foster
intra-BSEC trade, as well as tourism, infrastructure,
transport investments and economic prosperity among
the countries of the Black Sea. Most importantly, they
will make a concrete positive difference in the lives of
the people of the region and bring them closer
together — which should be an objective of all
international and regional organizations.
The Black Sea Ring Highway project envisages a
four-lane ring highway system, approximately
7,100 kilometres long, to connect BSEC member States
with one another. The project on the development of
the motorways of the sea in the BSEC region concerns
strengthening the maritime links among the ports of
BSEC member States. That project will make the Black
Sea smaller by creating the necessary infrastructure for
better connecting the Black Sea ports and the Black
Sea with the Mediterranean and the Caspian Seas.
At its fifty-fourth session, the General Assembly,
by its resolution 54/5 of 8 October 1999, granted
observer status to the Black Sea Economic Cooperation
Organization.
Subsequently,
General Assembly
resolution 55/211 of 20 December 2000, on
cooperation between the United Nations and the Black
Sea Economic Cooperation Organization, opened up
new avenues for BSEC to develop working
relationships with other organizations within the
United Nations system and beyond.
Since then, BSEC has signed cooperation
agreements with the United Nations Economic
Commission for Europe, the United Nations
Environment Programme, the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization (UNIDO) and the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP). BSEC has
also developed cooperation with the United Nations
Food and Agriculture Organization, the World Trade
Organization, the World Bank, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the
International Organization for Migration (IOM).
I wish to give a brief summary of the
development of relations between BSEC and the
specialized agencies and other organizations and
programmes of the United Nations system during the
2007-2008 period. Within the framework of our
cooperation with UNDP, the Black Sea Trade and
Investment Promotion Programme (BSTIP) was
launched in December 2006. BSTIP is the first
partnership project between UNDP and BSEC and the

08-58387

first programme jointly financed by Turkey and Greece
under the auspices of UNDP.
The overall aim of the Programme is to support
economic growth and development in the Black Sea
subregion through closer economic integration and to
expand intraregional trade and investment links among
BSEC member States. BSTIP is expected to have a
positive impact on the reduction of poverty as well.
New partnerships will be developed with business
support organizations. The beneficiaries of BSTIP are
small and medium-sized enterprises and special
emphasis is given to enterprises managed by young and
women entrepreneurs. The Programme is being
implemented in cooperation with local chambers of
commerce and business support organizations in each
of the BSEC countries.
As far as our cooperation with UNODC is
concerned, the first joint BSEC-UNODC project has
just recently been completed. The BSEC Regional
Action Plan for Strengthening the Criminal Justice
Response to Trafficking in Persons in the Black Sea
Region is a concrete product of that cooperation. That
BSEC Regional Action Plan aims at promoting
expertise and best practices exchange as well as
enhancing cooperation among BSEC member States in
combating human trafficking. Along with its policy
development and capacity-building aspects, the Action
Plan gives special consideration to three basic elements
in fighting human trafficking, namely, prevention,
protection and prosecution.
As part of our cooperation with IOM, we recently
completed a joint BSEC-IOM project on migration
management. A concrete outcome of that cooperation
was that the Migration Policy Recommendations for
the Black Sea Region were developed and adopted by
BSEC. The main purpose of the Recommendations is
to encourage the creation of a framework for BSEC
member States for sharing expertise and best practices
in migration policies in view of preventing irregular
migration flows and simultaneously facilitating legal
ones. The establishment of cooperation between BSEC
and UNIDO’s International Centre for Hydrogen
Energy Technology is another positive development.
I would like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his factual report on the status of
cooperative relationships between BSEC and various
United Nations organizations during 2007 and 2008
(A/67/228). We appreciate his recommendation that the

25

A/63/PV.37

United Nations, the specialized agencies and other
organizations and programmes of the United Nations
system should continue to hold consultations with
BSEC and formulate and implement joint programmes
pertaining to fields of common interest.
On 25 June 2007, BSEC celebrated its fifteenth
anniversary with a summit in Istanbul. Almost all
heads of State or Government of BSEC member States
attended. This high level of participation was a
reflection of the political support provided by the
member States as well as the strong credibility of the
organization.
One of the most important conclusions of the
summit, which finds its reflection in the summit
declaration, concerns the redefinition of the focus and
priorities of BSEC in certain areas of cooperation
where we can derive tangible results, such as
environmental protection, trade, transport, tourism,
energy, telecommunications, science and technology
and the fight against all forms of organized crime.
In the declaration, the heads of State and
Government of BSEC member States reiterated their
commitment to contribute to the attainment of the
United Nations Millennium Development Goals at
national, regional and global levels and instructed the
Council of Ministers of Foreign Affairs to examine
possible steps for the achievement of those goals in the
BSEC region. Within that framework, cooperation is
envisaged with UNICEF and UNDP.
The consequences of the ongoing global financial
crisis are of concern to all of us. Measures need to be
taken by all BSEC member States to safeguard their
financial institutions so that economic development in
the BSEC region is not impeded. The BSEC Working
Group on Banking and Finance will be convened on
18 November to assess the situation.
This assessment will allow the member States
that have taken measures to protect their financial
institutions to share that information with those
member States that have not yet been affected at the
same level by the financial crisis.
The global food crisis is one of the themes in the
debate at this session of the General Assembly, and it is
also being addressed by our organization. Within the
BSEC working group on agriculture and agro-industry,
BSEC member States have considered the situation
concerning the consequences of the increase in food

26

prices and the actions that may be undertaken in order
to reverse such an increase. Acknowledging that the
increase in food prices is a worldwide trend that affects
both developed and developing countries, the working
group identified various causes that lead to the
increase.
In addition to our efforts to achieve food security,
another area where BSEC wishes to contribute is the
improvement
of
respect,
understanding
and
cooperation among nations and peoples of different
cultures and religions and to counter the forces that
fuel polarization. We believe that any effort in this
direction is valuable in promoting sustained peace,
security and stability. It is within this framework that
BSEC has decided to open exploratory contacts with
the Alliance of Civilizations.
Before concluding, I would like to pay tribute to
the Republic of Albania, the previous chair-in-office of
BSEC, for drafting and introducing the draft resolution
that is now before the General Assembly (A/63/L.9). I
also wish to thank the sponsors of the text and hope it
will be adopted by consensus. Adoption of this draft
resolution will give new impetus to BSEC’s
cooperation with the United Nations and its specialized
agencies and others in the pursuit of the objectives and
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations as well as those contained in the BSEC charter.
BSEC will continue to play its role with determination
in efforts to strengthen multilateral cooperation to meet
the global challenges of this millennium.
The Acting President: In accordance with
General Assembly resolution 477(V) of 1 November
1950, I now call on the Permanent Observer for the
League of Arab States.
Mr. Mahmassani (League of Arab States) (spoke
in Arabic): I would like at the outset to commend
Mr. Miguel d’Escoto Brockmann on his election to the
presidency of the General Assembly at its sixty-third
session. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for the report
that he has presented to this session (A/63/228) on the
close and multifaceted cooperation between the League
of Arab States and the United Nations in confronting
the challenges and risks posed to international peace
and security.
The League of Arab States and its specialized
agencies are working on continuing and intensifying
their various facets of cooperation with the United

08-58387

A/63/PV.37

Nations, as set forth in the Secretary-General’s report.
The most recent meeting between representatives of
the United Nations and the League of Arab States took
place in Geneva in early July 2008 and covered several
political issues. It also discussed and proposed joint
projects in the economic, environmental, social,
humanitarian, cultural and technical fields, as well as
in the area of capacity-building. In addition,
participants agreed to form a mechanism to follow up
United Nations and Arab League resolutions; bolster
institutional ties between their two secretariats so as to
exchange experience, expertise and lessons learned;
and raise the level of joint efforts for conflict
prevention.
The United Nations Secretary-General has
supported the Arab League’s initiative and proposals to
end the political crisis in Lebanon. Cooperation
between the two organizations over the Iraqi issue has
primarily focused on establishing and activating an
expanded regional dialogue that was initiated in Sharm
el-Sheikh in 2007. The Arab League has also
cooperated closely with the United Nations on the
launching and implementation of the International
Compact with Iraq. This cooperation involves several
joint undertakings, including projects in the fields of
commerce, investment, finance, agriculture, water,
sustainable development and the implementation of the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
In the field of industrial development, the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization has been
cooperating with the Arab Industrial Development and
Mining Organization and the Arab League Educational,
Cultural and Scientific Organization. Projects related to
the environment have included implementation of the
sustainable development initiative in the Arab region,
as well as efforts to implement resolutions of the
United Nations Environment Programme and the
Global Ministerial Environment Forum.
In addition, the Department of Economic and
Social Affairs (DESA), together with the Arab League,
has implemented a special capacity-building project in
the field of evaluating development strategies aimed at
achieving the MDGs in the Arab region. Last March,
DESA, working in collaboration with the Western Asia
regional office of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and the Arab League, organized,
in Abu Dhabi the first Round Table Meeting of Experts
on Sustainable Consumption and Production in the
Arab Region. Participants stressed the importance of

08-58387

cooperation between the two organizations and the
need to build confidence in the dialogue among
civilizations, as well as bolster their alliance and
maintain the values of peaceful coexistence and human
dignity.
In this context, the Alliance of Civilizations
signed a memorandum of understanding with the Arab
League in order to encourage cooperation in various
fields, including an initiative to support human rights,
tolerance and the exchange of new practices, as well as
finding opportunities to enrich dialogue between
different cultures and religions.
The Arab League’s efforts to intensify full
cooperation with the United Nations in all fields makes
it eager to continue consultations and discussions in
order to search for all possible ways and means to
guarantee the implementation of all resolutions issued
by the Organization, whether related to disarmament,
combating terrorism or to the peaceful settlement of
conflict.
The most important priority for the Arab League
is to find a just and lasting solution to the Arab-Israeli
conflict, in accordance with resolutions of international
legitimacy, the Madrid terms of reference and the Arab
Peace Initiative. Strengthening cooperation between
the two organizations will reinforce ongoing efforts to
confront international dangers and challenges and
maintain international peace and security. Moreover, it
would guarantee a Middle East region free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, in
accordance with resolutions of international legitimacy.
Cooperation between the League of Arab States
and the United Nations emanates from a deep-rooted
traditional Arab culture which calls for tolerance and
peaceful coexistence with others through dialogue
among civilizations. The draft resolution to be
presented to the General Assembly under this agenda
item, on cooperation between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States (A/63/L.20), would
strengthen the principles of cooperation between the
two organizations.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 114 and its
sub-items (a) to (u).
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolutions A/63/L.7, A/63/L.9, A/63/L.10, A/63/L.11,
A/63/L.12 and A/63/L.13.

27

A/63/PV.37

Draft resolution A/63/L.7 is entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Asian-African
Legal Consultative Organization”. Before proceeding
to take action on the draft resolution, I should like to
announce that since its introduction the following
countries have become sponsors: the Congo, Gabon,
Syrian Arab Republic and Mongolia. May I take it that
the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/63/L.7?
Draft resolution A/63/L.7 was adopted (resolution
63/10).
The Acting President: Draft resolution A/63/L.9
is entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and
the
Black
Sea
Economic
Cooperation
Organization”. Before proceeding to take action on the
draft resolution, I should like to announce that since its
introduction the following countries have become
sponsors: Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bulgaria,
Georgia, Montenegro and Serbia. May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/63/L.9?
Draft resolution A/63/L.9 was adopted (resolution
63/11).
The Acting President: Draft resolution
A/63/L.10 is entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Latin American and Caribbean
Economic System”. Before proceeding to take action
on the draft resolution, I should like to announce that
since its introduction the following countries have
become sponsors: Belize, Brazil, Canada, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Ecuador, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras,
Jamaica and Panama. May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/63/L.10?
Draft resolution A/63/L.10 was adopted
(resolution 63/12).
The Acting President: We shall now turn to draft
resolution A/63/L.11, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Preparatory Commission
for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
Organization”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

In favour:
Albania, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahrain,
Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burundi, Cambodia,
China, Congo, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Egypt,
Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Hungary, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Myanmar, New Zealand, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, San Marino, Singapore,
Slovakia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Togo, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Yemen, Zambia
Against:
United States of America
Draft resolution A/63/L.11 was adopted by 64
votes to 1 (resolution 63/13).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Chile, Costa
Rica, Ecuador, Japan, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Maldives, the
Netherlands, Slovenia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and the United Kingdom
advised the Secretariat that they had intended to
vote in favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution
A/63/L.12 is entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Council of Europe”. Before proceeding
to take action on the draft resolution, I should like to
announce that since its introduction the following
countries have become sponsors: Albania, Andorra,
Armenia, Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Latvia, Lichtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, Norway,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine and
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/63/L.12?
Draft resolution A/63/L.12 was adopted
(resolution 63/14).

28

08-58387

A/63/PV.37

The Acting President: Draft resolution
A/63/L.13 is entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Eurasian Economic Community”. May
I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/63/L.13?
Draft resolution A/63/L.13 was adopted
(resolution 63/15).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belarus to speak in explanation of
position.
Mr. Rachkov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
Belarus welcomes the adoption of draft resolution
A/63/L.12, on cooperation between the United Nations
and the Council of Europe. In the resolution, the
General Assembly rightly pays tribute to the Council of
Europe for its advancement and protection of human
rights, including for its work on the issue of trafficking
in human beings.
We are happy to see mention of the entry into
force of the Council of Europe Convention on Action
against Trafficking in Human Beings. However, the list
of parties to that important document and to a number
of other international treaties of the Council of Europe
on issues of combating crime is in fact limited to the
member States of the Council of Europe. Because of
various circumstances, not all States that could and
would wish to make a meaningful contribution to
achieving the goals of the Convention have access to
the mechanisms of cooperation contained in it.
One means of developing cooperation between
the United Nations and the Council of Europe,
especially in combating human trafficking, would be
for the United Nations to promote a global plan of
action on that topic. As is the case with the
aforementioned Council of Europe Convention on
Action against Trafficking in Human Beings, not all
States are parties to other international documents in
the area of combating human trafficking, including the
Palermo Protocol to Prevent Trafficking in Persons,
especially Women and Children. We believe that a
United Nations plan of action to combat human
trafficking, designed to draw in all Member States,
could
combine
valuable
experience
in
the
implementation of various regional and international
documents in that area in a clear and open plan for
multilateral cooperation, with a genuinely global
nature.

08-58387

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-items (b), (d), (g), (j), (m) and (t)
of agenda item 114?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
114 and its sub-items (a), (c), (e), (f), (h), (i), (k), (l),
(n) to (s) and (u).
The Acting President: Before proceeding to the
next item on our agenda, I would like to appeal to
those Member States intending to submit draft
resolutions on the remaining sub-items to do so as soon
as possible.
Agenda item 59
Holocaust remembrance
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/316)
Ms. Halpern (United States of America): Albert
Einstein once said “The world is a dangerous place to
live, not because of the people who are evil but
because of the people who don’t do anything about it”.
Einstein was referring to the deafening silence that
prevailed throughout the world while the Holocaust —
the systematic slaughter of innocents by the Nazis —
was taking place.
The lessons of the Holocaust are as real in our
day as they were 70 years ago, on the eve of
Kristallnacht. In every generation tyrants rise up to test
the will of the world. They know from studying the rise
of Hitler that it is possible to promise unspeakable acts
of violence and yet not be opposed. They know that the
world has the capacity to stand by and let evil flourish.
But they must also know that we too have studied
history and that we too have learned lessons from it.
The passage of resolution 60/7 by the General
Assembly three years ago, on 1 November 2005, is
proof of that. That resolution sets a new course for
international action to memorialize the victims of the
Holocaust and to confront the threat of genocide in our
own day.
The United States welcomes the release of the
Secretary-General’s recent report on the United
Nations Outreach Programme and is pleased to
acknowledge the excellent work done so far to
implement the full range of activities called for by

29

A/63/PV.37

resolution 60/7. The efforts to educate, conduct
outreach and help raise generations free from the bonds
of hatred are much needed and form the basis of the
work of the United Nations at all levels.
The Outreach Programme is to be commended for
the creative platforms it has used in order to reach
across the broad spectrum of diverse societies,
including seminars, briefings and round tables, online
educational curricula, film screenings, exhibits and
concerts. Such an all-encompassing approach to
Holocaust remembrance will prove to be indispensable
to the education of today’s young people to the dangers
inherent in hatred and bigotry and to the horrors of
what humankind is capable of doing to one another.
The United States is proud to be a committed
participant in those Outreach Programme efforts.
American educators, film-makers, musicians, institutes
of higher education, museums and foundations have
contributed their resources and talents to the success of
this Programme.
The United States Holocaust Memorial Museum,
for example, has been an active partner with the United
Nations Programme. The United States Holocaust
Memorial Museum has organized training seminars for
United Nations information officers serving in the
field. The work of memorializing the Holocaust and the
prevention of future genocides must be an abiding
concern for all free nations because the threat in our
own time is very real.
The same underlying issues of State-sponsored
hatred and intolerance which led to the Holocaust are
as dangerous today as they were then. The false and
anti-Semitic libels that flourished in Europe before the
Second World War now find new audiences throughout
the world. The dignity and value of each individual
must be respected and protected in order to prevent
future acts of genocide. The Outreach Programme and
all of the countries that have participated to date are to
be commended for their tireless efforts in spreading
that message.
Despite the adoption of resolution 60/7, it
remains inexplicable that one of the Member States,
Iran, continues to insist upon denying the truth of the
Holocaust. As the United States has stated many times
before, to deny the Holocaust is tantamount to
approving the extermination of the Jewish people in
particular, and to approving genocide in general. That
is unacceptable and unconscionable.

30

If the denial of the Holocaust does prove
anything, it is that the lessons of that
incomprehensible, tragic event in human history
remain unlearned. It is for that reason that the Outreach
Programme is especially important. We hope that the
Programme will continue to expand and provide the
necessary resources to counter intolerance and hatred
while promoting understanding and respect. The
United Nations will continue to support that essential
mission.
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon could not have
been more correct in stating that it is not enough to
remember, honour and grieve for the dead. As we do,
we must also educate, nurture and care for the living.
We must foster in our children a sense of responsibility
so that they can build societies that protect and
promote the rights of all civilians.
It is a simple truth, an eternal truth and a truth
worth defending against all those who seek to infringe
upon it. For if we do not affirm and protect the right of
every human being to live in a world free from
baseless hatred, racism and bigotry, we can never claim
to be an organization of united nations.
Ms. Shalev (Israel): At the outset, please allow
me to thank the President for convening this meeting.
One week from today, the United Nations will
mark the 70th anniversary of the Kristallnacht
pogrom — the Night of Broken Glass — a single night
that served as a prelude to the Holocaust. On that night,
organized gangs of Nazi rioters and their supporters
rampaged throughout Germany, destroying more than a
thousand synagogues, as well as thousands of Jewish
shops and businesses. In the massive pogrom, Jews
were murdered and many thousands more were sent to
concentration camps.
The anniversary we commemorate is one of many
activities of the Holocaust and the United Nations
Outreach Programme. It has been organized since its
inception, following the adoption in November 2005 of
resolution 60/7, entitled “Holocaust remembrance”.
The resolution was a historic and universal
achievement that signalled the first acknowledgement
by the United Nations of the tragedy that befell the
Jewish people during the years of the Second World
War. Indeed, other peoples, cultures and nations also
suffered severely from Nazi atrocities. However, let us
not forget that no other nation lost such an enormous

08-58387

A/63/PV.37

proportion of its people as did the Jewish people. In the
words of Elie Weisel, “Not all victims were Jews. But
all Jews were victims”.
The Secretary-General’s report before us
(A/63/316) details the impressive work of the
Holocaust and the United Nations Outreach
Programme of the Department of Public Information,
under the leadership of Mr. Kiyo Akasaka and his
predecessor, Mr. Shashi Tharoor. Israel commends
their valuable work and dedication and will continue to
support and cooperate with Mr. Akasaka and his staff.
The State of Israel and the Jewish people
appreciate the historic resolution unanimously adopted
by the General Assembly three years ago regarding
Holocaust remembrance. Yet the resolution and the
Secretary-General’s report are not ends unto
themselves. Holocaust remembrance must be a
dynamic and ongoing effort that requires our
commitment to adapting the lessons of the Nazi
genocide to evolving threats in our times.
Thus, we cannot ignore the troubling reality that
today — more than 60 years after the Holocaust — we
have heard from this very rostrum a leader of a
Member State who calls for the destruction of another
Member State and denies the historical realities of the
Holocaust. In this Hall, all Member States swore:
“Never again”. It is therefore incumbent upon us not
merely to condemn such statements, but to act
immediately and with resolve against a Member State
whose leaders declare such despicable and dangerous
words. For in the end, the Nazi Holocaust did not begin
in the gas chambers. That is where it ended. The Nazi
Holocaust began with the dangerous words of men.
Israel wishes to thank the Secretary-General for
his work, as detailed in the report, and my delegation
continues to offer its assistance to ensure that the
lessons of the Holocaust continue to promote peace,
coexistence and tolerance.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Humankind recalls the terrible crimes of
Nazism with indignation and grief. The bloodiest of
those crimes was the Holocaust. In my country, we
remember those who fell victim to Nazism, including
the six million killed in the Holocaust, half of whom
were citizens of the Soviet Union.
Russia considers the Holocaust to be not only the
national tragedy of the Jewish people, but a catastrophe

08-58387

of humankind as a whole. Current and future
generations must understand who encouraged that
horrific crime and who committed it. It is unacceptable
to whitewash the actions of those who participated in
the crimes of Nazism and were condemned by the
Nuremberg trials, first and foremost, the members of
the Schutzstaffel, the ideologues and executors of the
Holocaust.
Thus we are very worried about the chauvinistic
and pro-Nazi tendencies in certain countries, which
pose a threat to democracy and human rights. In
civilized countries, it must be unacceptable to glorify
the memory of Fascism’s accomplices — the
legionaries of the Waffen SS and other collaborators —
who destroyed the lives of hundreds of thousands of
peaceful citizens, prisoners of war and concentration
camp internees. It is also our responsibility to pay
tribute to all the soldiers who died freeing Europe from
Fascism and who saved the Jews and other peoples
from slavery and complete destruction. Let us not
forget those who freed the prisoners from AuschwitzBirkenau, Majdanek, Treblinka and other death camps.
At the same time, we are seeing cynical attempts
to rewrite history around the world. In some countries
that declare themselves democratic, the days of victory
over fascism are considered days of tragedy.
Memorials to those who fought fascism are
demolished. Monuments are erected and official
decorations awarded to those who fought for fascism
during the war and whose hands are drenched in the
blood of innumerable innocent victims. Furthermore, in
many States the accomplices of fascism and those who
were directly responsible for putting Nazism’s racial
theories into practice are often seen as representatives
of national liberation movements and freedom fighters
for their countries. Thus, the very concept of such
movements is desecrated, since they are considered to
be undertaken in the name of racial purification. We
believe that such an approach to be an insult to the
historic memory of peoples, especially to those who
fought against fascism.
The Second World War cost 50 million people
their lives. Having overcome the scourge of Nazism,
the world paid too high a price to have to accept
attempts to revive it 60 years after the war that led to
the creation of the United Nations. We need to be very
vigilant in the face of attempts to revive the ideology
that led to the Holocaust and uncompromising in
combating neo-Nazism and other forms of racism.

31

A/63/PV.37

That is why the Russian Federation requested
that, at this session of the General Assembly, a draft
resolution to be submitted to the Third Committee on
the inadmissibility of certain practices that contribute
to fuelling contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
(A/C.3/63/L.49). We are convinced that the adoption of
the draft resolution would contribute to the
consolidation of international efforts to overcome those
ugly phenomena. We call on all States that condemn
the crimes of Nazism and fascism and pay tribute to its
victims to support that initiative.
History has severely condemned National
Socialism. The crimes of Nazism and its collapse are a
formidable warning to all those who incite ethnic
tensions and forget the lessons of the Second World
War. We cannot allow people to suffer again by
permitting the spread and resurgence of chauvinist
doctrines.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I am
honoured to speak on behalf of the European Union,
Croatia, Ukraine, Moldova, Montenegro, Serbia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The European Union, like the United Nations,
arose out of the ruins of the Second World War. At the
height of the turmoil, the Holocaust covered our entire
continent with its ashes. However, far beyond Europe,
it marked consciences and changed our hearts. The
human race will never be the same again.
More than 60 years have passed since the
Holocaust. Where the actual tragedy took place,
Europeans have together patiently built a Union that
has consolidated peace throughout the continent and
brought them security and prosperity. United in their
diversity, Europeans have learned the errors of their
ways. They did not build to forget — quite the
contrary. The memory of the Holocaust was at the core
of their entire reconciliation process. Europe is aware
of its responsibility towards the survivors, their
children and grandchildren. All Europeans must know
and remember so that the barbarity that almost swept
them away will never emerge again.
Three years ago, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 60/7, which designated 27 January as
International Day of Commemoration in memory of the
victims of the Holocaust. The European Union
welcomes the adoption of that resolution, which
commemorates the liberation of the Nazi camps and

32

honours the memory of Holocaust victims, first and
foremost the millions of Jewish victims — men,
women and children — but also the Roma,
homosexuals, political prisoners or prisoners of war,
and the physically and mentally handicapped.
Commemorating Holocaust victims is an integral
part of our common heritage. It demonstrates our
commitment to doing our utmost to counter the very
idea that the worst might happen again. Unfortunately,
as we have seen in the past, that lesson is still being
rejected, denied or scorned in various parts of the
world. Even today, as the United Nations meets once
again to reaffirm its condemnation of the Holocaust
and to perpetuate the memory of its victims, some have
cast doubts in that regard or even deny it ever
occurred.
That is why the Assembly requested that the
Secretary-General establish an outreach programme on
the theme “The Holocaust and the United Nations” and
take measures to encourage civil society to mobilize
throughout the world. The European Union welcomes
the programme and the Secretary-General’s report
(A/63/316), which underscores its successful
implementation since its establishment in January
2006. The programme facilitated the creation of an
international network of groups from civil society,
world-renowned institutions and Holocaust experts to
develop as efficient and comprehensive an outreach
programme as possible.
By providing civil society with communication
tools to keep the memory of victims alive, the
programme is contributing to the fight against
forgetting or denying the Holocaust. As there are
increasingly fewer Holocaust survivors who can still
bear witness to it, it is essential that we find new ways
to keep the memories of those horrendous crimes alive
for future generations.
As the President of the Republic of France said at
Auschwitz at the sixtieth anniversary of the liberation
of the camps in 2005,
“To honour their memory, to honour the
memory of all those deportees who died
tragically in this place of suffering and Nazi
extermination: that is the duty of all peoples who
refuse to accept that the insult of oblivion should
be added to this betrayal of human values …
When we remember each and every one of them,
we give them justice. We prevail over their
executioners, who promised them oblivion.”

08-58387

A/63/PV.37

The purpose of adopting a resolution on
Holocaust denial (61/255) last year was to confront the
dangers of ignorance and scorn. The Holocaust has a
specific universal character that cannot be denied or
undermined. By commemorating the Holocaust, we
reaffirm our commitment to fighting anti-Semitism,
racism, hatred and all forms of religious, political or
ethnic intolerance. For all those reasons, in 2005 the
European Union supported declaring an International
Day of Commemoration in memory of the victims of
the Holocaust and establishing a specific United
Nations outreach programme.
Members of the Assembly can rest assured that
the people of Europe, united in the memory of the
horror and in their desire to promote peace and
solidarity among all peoples, will continue to act
together to repel any temptation to forget and the
dangers of disavowal. That is our honour and our duty
as a free people.
Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): Austria fully aligns
itself with the statement which has just been made by
the Ambassador of France on behalf of the European
Union.
We thank the Secretary-General for his excellent
and comprehensive report (A/63/316) on the
programme of outreach on the Holocaust and the
United Nations. The report shows that Member States
all over the world have benefited from the outreach
programme since the adoption of resolution 60/7 in
2005. The resolution also urges Member States to
develop educational programmes that will inculcate
future generations with the lessons of the Holocaust in
order to help prevent future acts of genocide and, in
that context, specifically mentions the Task Force for
International Cooperation on Holocaust Education,
Remembrance and Research. As the current Chair of
the Task Force, Austria is very grateful for the work
carried out by the Secretariat under the outreach
programme. Let me share some aspects of the Task
Force’s work under the Austrian chairmanship.
The Task Force’s work is based on the Stockholm
Forum Declaration of 2000. The Declaration cites the
quest for mutual understanding as one of the most
important lessons to be learned from the Holocaust.
The commitments it enshrines originate from the
unprecedented character of the Holocaust, which will
always hold a universal meaning. The Task Force’s
working groups function as a unique network of

08-58387

international cooperation comprising some of the
world’s leading experts in the field of education,
remembrance and research. The intention is that
teachers, students and society as a whole learn about
the Holocaust and the lessons to be drawn from it for
present and future generations. Task Force efforts to
mobilize support and expertise for Holocaust
memorials contribute to the culture of Holocaust
remembrance. Special working groups focus on the
genocide against the Roma, as well as on the Holocaust
and other genocides.
The Task Force by its very nature is particularly
concerned with tendencies of diminishing or denying
the Holocaust. The Task Force is comprised of
25 member States, but it carries its mission beyond its
own geographical range. Gaining knowledge about and
dealing with the Holocaust should be further
mainstreamed. That calls for a broader communication
strategy with the aim of having Holocaust
remembrance generally accepted as part of human
rights education and learning. One of the Task Force’s
main goals under the Austrian chairmanship is to
improve medial outreach. Its website serves as an open
and accessible resource for mainstreaming Holocaust
education, remembrance and research. The Task Force
makes its tools accessible to the general public and
seeks to deepen its cooperation with other
organizations pursuing similar objectives.
On 10 November 2008, the day of remembrance
of the 1938 pogroms, Task Force member States will
come together with representatives of the United
Nations, the European Union, the Council of Europe
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe to discuss common objectives and experiences.
My delegation is very pleased that the Special Adviser
of the Secretary General for the Prevention of
Genocide, Mr. Francis Deng, will also be present at
that special event.
Mr. McNee (Canada): In 2005, when the United
Nations Holocaust remembrance programme was
created, an invitation was extended to all Member
States to remember the Holocaust and to build societies
based on inclusion, human dignity and respect for all
persons. It is not good enough for us to stand here
today and say that we remember and mourn what
happened over six decades ago, for no one can truly
comprehend the suffering of those who perished in the
Holocaust. But we do understand that the attempted
extermination of the Jewish people was a crime against

33

A/63/PV.37

all of humanity, and we understand that the prevention
of genocide is a fundamental responsibility of the
international community today.
Societies built on an ethos of tolerance and
acceptance, where all forms of racism and
discrimination are equally unacceptable, are needed
now more than ever. Today, discrimination and
intolerance have not yet been eradicated. Doing so is
central to the task of preventing genocide and crimes
against humanity in the future.
Canada is both supportive of and pleased with the
energy and dedication the United Nations Department
of Public Information has put into implementing
resolution 60/7 of 2005. The Secretary-General’s report
(A/63/316) provides an impressive list of activities that
have been undertaken since then, including initiatives
commemorating the end of the Holocaust, networkbuilding, academic seminars, civil society engagement
and developing information products for educators.
Canada would like that work to continue in years to
come.
We have been struck by the fact that so many
civil society organizations and artists responded to the
United Nations call to work together in ensuring that
the Holocaust is never forgotten. We note in that
context that a Toronto-based multinational group of
children came to the United Nations lobby last year to
perform extracts from Oratorio Terezin, a moving piece
based on poetry written by children in the Terezin
ghetto.
In Canada, we have acted to educate our citizens
on the Holocaust. An annual Canadian Holocaust
Remembrance Day has been established, at which the
Prime Minister, political party leaders and
parliamentarians appear with Holocaust survivors on
Parliament Hill to ensure that the memory of the
Holocaust is never lost. Canadian archival
collections — including the Jacob M. Lowy Collection,
which contains some of the earliest attempts to
document and publicize the Holocaust — have been
made available for education and research. The
Canadian Government has provided funding to the
Montreal Holocaust Memorial Centre and the
Vancouver Holocaust Education Centre, and is
currently providing multi-year funding for the creation
of a new human rights museum in Winnipeg, Manitoba.
Also, Canada has been active in exploring the question
of Holocaust-era cultural property.

34

Canada is very pleased to see that the Department
of Public Information has used the entire United
Nations network to ensure that the message reach
audiences around the world. We applaud the fact that
the outreach programme makes every effort to warn
against the consequences of anti-Semitism and other
forms of discrimination.
It is very impressive to see so many events and
countries in the Secretary-General’s report. That
having been said, as United Nations information
centres are only present in some countries, we all need
to do even more to ensure that this messaging reaches
the entire world. It is up to national Governments to fill
the gap where there is no United Nations presence.
Canada also notes the importance of resolution
61/255 of 2007, which urges all Member States
unreservedly to reject any denial of the Holocaust as a
historical event, either in full or in part, or any
activities to that end.
In June 2007, Canada took the first step towards
becoming a full member in the Task Force for
International Cooperation on Holocaust Education,
Remembrance and Research. Membership in the Task
Force will strengthen our ability to contribute to the
construction of societies, both in Canada and around
the world, that are based on human dignity and where
acts like the Holocaust are no longer possible.
(spoke in French)
In conclusion, Canadians, like all members of the
international community, have a duty to remain vigilant
with respect to all forms of racism and discrimination,
including anti-Semitism. We must ensure that the
memory of the Holocaust is never lost. Canada, for its
part, is firmly committed to that end.
Mr. Hill (Australia): It is now over 60 years since
the world saw the defeat of a barbaric and tyrannical
Nazi regime that had been set on the systematic
eradication of the Jewish people. Australia considers
the genocide perpetrated against the Jewish people
during the Holocaust to be the most abhorrent of
crimes. It cost many millions of lives and caused
immeasurable damage and dislocation to the lives of
many millions more. Its effects have been profound for
a number of generations and continue to be felt today.
The Holocaust showed the depths to which
humankind can descend and made clear to the world
the devastating consequences of anti-Semitism, racial

08-58387

A/63/PV.37

hatred and persecution. However, it is a sad fact that
anti-Semitism, Holocaust denial, racism and religious
intolerance continue to exist to this day.
Australia commends the work of the United
Nations Programme of outreach on the Holocaust and
the United Nations, as detailed in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (A/63/316). Since its establishment in
2006, the programme has worked actively to meet the
aims of resolution 60/7 on Holocaust remembrance,
including through memorial and educational activities,
exhibitions and media outreach. Raising awareness of
the Holocaust not only helps us to remember the many
victims but also serves as a reminder of the need to
remain vigilant and to take steps to prevent such a
horror from happening again.
Mr. Ndabarasa (Rwanda): My delegation
commends the Secretary-General for his report,
entitled “Programme of outreach on the ‘Holocaust and
the United Nations (A/63/316)’”.
Remembrance of the Holocaust serves first and
foremost to commemorate the victims of the
Holocaust, to educate a generation of young people
about the Holocaust and genocide, to raise awareness
across the broader public and to stimulate more people
to use their voice and challenge society’s values.
Rwanda, as a nation that has experienced the horrors of
genocide, fully appreciates the significance of
remembrance and the role it plays in reconciliation and
the prevention of future genocides.
My delegation commends the work that the
Department of Public Information has undertaken with
various stakeholders and through a variety of mediums
to ensure that the lessons from the Holocaust and the
genocide in Rwanda are disseminated to as wide an
audience as possible. Rwanda has received generous
support in exposing what led to the Rwandan genocide
of 1994.
My delegation appreciates the work of other
organizations that are educating and exposing

08-58387

intolerance in varied forms that may graduate into
genocide or acts of genocide. Those noble efforts
deserve commendation and the good work must be
continued, because hate and intolerance are still forces
in our world.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
I now call on the representative of Iran to
exercise the right of reply.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): Today
the General Assembly heard baseless and absurd
distortions by certain States against the Islamic
Republic of Iran. We reject those distortions and
express our concern over and condemnation of the
misuse of this body by certain circles to pursue some
unwarranted political goals.
We, along with others, have condemned and
continue to condemn genocide against any race or
ethnic or religious group as a crime against humanity.
My delegation wishes to reiterate that unambiguous
position here again today. In our view, there is no
justification for genocide of any kind, nor can there be
any explanation for certain unfortunate attempts made
by some, and particularly by the Israeli regime, to
exploit past crimes as a pretext to commit new
genocides and crimes.
We believe that to be a valid and serious concern
that the international community should not fail to
address. Unfortunately, certain political and media
circles have mischievously interpreted that genuine
concern and resorted to a campaign of misinformation
and defamation against those who have called for a
thorough examination of the incidents.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 59.
The meeting rose at 6.40 p.m.

35
