UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

th

MEETINC:23SEPTEMBER1982
NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2398) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . a. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

Expression of welcome to the. new representative

of Poland., . . . . . . . . . . . , , I

1

Adoption of the agenda , , , . . . , , . . . . , , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . .

I

The question of South Africa:
Report of the Security Council Committee established by resolution 421
(1977) concerning the question of South Africa on ways and means of
making the mandatory arms embargo against South Africa more effective
(S/14179) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I..................................

I

SIPV .2398

-

-

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supple~nents of the Ofj%Ycll Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resollrtions nrzd
De&ions
of the Secur-ify Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2398th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,
~%.ri~lc~nt: Mr. Masahiro

NISIBORI

23 September 1982, at 10.30 a.m.

(Japan).

to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote. in conformity
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure.

P~~sont: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana. Ireland. Japan, Jordan.
Panama. Poland. Spain. Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics. United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland. United States of America. Zaire.
Provisional

3. The PRESIDENT:
I should also like to inform
members of the Council that I have received ;I letter
dated 21 September 1982 from the Chairman of the
Special Committee against Aptrrtl7c~id. which reads as
follows:

agenda (S/Agenda/2398)

I.

Adoption

of the agenda

2.

The question of South Africa:
Report of the Security Council Committee
established by resolution 421 (1977) concerning the question of South Africa on ways
and means of making the mandatory arms
embargo against South Africa more effective

“I hnvc the honour to request the Council to
permit me to participate in my capacity as Chairman of the Special Committee against AptrrtAcitl,
under the provisions of rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, in the Council’s consideration of the item ‘The question of South Africa:
Report of the Security Council Committee
estabfished by resolution 42 I ( 1977) concerning the question of South Africa on ways and means of making
the mandatory arms embargo against South Africa
more effective (S/14179)‘.”

(S/14179)

Espression

of welcome to the new representative
of Poland

I. The PRESIDENT:
On behalf of the members of
the Council. I extend a warm welcome to the new
Permanent Representative of Poland, Mr. Wlodzimierz
Natorf. Mr. Nutorf znd I were colleagues in Geneva.
and he was one of the most highly respected representatives for his diplomatic skill and political acumen.
I am quite sure that we shall have the same good and
co-operative
relations with him as we had with his
prcdeccssor, Mr. Wyzner.
Adoption

4. On previous occasions. the Council has extended
invitations to representatives of other United Nations
bodies in connection with the consideration of matters
on its agenda. In accordance with past practice.
therefore. I propose that the Council extend an invitation pursuant to rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure to the Chairman of the Special Committee
against Apclrthcitl,

of the agenda

5. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is the t’epresentative of Ghana. who wishes to make a statement
in his capacity as Chairman of the Group of African
States at the United Nations for the month of September.

The question of South Africa:
Report of the Security Council Committee established by resolution 421 (1977) concerning the
question of South Africa, on ways and means of
making
the mandatory
arms embargo against
South Africa more effect& (S/14179)

6. I invite him to take a place at the Council
and to mnke his statement.

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform memhers of the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Algeria and Ghana in which they
request to be invited to partici,pate in the discussion of
the item on the agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council,

7. Mr. GBEHO (Ghana): Mr. President, I urn grateful to you and to other members of the Council fat
giving me the opportunity to make this submission on
the question of the arms embargo against South
Africa. 1 do so in my capacity as the Chairman of the
Group
of African States and. no doubt, also as an
1

table

individual who is very concerned with the continued
plactice of the system of rrprrrthr~id in South Africa.

and in the wake of the brutalities unleashed against
the young students of Soweto. the Council adjudged
the situation in South Africa to be sufficiently serious
to attract the Council’s
embargo action against the
racist rCgime, under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations. Since then, however, the raGAt
South African regime has committed constant rind
more intensified acts of aggression, subversion and
terrorism
agninst neighbouring
States: it has continued illegally to occupy Namibia, from where it
launched a full-scale incursion
into Angola: it hils
escalated repression in South Africa, including execution of patriots; there is armed confrontation between
the forces of the racist rigime and freedom fighters.
and nuclear tests have been conducted and nuclear
collaboration intensified with Israel and Taiwan. All
this has resulted in a situation which constitutes a
graver threat to international peace and security then
was the case in 1977. The debate is therefore timely
and appropriate. There is now every justification fog
reviewing the measures prescribed in resolution 418
( 1977) with a view to plugging all the loopholes in it and
making it more ef$cacious.

8. The Group of African States considers
it very
necessary to make its views known to the Council on
this important question at this time, not only because
the victims of the cruel system of opurthritl
are the
black majority in South Africa. but also because the
very existence of the system.
which
the Council
stated is
“a crime against the conscience
and dignity of
mankind and is incompatible
with the rights and
dignity of man, the Charter of the United Nations
and the Universal
Declaration
of Human Rights,
and seriously disturbs international peace and security” [r~.scJrctio/z 47-? (1980) 1,
constitutes
an affront to our freedom, independence
and respective national sovereignties
on the continent.
We believe strongly that unless we play a leading role
in giving support to the Council to strengthen
and
implement its arms embargo against the racist rkgime,
ZI bloody war will be inevitable. with devastating consequences for Africa.
We are also convinced
that
sanctions such as those now under consideration
by
the Council offer the last pacific means of eradicating
rrprrr&id
and racial discrimination
in South Africa.

12. At the time that resolution
418 (1977) was
adopted, thus imposing a mandatory arms embargo
against South Africa, our joy at that achievement was
sobered by the realization that the decision itself had
come a little too late. Since the massacres in Shtirpeville in 1960. the international community had pressed
for a mandatory arms embargo against the r$gime, but
it was not until I7 whole years later that the major
Western Powers co-operated
with other States on
the Council to adopt resolution 418 (1977). South
Africa had by then already amassed enormous military hwdware
and had also established a sizeable
armament industry.
With those assets it proceeded
ruthlessly
to repress internal dissension,
unlc;wh
incredible
violence against the schoolchildren
of’
Soweto and against Namibians,
and attack neighbouring countries like Angola and Mozambique. We
nevertheless trusted in the good faith of our friends to
implement strictly the terms of the then newly-adopted
resolution 418 (1977) in order to end suffering under
and at the hands of the oprtrthc4ti rigime as quickly
its possible. But the next few years were to prove thilt
our trust was misguided and misplaced. Arms have
continued to reach South Africa, and its own armament industry has continued to grow through the active
investments and assistance of certain Western COUOtries. Meanwhile
the international
community has
been engaged in what seems to be a sterile--and, one
suspects, deliberately so-cerebration
on the meaning
of the various phrases used in a resolution that w;&
after all, unanimously adopted in 1977 to deill effectively with the trptrt~hritl system and its violent habits.

9. On behalf of my African colleagues,
1 wish first
of all to record my thanks and appreciation
to the
members of the Security Council Committee,
formerly under the chairmanship of Mr. Khwaja Mohammed Kaiser of Bangladesh and now under Mr. Mimoz
Ledo of Mexico. for the very detailed and lucid report
produced on ways and means of making the 1977
mandatory arms embargo against South Africa more
effective. I refer to document S/14179. Although it
took three long years for the report to be published,
the extent of its coverage and the circumspection
evident in its analyses, conclusions and recommendations demonstrate the diligence with which the task
given the Committee has been performed.
IO. In spite of the long period between the adoption
of resolution 421 (1977) and the presentation
of the
Committee’s
report. a further time span of two years
has been lost in finding an appropriate
time for the
Council to consider the report. No one can be blamed
for the delay. In the lust two years, very important
issues have engaged the serious and priol’ity attention of the Council. But all the same, they have been
two long and tortuous years for those who live under
the authority of opcwtkrid South Africa or are held
in its notorious prisons. It is a source of great relief,
therefore, to witness today the serious resumption
of
the consideration of the matter by the Council.

13. Uur greatest surprise and disappointment since
the adoption of resolution 418 (1977) has been the
impression
created.
through
the pronouncements
and actions of some States, that the establishment of
the mandatory arms embargo was solely the making

I I. The debate in the Council comes at a time when
the situation in South Africa. and in southern
Africa
in general, has worsened from what it was when the
Council adopted resolution 418 (1977). At that time
2

of the non-western
States, especially of African
States. on the Council and in the IJnited Nations. It
is important to remind the international
community
and to emphasize here that resolution 418 ( 1977) was
essentially the text of the Western States, as evidenced by its inherent weakness.
14. Be that as it may, we must all recall now ihat
the resolution was adopted to serve a specific purpose,
which remains one of the prime objectives of the
Charter. This was poignantly stated by the then Secretary-General.
Mr, Kurt Waldheim, in his statement
immediately after the adoption of the resolution when
he said:

18. As far as the second example is concerned. 0111
adversaries have argued that the review of contractual
arrangements culled for in resolution 418 (1977) did
not mandate a termination of such contracts. Again,
we take the common-sense view, as indeed the Security Council Committee also does, that such an interpretation is an unfettered licence to abuse of the
resolution.

“We have today clearly witnessed a historic
occasion. The adoption of this resolution marka the
first time in the 32-year history of the Organization
that action has been taken under Chapter VII of the
Charter against a Member State. It is not my purpose to seek to determine whether the Council’s
decision by itself is adequate to secure its objective.
However, it is abundantly clear that the policy of
opclrfhrid
as well as the measures taken by the
South African Government to implement this policy
are such a gross violation of human rights and so
fraught with danger to international peace and security that ;I response commensurate with the gravity
of the situation was required.” [204&h mccti~tg,
pnrc/.

’ did not include
the supply of certain strategic items to South Africa because those items did
not form clearly defined weapon systems, or that the
term should not include those strategic-cum-military
items that are supplied to civilian customers in South
Africa, even though some might eventually find their
way into the hands of the military authorities. We find
it difficult to go along with these interpretations.
because they obviously provide loopholes for the passing
of military supplies to the racist rlgime.
mrrL;ric~/

19. In the third case, that is, the need for States to
refrain from nuclear co-operation with South Africa
in the manufacture of nuclear weapons, the argument
has been heard that the call to refrain did not necessarily mean a boycott of the nuclear programme of
South Africa and that certainly there was a difference
between South Africa’s nuclear programme for peaceful purposes and any programme that it might have
for the development of nuclear weapons. In our view,
this is playing the devil’s advocate for licence to provide nuclear-weapon assistance to a paranoid regime.
There is no denying the fact that, after the transfer of
nuclear technology,
capital equipment and fissionable material to South Africa, the transition of that
country from civilian nuclear ob.jectives to a nuclearweapon capability would be over a very thin dividingfine. We therefore consider it inadvisable for any country to collaborate ;tt all with South Africa in its nuclear
programme,
because such collaboration
is bound to
enhance South Africa’s nuclear-weapon
capability,
which not only allows it to terrorize neighbouring
countries but also prejudices the peace and security
of the entire region.

6. I

And yet. over the years we have seen a weakening
of the embargo by those States which are in a more
powerful and influential position to enforce it.
15. It was therefore very gratifying to African States
when the Council eventually reviewed the effect of
the embargo, decided that there was a prima facie case
for strengthening it and proceeded to create the Committee to study ways and means by which the embargo
against South Africa could be made more effective.
The result of that Committee’s
work is before the
Council today. and is that on which we wish to contribute our modest views.
16. As far as the African group is concerned, the
conclusions of the Committee as outlined in document
S/l4179 are generally acceptable. The report touches
upon certain important, indeed critical, aspects of the
matter which deserve the serious consideration of the
international
community. For instance, it draws attention to difficulties
concerning the interpretation
of
certain aspects of the resolution, especially paragraphs 2. 3 and 4. The debates have centred around
what interpretation
should be given to the phrases
“arms and related mtrtc’rirl of all types”, the “review”
of “all existing contractual arrangements”
and the
f:ict that all States are called upon to “refrain” from
any co-operation
with South Africa in the manufacture and development of nuclear weapons.

20. We do not intend here to indulge in legal arguments with our partners on the issues upon which
I have touched, because the legal questions being
raised are in truth a cover for not implementing
the
mandatory arms embargo. It should be obvious to all
that the efficacy of the mandatory arms embargo
depends on the political
will and commitment
of
States. No one can deny the fact that the embargo
was instituted to bring political and economic pressure
to bear on the racist rigime in order to compel it to
give up trparfhid
and other forms of brutality. We
therefore believe that if nations desire success. that
success can be achieved, even under the present
wording of the resolution.
21. In our view, there are none the less serious defects in resolution 418 (1977) which can be remedied,
To overcome the difficulty
with definition
of the

17. In the first case, those eager to do business with
the racist regime have argued that the term “related
3

phrase
“arms
and relitted
~nlrtc;/-ic~/“. for example.
we are inclined
to the view that. with the assistance
of the Special
Committee
against
Apclr.thrid.
the
World Campaign
against Military
and Nuclear
Collaboration
with South Africa
and other such organizations,
the Security
Council
Committee
could
compile
21 list of all the products
which fall within the
category for the guidance of all. No Government
would
be in the dark after that. In the same way. existing
licences
for the production
of armaments
and other
weapon
spare parts in South Africa
could be carefully registered
and reviewed
by a United
Nations
authority.
in accordance
with the letter and spirit of
the embargo,
so as to prevent further
investment
in
this area in South Africa and progressively
to reduce
their impact on the embargo.

we XL generally
in agreement
and which we would
like to support.
In giving the range of recommendutions our approval and support,
we also wish to underline a few specific proposals
that merit the scl.iou+
consideration
of the Council
and the intern&n;tl
community.
These proposals
relate to the implcmentational
aspect of the action prescribed
against thr
racist rkgime. because we feel that our cc)mmon filiIul\:
so far has been largely in this regard.

25. First of all, there is a critical need for an in@mentutionary
authority
to monitor.
detect and invcstignte all violations
with a view to bringing such violations to the immediate
attention
of the Council
fol
enforcement
of policy.
26. Secondly,
it is necessary
that States should. ;I\
il matter of extreme urgency.
bring their national law5
in line with resolution
418 (1977) with ;I view to makirlg
the implementation
of the mandatory
arms emhitjgcb
in their
respective
territories
more efficient.
The
embargo
should
cove1
all military
collaboration.
direct w indirect,
in accordance
with General Assembly resolution
35/206 C of 16 December
IY80.

22. Another
at-en of concern
to African
States in
the implementation
of resolution
418 (1977) is that of
the interpretation
given to the reference
to so-called
*‘dut\l-purpose”
items. These include
a whole range
of components.
electronic
equipment.
computers,
aircraft.
aircraft
parts and other ammunition
spare
parts which
are usually
supplied
to civilian
customers in South Africa, but the use of which not only
is militarily
possible
but is almost invariably
taken
advantage
of by the South African
military
authorities. On the surface,
it is acceptable
to allow
such
supplies
to civilian
companies
and so on. But we all
know where they eventually
find their way. The question that the Council
should
ponder,
therefore,
is
whether
it wants quick and effective
action
in the
eradication
of upa/.f/rrid.
If the answer is in the &firmative.
the supply
of these items to South
Africa
should,
in our view, be banned
totally.
This step is
very necessary,
because
modern
warfare
depends
heavily
on electronic
technology
and
equipment
which also serve civilian
purposes.
To fail to include
the so-called dual purpose items on the prohibited
list,
therefore,
would be seriously
to subvert the spirit and
okjective
of resolution
4 I8 ( 1977).

it is important
th:\t violators of the arm\
27. Thirdly,
embargo
must attract the severest consequences
and
not mere verbal admonitions
or token fines thnt prc.
serve the profitability
of the ilrrns trade.
28. Fourthly,
there is the urgent need to mobilise
Governments,
Parliaments
and the public in support uf
the arms embargo
so as to ensure the co-operation
of all. The records show that it is non-governmentul
organizations
that have always
reported
violations
of the embargo.
Governments
normally
do not. Rut
the support of Governments
is crucial. and all must
be done to win their co-operation.
2Y. Fifthly. we trust that the Council will now adopt
the recommendations
of its Committee
as quickly
US possible
so as to set in train measures to plug the
loopholes
that have so far rendered
the mandatory
arms embargo meaningless.

23.
There is yet another
area not touched
upon in
detail in the mandatory
arms embargo
of 1977, but to
which the serious attention
of the Council
has to be
drawn.
I am referring
to oil as an essential
element
in any arms embargo.
Ever since armies
discarded
horses in warfare
for the greater capacity,
speed and
strength
of the motorized
vehicle,
oil has been an
important
military
commodity.
No armed force can
quickly
move troops on land or sea or in the air without oil. In the case of South Africa.
that product
has
been instrumental
in the repression
inside
South
Africa
as well
us in the perpetration
of aggression
against neighbouring
sovereign
States. It is an uncontested fact, therefore,
that no arms embargo
will be
complete
without
the total prohibition
of petroleum
rind petroleum
products.
We urge the Council.
in the
circumstances.
seriously
to consider
adding oil to the
list under the embargo.

30. 1 said at the beginning
of this submission
that
the employment
of the instrument
of sanctions wil$
the last peaceful means for effecting change in SW~
Africa. This is a true statement
if you consider the
recent waves of violent
clashes that have occurred
between
the racist
regime
and freedom fighters.
Violence
is now commonplace
in South Africa, ;Ind
unless we act quickly
in this Orgunization
to bring
r/prri.rhc&/ to an end, the black and the white races ifl
South Africa
will surely
continue
inexorably
un iI
collision course. the consequences
of which would be
very grave for international
peace and security. We
believe. therefore.
that all who desire pence shutlId
lend support to sanctions
against ;I rigime whose PO]i&s no one of us can publicly
defend or condone.

24.
Section
B of the report of the Security
Council
Committee
elnborutes
recommendations
with
which

31. In addition,
the ;\rms embargo
has an added s@
nificance.
as was succinctly
expressed
by Mr. Em&l

4

Anyaoku. the Deputy Secretary-General of the Commonwealth. at the International Seminar on the Implemcntution and Reinforcement
of the Arms Embargo
against South Africa, held in London from I to 3 April
198 I. He said:
“The arms embargo against South Africa has a
symbolic importance which transcends its practical
effects. It is not only the first invocation of Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter. but an expression of the international
community’s
determination to bring about change within South Africa
through peaceful means. Every breach of the arms
embargo represents a weakening of that determination and resolve: and so every breach sends signals
to the blind men of Pretoria that they are not without support in the world outside. The strategy of
persuasion, laudable and well-intentioned,
has its
limits: the time has come for a strategy of pressure,
wide-ranging
and purposeful, that would force
South Africa to understand that its fatal enterprise
will no longer be underwritten
by its friends
abroad.“’
We hope that our friends and partners will join in
ensuring that South Africa learns its lesson quickly,
and with as little pain as possible to the black majority in that country.
32. South Africa is under pressure, both within and
without its borders, and it is desperately trying out
alI its options in a futile bid to preserve the trpl,rthpid
system while not losing its friends and respect abroad.
The tide within South Africa itself is meanwhile turning
against the regime very fast, as violence by the racist
iluthorities
is disapproved by more and more people.
as black political awareness spreads, and as many
whites are no longer willing to enlist in the rrptr/.t/~rid
armed forces or accept the high casualty rates that the
opposing black militancy is forcing upon them. Therefore this is the time to increase international pressure
to effect change. To consider only the selfish profitability factor of the arms trade is to fail to understand
the simple reasoning that much more profits would
;1ccrue if South Africa were to rid itself of the tension, boycotts and international isolation that it now
has to live under. It is the hope and prayer of my
colleagues in the Group of African States, at the United
Nations and myself that the Council will ensure the
more effective implementation
of the mandatory arms
embargo against South Africa. This logical step in its
own way is a challenge to the members of the Council, and we hope they will not let down the suffering
bl;lck majority of South Africa or the Charter.
33.
Mr.
AM EG A (Togo) (in[c’rpr.cttrriorz
,fiwm
Fr.c>/~c.h); Mr. President. I should like first of all to
convey to you the heartfelt congratulations
of my
delegation
on your accession to the presidency of the
Council
for this month. You are the representative
of a country well-known for its age-old civilizution
and for the wisdom of its people and of its leaders.

Your competence. your qualities as a shrewd diplomat
and your broad experience of international
relations
are assets which augur well for the successful conclusion of our deliberations.
34, I should also like to offer to your predecessor.
Mr. Noel Dorr of the Republic of Ireland, the thanks
and congratulations
of my delegation for the outstanding work he did when he was President last
month during a particularly tense period in international life. He defended the interests of international
peace and security with zeal and distinction,
thus
deserving the gratitude of the international
community. Finally, I should like to take this opportunity to
bid welcome to Sir John Adam Thomson, permanent
representative of the United Kingdom. He will certainly bring to our Council his rich experience of
diplomatic relations.
35. The same wishes go to Mr. Natorf. the permnnent representative of Poland. I am sure he too will
give the Council the benefit of his rich experience.
36. Two years ago. the report which we are taking
up today was drawn up. While it was submitted to
the Council in December 1980. the Council has nevel
been able to consider the substance of the recommendations it contains. This situation is, to say the least.
regrettable.
But my delegation welcomes the consensus reached throughout the informal consultations
which made it possible to take up this report without
further delay at the request of the non-aligned members of the Council. My delegation also welcomes
the fact that consideration of the report is taking place
under your presidency, Sir, because your country,
Japan. is one of the very few countries which have
renounced war in their Constitution.
What this means
is that your country has renounced aggression, whereas
South Africa has systematized aggression against its
neighbours, the front-line countries, as a political
means of perpetuating internally the vile policy of
uprwth&/,
and externally of postponing or even obstructing the emancipation of peoples. These systcmatic acts of aggression against the front-line countries
could not have been committed by South Africa were
it not for the arms supplied by certain Member States.
It is that fact which prompted the African States.
with the support of friendly countries belonging to
the Non-Aligned
Movement and others which cherish
freedom. justice and peace, to attempt to set up at the
national and international
levels a system of law to
prohibit the delivery of weapons to South Africa.
37. At the international
level, this juridical
system
is based principally on three texts: Security Council
resolution 418 (1977), which imposed a mandatory
arms embargo against South Africa: and resolution 421
(IY77), whereby the Council established a Council
Committee composed of all Council members. Among
other functions, the Committee.
which, I stress. consists of all members of the Council. is instructed “To
study ways and means by which the mandatory arms

embargo could be made more effective against South
Africa . . .” and “To seek from all States further information regarding the action taken by them concerning
the effective implementation
of the provisions
laid
down in resolution 418 ( 1977)“. Thirdly, there is resolution 473 (1980), where the Council, in paragraph IO,
calls upon *’ all States strictly and scrupulously
to
implement resolution 418 ( 1977) and enact, as appropriate, effective national legislation for that purpose”.
In paragraph I I of that resolution,
the Council requests the Security Council Committee
established
by resolution 421 (1977) “to redouble its efforts to
secure full implementation of the arms embargo . . , by
recommending , . . measures to close all loopholes in
the arms embargo, reinforce and make it more comprehensive”.

clusions of the report, as regards the action. or rathe
the failure of States to act that *‘the ‘review’
by States
of existing contractual arrangements with and licences
granted to South Africa under the terms of paragraph 3
of resolution 418 (1977) has, in most cases. not been
brought to the attention of the Committee”.
(S1/4/7Y.
pore. 77. I This implies that arrangements previous to
the embargo which were not repealed or reviewed
by States allow South Africa to manufacture arms at
home under foreign licences.
42. A final point, and one of serious concern to my
delegation, is the problem of nuclear co-operation
with South Africa, which allows that racist. warmongering country to develop a nuclear capability
constituting
a serious threat not only to the nonnuclear-weapon
States in the area but atso to international peace and security,
South Africa having
always refused to accede to the Treaty on the NonProliferation
of Nuclear Weapons? and to submit to
international control. My delegation would like to say
here that the Government
of Togo attaches great
importance to the imperative need to make the African
continent a nuclear-weapon-free
zone.

38. The report before us today was prepared in
implementation
of paragraph
It of resolution
473
(IY80).
39. I should like to take this opportunity
to congratulate the Chairman and the members
of the Committee, many of whom are no longer with us, for the
excellent work they did in drawing
up this report
despite all the limitations
and difficulties
they encountered.

43. The causes of the violations are well known, and
it is important now to seek to remedy them. In that
respect, my delegation would like to draw attention to
the recommendations in the report before it. All members of the Council are members of the Committee
established by resolution 421 (1977). and it is the responsibility of all members of the Council under that
resolution to seek means whereby -‘the mandatory
arms embargo could be made more effective against
South Africa”. My delegation sincerely hopes that the
Council will achieve the unanimity necessary for
action to be taken on this important issue.

40. An objective examination
of the report of the
Security Council Committee established
under resolution 42 I ( 1977) points to violations of the mandatory
arms embargo against South Africa. Of course, as the
report states, these violations
were not carried out
directly by the Governments
of the countries
mentioned but were committed by private companies in
those countries.
These violations
have existed and
perhaps continue to exist because, according to the
report before us, inquiries were ordered by the Governments of the countries
concerned,
some of the
companies implicated
pleaded guilty and the Governments imposed sanctions on them.

44. For the time being, my delegation believes that
the Council should reach agreement quickly on improving on resolution 418 (1977); should renew the
mandate of the Committee established by resolution
421 ( 1977): and should extend the mandate and scope
of action of the Committee, in particular by givins it
a permanent secretariat to enable it to resume its Work
and to complete its report.

41. While we commend the action of Governments
which imposed sanctions on the companies
guilty of
embargo violations,
my delegation would prefer effective measures to be taken to prevent such violations. We must identify the causes of the violations
and look for ways of eliminating them. According
to
the report before us, violations are due on the one
hand to the loopholes in the embargo and the difficulties in the interpretation
of certain terms of expressions used in resolution 418 ( lY77), in particular
the
expression
--arms and related /n~&t*i(~l of all types”
in paragraph 2. These gaps and difficulties of interpretation provide loopholes for the individuals
and legal
entities involved in embargo violations.
Moreover,
the violations are made possible by the lack of domestic legislation, particularly
when such regulations
do not require an indication of the final destination
of
shipments. thus allowing arms exports to intermediary
countries which then forward them to South Africa.
Furthermore,
my delegation has noted, in the con1

I..

45. I cannot conclude my statement without nuti%
with interest the pledge of the present French GuV.
ernment to respect the arms embargo against Sdl
Africa. My delegation hopes that it will be followed
by other similar pledges.
46. The PRESIDENT: I invite the Chairman of the
Special Committee against Aptrrtkrid,
Mr. Alhidi
Yusuff Maitama-Sule. to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
47. Mr. MAITAMA-SULE
(Nigeria), Chairman of
the Special Committee against Aptrrthcid:
1 should
first of all like to express my great satisfaction thirt
the Council is considering the question of the arms
6

cmb:~rno against South Africa under the nresidencv
of the-repkesentative
of Japan, a countr;
which ii
wedded to peace and disarmament and which has declared its support for an effective arms embargo on
military and nuclear co-operatiun with the racist rigime
of South Africa.

dintely after the adoption of resolution 418 ( IY77). He
said:
‘*We have today clearly witnessed :L historic
occasion. The adoption of this resolution marks the
first time in the 32-year history of the Organizution
that action has been taken under Chapter VII of
the Charter against a Member State. It is not my
purpose to seek to determine whether the Council’s
decision by itself is adequate to secure its objective.
However. it is abundantly clear that the policy of
trptrrt/u+l as well as the measures taken by the South
African Government to implement this policy are
such II gross violation of human rights and so fraught
with danger to international peace and security
that a response commensurate with the gravity of
the situation was required. It is also significant
that this momentous siep is based on the unanimous
agreement of the Council members. Thus we enter a
new and significantly different phase of the longstanding efforts of the international community to
obtain redress of these grievous wrongs.” (204&/r

48. Since its inception almost 20 years ago, the
Special Committee against Aprthcid
has constantly
emphasizcd
the need for an effective arms embargo
against South Africa as a minimum first measure by
thr international
community
to prevent, or at least
minimize. the danger of violent conflict in southern
Africa,
49. The Special Committee has emphasized that the
least that any nation which claims to abhor the inhuman system of rrptrrrhd
can do is to stop assisting
the racist rigime in expanding its military arsenal
:tnd in acquiring nuclear capability.
SO. It has called for effective mandatory action to
end all military and nuclear co-operation with the
racist regime of South Africa, including the training
of military personnel and exchanges of military attachCs; to stop all supplies, direct or indirect, to the
military establishment of that rCgime: and to prohibit
all transfer of technology and capital which might
assist that rlgime in developing its military arsenal.

mwtinq.

pcrrtr. 6.1

55. The Special Committee, for its part, recognized
that the mandatory arms embargo had been instituted
long after the South African regime had embarked on
a military buildup in the wake of the Sharpeville
massacre and the accession of African States to independence, and after that racist rl-gime had acquired
;I domestic arms industry. It was also aware of the
limitations of resolution 418 ( 1977).

Sl. It welcomed Security Council resolutions 181
( 1Y63) and 182 ( lY63), solemnly calling upon all States
to cease forthwith the sale and shipment of arms,
ammunition of all types and military vehicles to South
Africa, and the sale and shipment of equipment and
materials for the maintenance of arms and ammunition in South Africa. But that solemn call was interpreted by certain Western Powers as some kind of a
voluntary embargo and proved totally inadequate.

56. At the same time, it emphusized the great importance of the mandatory decision of the Council and
saw it as a first step in a programme of action against
flptrrtheitl. It stressed the imperative need for the
full implementation of the unanimous and historic
decision of the Council.

52. After I4 years of appeals and efforts at persuasion. after the World Conference for Action against
Aprrrthrid held at Lagos in August 1977 and after the
escalation of repression by the racist rigime of South
Africa, the Council adopted resolution 418 (19771,
determining that ‘.the acquisition by South Africa of
arms and related mrrtc;ricJ/ constitutes a threat to the
maintenance of international peace and security”, and
instituting n mandatory arms embargo against South
Africa under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations.

57. The Chairman of the Special Committee said in
a statement on 8 November 1977:
“On

behalf of the Special Committee against
I wish to stress that all States concerned
must immediately take action to implement Security Council resolution 418 ( 1977) of 4 November
1977 on ;I mandatory arms embargo against South
Africa. No delays. no equivocations and no restrictive interpretations can be justified.
.4prrrtkrJid.

53.

By its resolution 421 ( 1977). the Council. again
ilnnnimously. decided to establish a committee of the
whole to monitor the arms embargo and mandated it
specifically to “study ways and means by which the
mandatory arms embargo could be made more effective against South Africa and to make recommendations to the Council”.
54.
then

“I would like to emphasize, in particular. that
all States which have supplied military equipment
to South Africa-notably
the Western States and
Israel-must
immediately stop direct or indirect
supply of spare parts and components. All contracts for the supply of military equipment must be
abrogated and all licences for manufacture of such
equipment must be revoked in the spirit of the
resolution.”

I should like to recall the statement made by the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim. imme7

5X. The Special Committee lent its full co-operation
to the Security Council Committee established by resolution 42 I (1977) on the question of South Africa.

information is available in the records of the Security
Council Committee and the Special Committee ag;tinct
Aptrl~tlwicl.

59. In fact. most of the activity of the Security Council Committee in monitoring the arms embargo was
based on information communicated
by the Special
Committee
itself or by orgunizations or individuals
with the support and encouragement of the Special
Committee.

66. I only wish to recall that the Special Committee
has repeatedly drawn the attention of the Council
to the need for the strengthening and reinforcement
of the arms embargo.

60. In pursuance of the decisions of the General
Assembly. the Special Committee organized a seminar on South Africa’s military buildup and nuclear
plans, held at United Nations Headquarters on 30 May
1978: a seminar on nuclear collaboration
with South
Africa. held in London in February 1979. and an international seminar on the implementation
and reinforcement of the arms embargo against South Africa,
held in London in April 1981.
61. It has held a number of consultations with eminent experts. the most recent of which was on I4 June
1982, and has publicized information on the loopholes
in the arms embargo and the means of reinforcing the
embargo.
62. The International
Conference
on Sanctions
against South Africa, held in Paris in May 1981, gave
special attention to the arms embargo, and very pertinent recommendations
are contained in the Paris
Declaration on Sanctions against South Africa’ and
in the reports of the commissions.
63. In the light of its studies and consultations,
the
Special Committee
was obliged to express grave
concern on several occasions that Security Council
resolution 418 ( 1977) was not being fully and effectively implemented
by certain States.
64. Several States had failed to enact legislative or
equivalent measures for the implementation
of the
arms embargo. Some Stales allowed the supply of
military and related equipment to South Africa on the
grounds that it was “dual purpose equipment”.
This
exception can be stretched-and
has indeed been
stretched on some occasions-to
make the mandatory
sanction or decision of the Council meaningless. Some
States have refused to take any action to prohibit the
supply to South Africa of technology which could be
used for military purposes, or to ban the supply of
capital and technical personnel to assist the development of the arms industry in South Africa, or to require transnntional corporations under their jurisdiction to stop their subsidiaries or affiliates in South
Africa from providing supplies to the South African
military establishment.
Some States have utilized
the weakness in the formulation of resolution 4 18 ( 1977)
to continue collaboration
with South Africa in the
nuclear field.
6.5. I do not wish, at this stage, to point to individual
States or transnational corporations, as much of the

67. Un the recommendation
of the Special Committee, the General Assembly. by an overwhelming
majority, requested the Security Council to take urgent
mandatory action for the full implementation
itnd
reinforcement of the arms embargo.
68. We were somewhat encouraged when the Council, again unanimously,
adopted on I3 June 19X0
resolution 473 (1980). in which it called upon “all
States strictly and scrupulously to implement rcsofution 418 (1977) and enact, as appropriate, effective
national legislation for that purpose”, and requested
its Committee “to redouble its efforts to secure full
implementation
of the arms embargo against South
Africa by recommending by 15 September 1980 rnensures to close all loopholes in the arms embargo. reinforce and make it more comprehensive”.
69. The developments
since that time have been
most disappointing, and indeed, distressing.
70. The Security Council Committee submitted. in
its report of September 1980, I6 recommendntions
which fall considerably short of the proposals of the
Special Committee as well as the requests of the Genera1 Assembly.
71. Yet the United Kingdom placed a general reserve on all the recommendations.
France-under its
previous Government-expressed
reservations 011
six recommendations
and opposition to two recommendations. The United States-under
its previouh
Administration-expressed
reservations on five retommendations [S/14/ 79, paacr , 821.
72. Instead of trying to consult, harmonize Pusitions and take positive action, the Council has so fill
taken no action on the report of its own Committee.
73. As a result of this attitude of the three Western
permanent members. the monitoring
of the arms
embargo has been paralysed.
74. The Special Committee has been requested bY
the General Assembly to co-operate with the Secu*
rity Council Committee, but the latter has not even
met for a long time.
75. The primary purpose of the arms embargo is to
curb the capacity of the racist rigime of South Africa
to expand its military establishment and arsenal ;Ind
to commit acts of aggression and terrorism a&lind

neighbouring
States as well
against its own people.

as acts

of

repression

conflict.
report:

Only

South Africun
mobile
artillery
range of North
limetre
shells,
pt’o.jectiles.

days ago. on 12 September,
the
of Johannesburg
reported
that the
Minister
of Defence
had unveiled
a
unit --G6-which
can fire an entire
Atlantic
Treaty Organization
155milincluding
Americnn
nuclear
warhead

82.
We cannot
but express grave
supply
of sophisticated
military
c--quipment
by the United
Kingdom
that it is “dual purpose”
equipment.

its

((1) Prevent
South Africa
from acquiring
arms,
ammunition
and reluted materials
as well us nuclear
equipment
and materials:
(h) Revoke
all licences
granted
previously
to
South Africa for the manufacture
of arms and related
materials
of all types:

80.
We cannot
but express great concern
over the
report
in 7%~
Wull Strut .lor~r~trl of 2 I September
----II day named
“Peace
Day”
to coincide
with the
opening
of the General
Assembly
session-that
South
Africa
was able to purchase
2.500 electric
shock
batons from the United States. I hope that the United
States Government
will take urgent measures to stop
sLtch sales.
but condemn
Israel for
warships
to South Africu.

in

M/206 B of 16 December
1980
86. In its resolutions
and 361172 F of I7 December
1981. the General
Assembly
requested
the Security
Council
to take mandatory measures to strengthen
the tu-ms embargo
and
secure the immediate
cessation
of any form of collaboration
with the racist rdgime of South Africa in rhc
military
and nuclear fields. In that context.
it asked
that the Council t‘nsure that all States shall:

79.
Most alarming,
of ~OUI’SC. have been the reports
on the acquisition
of nuclear capability
by the racist
r&ime
of South Africa. In this context, we cannot but
express out great distress that the United States Government
has chosen to relax its regulations
on the arms
and nuclear
embargo
against South Africa this year.

81.
We cannot
missile-equipped

concluded

85. On behalf
of the Special
Committee
ugainst
.~p~~rthr~id. I urge the Council to take the long-delnycd
action on the recommendations
of its Committee.
und
to give urgent consideration
to the requests
hy the
General
Assembly.

a few
Tin7cs

Committee

What is at stake is not only peace in southern
84.
Africa
and the lives of the African
people
of that
region but also the authority
of the Council
and the
integrity
of its permanent
members.
who bear ;I great
responsibility
for ensuring
the maintenance
of international
peace and security.

77.
It has been boasting of the expansion
of its arms
industry,
and the manufacture
of new and sophisticated
military
equipment.
78.

Special

“The
internntionul
community
must find ways to
expose all military
and nucIc;1r collaburntion
with
South AfEca, and to stop ail such collabol~ation”,s

76. The South African
regime has committed
innumerable
acts of aggression
and terrorism
ngninst all
neighbouring
States. particularly
the Peoples’
Republic of Angola,
so that the heads of States of the Frontline States. at the conclusion
of their Summit Meeting
held at Muputo
on 6 and 7 March 1982, described
the
situation
in southern
Africa
as one of “undeclared
W;II.*‘.’ The Pretoria
rdgime has even been involved
in a mercenary
invasion of the islands of Seychelles.

.S/~rtd(rg

The

(c-1 Prohibit
corporations
within
their .jurisdiction from becoming
involved
in the manufacture
01
development
in South Africa or elsewhere
of arms
and related
materials
and all supplies
for the use
of South Africa’s
military
and police tkrcrs and its
nucleus programmes:

supplying

(tl) Prohibit
the transfer
of technology
relating
to military
and nuclear industries
to the racist r&ime
of South Africa or its agencies:

concern
over the
communications
on the grounds

((8) Prohibit
the supply of maintenance
of aircraft.
uircraft
engines
01’
paITs,
telecommunications
equipment.
computers
and four-wheel-drive
vehicles
to South Africa:

83.
The Special
Committee
was therefore
obliged,
in its annual report adopted lust Friday, I7 September,
tu emphasize
that the. resistance
of certain
Powers
to the strengthening
and even to the effective monitoring of the arms embargo.
and the continued
collaboration
by certain States, corporations
and institutions
with South
Africa
in the military
and nuclear
fields.
have resulted
in ;I grave undermining
of the
arrthority
of the United Nations and 11 betrayal of the
commitments
of the international
community.
They
have
caused
enormous
suffering
and numerous
brt:uches
of the peace. as well as the threat of a wide)

(/) Prevent
investments
by corporations
OI
inclividunls
within theirjurisdiction
in South Africa’s
military
and nuclear
industry.
us well as its supportive
institutions;
(,:,) Cease all forms of nuclear collaborution
with
the racist r+gime of South Africa
and terminate
in
particular
the exchange
of nuclear
scientists
with
South
Africa
and the training
of South
African
nuclear
scientists
and technicians:
9

07)
Prohibit the recruitment of nuclear scientists
and technologists by South Africa:

question of South Africa submitted in September 1480
a report on ways and means of making the mandatory
arms embargo against South Africa more effective
[s/14179]. It contains a number of concrete and positive recommendations to strengthen the arms embargo
against South Africa. The Chinese delegation wishes
to express its appreciation of the efforts made by the
Committee.

(i) Prohibit the import of any arms and related
materials from South Africa:
(j) Terminate the exchange of military, air, naval
and scientific attach& and of visits by military and
police personnel. experts in weapons technology
and employees of arms factories with South Africa,
as well as the training of South African military and
police personnel:

93. The Council should have considered this report
long ago. For various reasons, however, such consideration has been delayed for two years. Nevertheless, in view of South Africa’s behaviour, it is abwIutely necessary for the Council to take up the report
now and to give serious and favourable consideration
to its recommendations
for strengthening the arms
embargo against South Africa.

(k) Take effective legislative and other measures
to prevent the recruitment
and/or enlistment,
training and transit of mercenaries for service with
South Africa’s military and police forces:
(I) Refrain from purchasing uranium
uranium from South Africa.

or enriched

94. In spite of Security Council resolution 418 ( I9771
imposing the arms embargo in 1977, the South African
racist rigime has not shown the slightest restraint in
its abominable practices, but has stepped up arms
expansion and the cruel suppression of the South
African people’s national liberation struggle. Moreover, it has intensified the barbarous policy of rrl~rrlIV+/ and accelerated bantustanization
by creating
phoney independent black homelands. Most recently.
it has wantonly suppressed workers’ strikes. Large
numbers of African workers have been laid off and
forcibly repatriated to black homelands. Pretoria is
pushing a power-sharing plan which would deprive
Africans, who comprise 70 per cent of the population,
of all political rights. All this shows that the so-called
reforms to improve racial relations are no more than
a deceptive ploy designed to bolster the racist rule.

States were asked to take firm steps to prevent any
co-operation or contacts with the regime of South
Africa by military alliances to which they are parties.
87. The Assembly also requested the SecretaryGeneral to ensure more effective Secretariat services
for the monitoring of the arms embargo against South
Africa and maximum co-ordination towards that end.
88. The Special Committee attaches utmost importance to the total cessation of all nuclear collaborations with South Africa. Only a few days ago, the
Special Committee
learned with great concern that
South Africa is a member, and even chairman, of
several technical working groups of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), and it requested the
IAEA General Conference to take urgent action to
exclude South Africa.

95. Moreover, the South African rigime is stubbornly clinging to its illegal occupation and colonial
rule in Namibia, in total defiance of world censure.
It resorts to massive military power in its brutal SUP
pression of the Namibian
people’s armed struggle,
led by the South West Africa People’s Organization
(SWAPS), and, using Namibia as a staging platform,
to make repeated forays into Angola and other neigllbouring African countries. Moreover, it has tried by
every means to sabotage negotiations so that no headway can be made in the implementation
of SecurilY
Council resolution 435 (lY78), and Namibia has yet to
achieve independence, Over a period of time. Pretoria
has also stepped up subversion and sabotage against
Mozambique,
Zimbabwe and other front-line States.
These outrages have seriously threatened the peace
and stability of southern Africa and the continent ils
u whole.

89. The Special Committee also considers that an oil
embargo is an indispensable complement to the arms
embargo against South Africa.
90. I hope thut the Council will take all necessary
decisions to ensure the effective monitoring
of a
strengthened and enforced arms embargo against
South Africa. The Special Committee,
in accordance
with its mandate from the General Assembly, pledges
its full co-operation to the Council and its Committee
in that task.
91. Mr. LINC
Qing (China) (infer’llrc’ttrtit,I? ,j$orn
C’hincj.~~): Permit me at the outset, Mr. President,
on behalf of the Chinese delegation, to extend our
warm welcome to the new representative of Poland,
Mr. Natorf. We look forward to good relations of cooperation with him in the work of the Council,

96. In order to protect their vested interests. certilin
Western countries, especially a super-Power. have.
regrettably, supported or connived with the SUuth
African rigime in many respects and directly of’ iodirectly provided it with military equipment, materkbt
and know-how, and have even extended their c&lboration in the nuclear field. All this has made it dif-

92. In conformity
with Security Council resolution 473 (1980). the Security Council Committee
established by resolution 42 I ( 1977) concerning the
IO

-

--

-. ~.

ficult to implement resolution 418 ( 1977) effectively
and has served only to increase the audacity and
truculence of the South African rCgime.

“PIBP-

three permanent members of the Council. We do
hope that in our informal consultations those reservations will be withdrawn so that the Council may emerge
with a unanimous resolution to strengthen the implrmentation of its resolutions.

97. In these circumstances,
the African countries
and peoples and the international
community as a
whole have vigorously condemned Pretoria’s conduct
and strengthened their support for the just struggle
of the peoples of South Africa and Namibia. They
strongly insist that the United Nations should apply
rigorous sanctions against the South African rkgime in
accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter, First and
foremost, Security Council resolution 418 (1977)
should be strictly implemented and the arms embargo
against South Africa should be effectively enforced.
All this is entirely just and reasonable.

103. The last Chairman of the Committee was
Mr. Munoz Ledo of Mexico. who served in 1981.
Mr. Mutioz Ledo was Vice-Chairman in IO80 and
played an active role in the f’ormulation of the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the last
report. When that last report was introduced in the
Council on 19 September 1980. the then President of
the Council stated that consultations would be held
among members with a view to continuing consideration of the item. It is now more urgent than eve1
before that such consultations be initiated in earnest,
in the light of the intensifying oppression and repression being practised by the racist r6gime of South
Africa against the majority population of South Africa.
as well as of South Africa’s refusal to concede the
independence which Namibia deserves and which is
a trust of the United Nations itself-a direct trust.

Y8. China has always firmly supported the just
cause of the peoples of Namibia and South Africa.
We strongly condemn the policy of trpc/rrhcid and the
illegal occupation of Namibia by the South African
rigime. Accordingly, we support the just demands of
the African States and are in favour of sanctions and
the strict enforcement of an arms embargo against
South Africa. In our view, the effective implementation of resolution 418 (lY77) requires some more
specific provisions and, above all, a clear political
will on the part of certain countries. We therefore
believe that the Council should give serious consideration to the report of the arms embargo Committee, especially the recommendations
therein, and
give the Committee a clear mandate to reactivate itself
forthwith.

104. It is also to be hoped that the Council will, in
its wisdom, include in a formal resolution the conclusions and the many recommendations contained in the
last report of the Committee,
perhaps with such
additions as the Council might deem necessary. It is
equally urgent that the Committee be reconstituted
and accorded new terms of reference in the light of
the loopholes which have appeared during the functioning of the Committee. The full implementation of
resolution 421 (1977) has become more compelling
inasmuch as South Africa has become possibly the
tenth largest arms exporter in the world. as well as a
nuclear menace not only to the region. not only to the
African continent. but to the world at large. A very
informative and authoritative article published in the
C’hristitrn Scienc*c Monitor
of Monday, I3 September,
as well as other authoritative
publications. prove
beyond any doubt that South Africa is openly launching
a vigorous campaign to sell the arms it manufactures
to practically the whole world. It is said that South
Africa is selling the arms it manufactures to what it
regards as friendly countries. I need hardly state that
many of those weapons have been developed by
means of imported arms and technology-including
nuclear technology and ,nrrlGtG/-in
violation of the
Council’s resolutions. and with the participation of
several countries but primarily of Israel.

99. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): I should like at the
outset to extend the warm welcome of my delegation
to the new representative of Poland. I am certain that
his wide experience will enrich the work ofthe Council.
100. The Council is resuming its deliberations on
a strict observance of its resolution 418 (19771, which
created certain concrete obligations for States and
which imposed for the first time a mandatory arms
embargo against South Africa. In an effort to promote
the implementation
of that resolution, the Security
Council subsequently adopted resolution 421 (19771,
by which it established a committee of the whole to
study ways and means by which the embargo could
be made more effective, and to make recommendations to the Council.
101. The Committee has submitted three reports.
The last report on ways and means of making the
mandatory arms embargo against South Africa more
effective was submitted in September 1980 in document S/14179. It is regrettable that two years have
already elapsed before the Security Council has
addressed itself to that report.

105. I entirely agree with the firm request of the
representative of Ghana that an oil embargo should
be included in the enforcement measures. I feel dutybound, however, to stress in the strongest terms that
the oil sales which are being made to South Africa
constitute an act committed by the multinational corporations and not by the oil-producing countries. AS
soon as a tanker leaves the port of an oiLproducing
country. those companies that are purchasing that
petroleum become the culprits which sell them wherever they see fit.

102. While the conclusions contained in the latest
report were adopted unanimously, there were SOme
reservations on the recommendations
on the part of
II

/
,:

106. We know from our recent experience
that Governments.
even those in free-enterprise
countries.
can and do influence
the behaviour
of their corporations whenever
they decide
to impose
an embargo
against another
country.
We have seen this recently,
Therefore
the fact that any disregard
of the Council”s
mandatory
resolutions
is by corporations
should
in
no way exonerate
the countries
to which they belong
from responsibility
for the defiance
of those resolutions.

orgiinizcd
the arms embargo
against
South Africa.
jointly
by the Special
Committee
against .+tr/&i,l
and several
governmental
and non-government;,i
organizations.
That seminar
was attended
by rcpre.
sentatives
of Governments
in Africa.
Asia, L;lljn
America and Eastern Europe
and by parli;lmcntal,ian,
from Western
Europe.
and 1 should like to cornmu.
nicnte to the Council the sentiments
of the participnnts
in that seminar, including
those of my own delcgatiun.

107. The Committee
deserves
the Council’s
highest
commendation
for identifying
the areas where loopholes abort the Security
Council’s
resolutions.
The
Committee
certainly
needs some kind of follow-up
mechanism
to carry out its task on behalf of the Council. The question
of such a mechanism
should take
pride of place in consultations
among members
of the
Council in the hope of reaching a feasible consensus 01
unanimity.

113. It was felt that the issue of South Africa’s militarizution
and the racist rigime’s
use of its militq
and nuclear power to threaten peace and stability is of
long and unbearable
duration,
To buttress its system
of c//~~r/~f/lc~id inside South Africa and Namibia
and to
carry out its military
adventures
in neighbouring
States. the South African
r&gime has established
il
massive and monstrous
military
and police apparatus.
In support
of its aggressive
designs. South Afric;l has
developed
a total strategy which musters all available
resources in the service of its armed forces structure.

108. The Council
benefited
greatly from the prescntiltion of the last report by Mr, Munoz Ledo, the Chairman of the Committee
for 1981. This has certainly
reinforced
the need somehow
to profit from his cxperience. ifthe proposed reconstitution
ofthe Committee.
which is a Council
committee
of the whole.
does not
preclude this because Mexico is no longer a member of
the Council. Obviously.
while the embargo
Committee
is a Council committee
of the whole, it cannot achieve
much in the absence of ;I full-time
secretariat,
mnchincry. mechanism
or whatever.
This must be established
to carry out on a day-to-day
basis the meticulous
implementation
of the Council’s
resolutions.
ObviOLISIY. although
we pass resolutions.
even though they
be mandatory
they will come to naught unless there is
;I mechanism,
machinery.
somewhere
in the Secretariat that can see to it on a day-to-day
basis and as
:I full-time
assignment
that the mandatory
resolutions
adopted unanimously
by the Council
are scrupulously
observed.
109. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker
is the
representative
of Algeria.
I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
I IO. Mr. SAHNOUN
(Algeria):
Mr. President.
the
last time I spoke before the Council
I could not pay
;I deserved tribute to you. owing to the tragic circumstances under which the Council
was meeting.
Allow
me now to express our whole-hearted
congl.atulations
to you on your assumption
of the presidency
for the
month of September.
We know from past experience
that you will bc able to lead the work of this body with
great style and efficiency.
I I I I I should like to take this opportunity
to congratulate also your predecessor,
the representative
of
Ireland. who 1 hear was indeed an excellent
President
during the month of August.
112. I intervene
in this discussion
months ago I presided
over a seminar

because
some
in London
on

114. A five-year
expansion
programme
was inlroduced in 1974 which tripled
military
spending
in the
following
three years. It is therefore
no surprise Ihat
the situation has deteriorated
to the point where South
Africa clearly
today poses an immediate
danger to
our continent
and. I dare say. to part of the Indian
Ocean and the South Atlantic
area. It resorts with
gre:lt freedom and ease to tactics aimed at terrorizing
most of the independent
sovereign
States of southern
Africa. It continues
with impunity
to defy the United
Nations by its illegal military
occupation
of Namibia.
Its troops are still deep inside Angola.
Its armed
forces have carried out acts of subversion
and s&otage in Mozambique
and in Zimbabwe.
It continues to
organize
and support bandit groups on the borders of
neighbouring
States and attempts
thereby
to destabilize the legitimate
Governments
of those countries.
113. All these South African
designs and operation5
are made possible by a military
machinery created with
the direct or indirect
assistance
of overseas
friends
and partners in defiance of the Council’s
arms ernbal’gu
imposed
by its resolution
418 ( 1977). The Council
itself, conscious
of the need to monitor
implement+
tion of the arms embargo
resolutions.
decided by ils
resolution
421 ( 1977) to set up a committee
to study
ways and means of achieving
that purpose.
We illi
welcomed
that decision as a useful and necessary step.
116. It was the view of the seminar in London thitl
this Committee
had worked
under rathw difficult
conditions
and, although
it presented
its findings
10
.
the Council in 1980. to date its recommendntlons
ilflfl
conclusions
have been neither
studied nor folIowed
up by the Council,
We studied this report and agreed
fully with the Committee.
iis it underlined
what WCin
Africa
already
knew-that
there
were numrr’ous
instances of ilIcgal supplies of military arms und technology to South Africa, in contravention
of the ~~J~lflcil’s resolution.
We noted, however. that States didnot

provide

further information to the Committee which
enable the Council to examine specific breaches
of the arms embargo with all the facts at hand, We
~tlso note that varying interpretations
of some of the
paragraphs of the Council’s
resolutions
have made
the work of the Committee difficult, Some States consider that licensing arrangements
with South Africa
for the manufacture
of arms and ammunition or the
sale of vehicles of any kind, even when specifically
designed for military purposes,
are not to be considered. This is astonishing. That is why we could not
agree more with the Committee when it suggests that
it is hardly possible to discharge the function of monitoring the arms embargo without the appropriate
clarification.
the appropriate
mandate, and all the
means required for such monitoring.
would

I 17. It is high time that the Council studied in a
systematic
manner the flow of arms and mrrriric~l to
South Africa,and
took appropriate action. The diversionary tactics employed by South Africa’s friends
should be definitely proscribed.
Information
should
be disseminated
in a more effective manner to enable
the public, as well as Governments,
to play their role
in implementing the arms embargo.

121. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of the Council that I have iust received a letter
from the representative
of Cubn’in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the discussion
of the
item on the Council’s agenda. In accordance with the
LISU~I
practice.
I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative
to purticipnte in
the discussion
without the right to vote. in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the provisional
rules of procedure.

122. The PRESIDENT:
I invite the First Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba. Mr. Jose Viera,
to take ;I place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

I 18. We strongly
support the creation. as recommended by the Committee, of an arms embargo section in the Secretariat-in
our view it should be in the
office
of the Secretary-General-which
would
be
specifically
entrusted
with the task of assisting the
Committee
to discharge its duties by providing it with
the necessary services, including research, documentation and communication
with Member States.

123. Mr. VIERA
(Cuba) (infcJi’/~,‘l’f~rlio/l ./kom Sputris/r): Mr. President. I wish to thank you and the other
members of the Council for giving me this opportunity
to address the Council at a time when it is considering
this important question. It is a particular pleasure for
the delegation of Cuba to see you.
MI-. President,
presiding over the work of the Council at this time.
Your experience and wisdom, as well as the dedication of your great country. Japan, to the WLIS~ of international peace and co-operation
arc a guarantee that
you will successfully
accomplish your task.

1 19. It is imperative that the Council fully shoulder
its responsibility
in :I matter that affects international
peace and security and display its willingness
and
ability to implement its own resolution on the arms
embargo against South Africa, a resolution in which,
for the first time in the history of the United Nations.
:lction was taken under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations. The same countries that beg us not
tr> call for further sanctions and that oppose any attempt
to do so are today failing to fulfil their own commitments.
Let them show us that they mean business
when
they themselves agree to invoke Chapter VII:
otherwise,
the Organization
will become totally
powerless,
as the Secretary-General
pointed out in his
report
on the work of the Organization.
120.
I would like to quote the specific paragraph
the Secretury-General’s
report dealing with this:

motivate their policies outside the United Nations.
This indeed is the essence of the treaty obligation
which the Charter imposes on Member States, In
other words the best resolution in the world will
have little practical effect unless Governments
of
Member States follow it up with the appropriate
support and uction .’ ‘h

124. The conflict in southern
Africa and the need
for effective
implementation
of the arms embargo
against the South African racist rCgime imposed by
the Council in its resolution 4 IX ( 1977) today constitute
one of the most pressing problems affectung international peace and security.
The Movement
of NonAligned Countries
has repeatedly stressed the need
to apply to the racist trp(/~r/rc~id regime the sanctions
provided
for in Chapter VI1 of the Charter of the
United Nations and has particularly
emphnsizrd
the
importance
of supplementing
the mandatory
arms
embargo imposed under the above-mentioned
resolution. in view of the repeated and clear violations
of that decision by South Africa with the complicity
of its allies, especially the United Stntes.

of

“There
is a tendency in the United Nations for
Governments
to act as though the passage of a resolution absolved them from further responsibility
fat
the subject in question, Nothing could be furthet
from the intention of the Charter. In fact resolutions,
particularly
those unanimously
adopted by the
Security
Council, should serve as a springboard fat
governmental
support and determination and should

12.5. The Non-Aligned
Movement. at its most recent
ministerial meeting, took note with regret and concern
of the fact that the Council had been unable to uct in
accordance
with its basic responsibility
for muintuining’ international
peace and security.
largely because of the veto and the policy of the United States.
13

which impeded the adoption of resolutions
have implemented
broad and mandatory
against South Africa.

that would
sanctions

126. The seriousness of the situation in the southern
part of Africa and its harmful consequences for world
pence require, today more than ever before. that the
decisions of the Council and the recommendations
of
the Security Council Committee established by resolution 42 I ( 1977) become a reality. It is hardly necessary to describe the well-known
situation that exists
in southern Africa. There we see a stepping up of the
threat to peace and security brought about by the continuing illegal occupation of Namibia by racist South
Africa, the repeated acts of unprovoked
aggression.
attacks and sabotage agamst Angola, Mozambique,
Zimbabwe,
Zambia, Lesotho and other independent
neighbouring
States. and also the continuation
of the
reprehensible
policy of uprrrthrid.
127. In Namibia, South Africa is continuing to mock
resolutions
of the Council. of the General Assembly
and of the many international
bodies which have
demanded the withdrawal
of the racist troops from
Namibia. In particular. the Pretoria racists resort to all
kinds of delaying tactics to prevent the implementation of resolution 435 ( 1978), which is the recognized
basis accepted by the international
community
fat
the independence
of that people. Instead.
South
Africa has stepped up repression against its own people as well as against the people of Namibia. which,
under the leadership uf their national liberation movements. internationally
recugnized. is taking a heroic
stand itguinst it. The weapons
provided by certain
Powers-first
and foremost, by the United States-are
the ones making possible that brutal repression,
which
resorts to criminal and fascist means in ;I vain attempt
to block the course of history in the elimination of
colonialism and racism in southern Africa.
128. The delegation of Cuba pays a tribute to the
members of the Committee. who have worked so hard
in dealing with the question of the arms embargo
agitinst South Africa and who have provided all Mem-

ber States. and members of the Council in particular.
with data. analyses and recommendations
of funditmental importance. We take note in particular of the
obstacles the Committee
encountered
in trying to
carry out its task and the tenacity with which its Chairman worked to bring that task to completion.
129. We support the recommendations
which l-twc
been made to the Council by the representative
of
Mexico for an early implementation
of the arms
embargo against South Africa and especially for the
establishment of a sanctions office in the Secretariat.
which in a practical way would help implementation
of the embargo.
130. Mr. NATORF (Poland): I should like to express
my sincere thanks for your cordial words of welcome
to me, Mr. President, and also those of my colleagues
from Togo, China and Jordan. In the days to comt‘.
I shall be looking forward to constructive co-operation
with all members of the Council in the implementation
of the difficult tasks of maintaining peace and security
which are entrusted to this body ofthe United Nations.
13 I. Permit me also to take this opportunity to ;tssUciate myself with the good wishes addressed to the
newly arrived representative
of the United Kingdom.
Sir John Thomson, and to wish him success in his
work.

No’ri:s
’ A/AC.

I lS/L.547.

p. 10.
