S/PV.9394

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9394th meeting

Wednesday, 9 August 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. França Danese
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Ishikane
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Afonso
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mr. Hauri
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Dame Barbara Woodward

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-23563 (E)
*2323563*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9394

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Martha Ama
Akyaa Pobee, Assistant Secretary-General for Africa,
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs
and Department of Peace Operations, and Ms. Edem
Wosornu, Director of Operations and Advocacy, Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. Pobee.
Ms. Pobee: I thank you, Madam President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in the Sudan.
More than 100 days have passed since fighting
erupted between the Sudanese Armed Forces and the
Rapid Support Forces. Clashes between the parties have
continued in various parts of the country, particularly
Khartoum, Bahri, Omdurman and Darfur, with neither
side achieving victory or making any significant gains.
Khartoum state remains an epicentre of the conflict,
with major combat concentrated around key Sudanese
Armed Forces installations, including the Sudanese
Armed Forces General Command Headquarters.
Fighting has continued in various neighbourhoods.
This week, the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid
Support Forces both ordered residents to leave their
homes in a section of Omdurman, declaring it an area
of operations.
The parties have inflicted tremendous suffering on
the people of the Darfur region, as the fighting there
has continued to reopen old wounds of ethnic tensions
created by the past conflicts in the region. The brutal
violence experienced in El Geneina and Sirba is a
particularly bad aspect of the situation, which is deeply
2/19

09/08/2023

worrying and could quickly engulf the country in a
prolonged ethnic conflict with regional spillover. The
initiative that Chad has taken to convene a grouping
of Darfurian stakeholders to address the situation in
the region is therefore welcome and should be built
on, while ensuring the participation of a broad range
of stakeholders, including armed groups, tribal leaders
and members of civil society and women’s groups.
The situation in the states of South and North
Kordofan and the Blue Nile state of the Sudan
continues to be fragile, with persistent military actions
and frequent road closures. In North Kordofan, the
Sudanese Armed Forces control El Obeid city, while
the Rapid Support Forces control areas around the city.
Since June, the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement-North (SPLM-N) Al-Hilu faction has
continued to make military advancements in the
Sudanese Armed Forces-controlled areas in South
Kordofan and Blue Nile states, which SPLM-N claims
is an attempt to take back territory previously taken
from it.
While the east is relatively calm, there are indications
of active mobilization efforts in support of the Sudanese
Armed Forces, with the emergence of mobilization
committees and the establishment of military training
camps. The mobilization is particularly worrisome and
risks plunging the east into conflict along ethnic lines,
further highlighting the fragility of the region.
The northern part of the country remains under the
control of the Sudanese Armed Forces.
The conflict in the Sudan continues to have
immense repercussions on the country and its people
who continue to face unimaginable suffering. The
humanitarian and protection needs are rising by the day
with no signs of a reprieve. My humanitarian colleague,
Ms. Edem Wosornu, will brief the Council in detail on
the mounting humanitarian needs and response efforts.
The indiscriminate and sometimes targeted attacks
on civilians and civilian objects and infrastructure
continue, particularly in Khartoum, Darfur and North
Kordofan, as the parties continue to disregard calls to
protect civilians and uphold their international human
rights and humanitarian law obligations.
Sexual violence continues to be perpetrated on
a large scale, while children continue to be killed or
victimized or at risk of being recruited to fight.
23-23563

09/08/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The systematic abductions and killings of human
rights defenders in Darfur and Khartoum are on the rise.
The parties to the conflict must take concrete actions to
end and investigate those violations and support must
be provided to strengthen human rights defenders’
networks and better protect human rights defenders.
The United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) and the wider United
Nations has on several occasions denounced specific
egregious violations, such as ethnically motivated
attacks in West Darfur, systematic looting and rape and
aerial bombardments, and has named those responsible.
Hostilities in the country must come to an end and
perpetrators should be held accountable for crimes
committed, including sexual violence.
We welcome the ongoing efforts by the African
Union (AU) and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) to end the conflict in the
Sudan. UNITAMS remains committed to supporting
those efforts, including through the AU-led expanded
mechanism and its core group, which the United Nations
is a part of. We also welcome the continued efforts
of the United States and Saudi Arabia to facilitate
negotiations between the conflicting parties in Jeddah,
Saudi Arabia, as well as the initiative of the Sudan’s
neighbouring countries to help resolve the conflict.
The common thread among those initiatives is the call
for a permanent cessation of hostilities, the facilitation
of humanitarian access and engagement with civilian
stakeholders in an inclusive political process.
Coordination between the existing regional and
international mechanisms and forums remains essential
to maximize the collective leverage of regional and
international actors and enhance the effectiveness of
mediation efforts. The United Nations is supporting a
joined-up approach towards facilitating a comprehensive
solution and will continue to work closely with our
partners particularly the African Union and IGAD in
that regard, in coordination with others.
We must also highlight that a broad range of
civilians remains committed to ending the war and
a resumption of a transition leading to a democratic
State. Civilians, tribal leaders and others are coming
under increasing pressure to take sides in the war,
and we continue to urge against that. Such pressure
will lead only to a civil war with ethnic and regional

S/PV.9394

repercussions for decades to come. In fact, UNITAMS
is supporting efforts by local leaders to prevent or
de-escalate conflicts, particularly in Darfur.
UNITAMS also welcomes the ongoing efforts
by civilian leaders to consolidate various civilian
initiatives under one umbrella to unify anti-war
forces in one broad front and prepare for an inclusive
political process. It is important to include civil society,
women’s rights groups, youth, trade professions and
resistance committees whose voices and engagement
are particularly significant in any effort to end the
conflict in the Sudan. UNITAMS continues its
outreach with those initiatives and encourages broadbased inclusivity.
Let me also highlight the important role Sudanese
women are playing by leading several anti-war initiatives
that call for the immediate cessation of violence;
accountability for human rights violations, including
sexual violence; and for women’s participation in
ceasefire negotiations and any future political process.
Their voices must be heard.
Let me close by reiterating that there needs to be a
negotiated solution to end the war as soon as possible.
There is no other alternative. Calls by some to continue
the war in order to achieve a military victory will
contribute only to destroying the country. The longer
the war continues, the greater the risk of fragmentation
and foreign interference, the erosion of sovereignty and
the loss of the Sudan’s future, particularly its youth.
Now is the time to end this senseless war and return to
negotiations. UNITAMS, along with its partners, will
continue to engage with both sides towards that goal, and
we count on the united support of the Security Council.
The President: I thank Ms. Pobee for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Wosornu.
Ms. Wosornu: I thank you, Madam President, for
the opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
humanitarian situation in the Sudan.
Since we last briefed the Council on 23 June,
the Sudan’s descent into a full-blown humanitarian
catastrophe has only deepened. During these six
weeks alone, more than 1.4 million people have fled
their homes.
I visited the Sudan two weeks ago. I was deeply
alarmed by the level of suffering I saw and the stories
I heard.

23-235633/19

S/PV.9394

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The women and girls I spoke to shared accounts of
being forced to flee far from their homes. They moved
from place to place, seeking safety in a constantly
shifting security environment. Many live in fear of the
fighting catching up with them. They told me stories
of sexual violence, harassment and physical assault;
of husbands disappearing never to be seen again; of
education interrupted; careers ruined and livelihoods
lost. Teachers and nurses who had fled their homes
have also not received the salaries that they were once
used to.
Everyone had a story of parents, children, colleagues
and friends who had perished in this devastating
conflict, with fears of more to come as the conflicting
parties push on regardless of the consequences.
Thanks to the lack of coverage of the Sudan in the
global media, it is impossible to understand what is
happening there. Nearly four months into the conflict,
millions of people remain trapped in a humanitarian
calamity that continues to grow. More than 4 million
have fled their homes, with 3.2 million internally
displaced and close to 900,000 who have crossed
the border into Chad, Egypt, South Sudan and other
countries. The alarming accounts of sexual violence
that I heard from people who have fled to Port Sudan are
just a fraction of what is being repeated on a sickening
scale in conflict hotspots across the country. People
are finding it more and more difficult to access urgent
medical assistance, with 80 per cent of hospitals across
the country unable to function. Half of all the children
in the Sudan, 14 million, need humanitarian support.
More than 40 per cent of the population, that is, more
than 20 million people, are facing high levels of acute
food insecurity. The conflict is disrupting livelihoods
and physical access to markets and fuelling steep
increases in commodity prices. The banking system
has been seriously disrupted, as have public and civil
institutions, leading to the severe disruption of public
services and less and less money circulating within
the economy. Electricity blackouts are extensive, and
education services, which previously functioned very
well, have been interrupted. This is the story of a country
and a people being driven to the point of collapse.
As Assistant Secretary-General Pobee has
highlighted, the situation is particularly alarming
in areas where the conflict is most intense, notably
Khartoum, as well as in Darfur and the Kordofan states.
The reports of ethnic-based violence in West Darfur are
extremely alarming, with numerous civilians killed or
4/19

09/08/2023

wounded. The intense fighting and difficult operating
environment are limiting our ability to deliver urgently
required humanitarian assistance, and that is only
deepening the people’s suffering.
Nevertheless, since we last briefed the Council,
humanitarian and civil-society organizations, the
United Nations and its partners have spared no effort to
restore the flow of humanitarian supplies, particularly
to the Darfur states, where access was most restricted.
We have seen some progress, but it has been limited.
On 3 August, following intensive negotiations with
the parties, a convoy of 10 trucks was able to deliver
500 metric tons of improved seeds to 70,000 families
in Ed Daein in East Darfur, the first convoy we have
been able to facilitate to Darfur from the eastern part
of Sudan — just in time for the planting season, which
will be vital to ensuring food security in the coming
months. The Darfur states also have some of the highest
levels of food insecurity in the Sudan. Additional trucks
are en route to North and South Darfur to respond to
health, nutrition and food security needs, and we expect
the parties to live up to their commitments and allow
the trucks to reach their destinations. Last week also
saw the first delivery of food assistance into West
Darfur from Chad. Additional assistance is expected to
follow in the coming weeks.
As Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator Martin
Griffiths has said, ensuring cross-border access into
the Darfur region represents a key milestone, as the
United Nations is seeking to access all the areas in
the Sudan that are hard to reach and to provide critical
humanitarian assistance to people in need, wherever
they are. We continue to depend on the generosity,
understanding and negotiations of the Sudanese
authorities, as well as those of the Sudan’s neighbours,
to facilitate the critical efforts to reach those most in
need. Meanwhile, assistance is also being provided
in Adré, in Chad, which I also visited, in support of
the more than 350,000 people who have fled across its
border, as well as the Chadian communities generously
hosting them.
Nationwide, since the conflict started, more than
2.9 million people have received some minimum form
of humanitarian assistance, including cash or in-kind
food assistance, minimal health services or access to
basic water services. Unfortunately, that represents
only a fraction of the 18 million whom we are trying
to reach, and we need unhindered and unfettered
23-23563

09/08/2023

S/PV.9394

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

humanitarian access to those who need us most. In
Khartoum, where access to people in need remains
enormously challenging, some assistance is being
provided with the dwindling resources that are still
available locally, but we have been unable to guarantee
passage for a humanitarian convoy to the capital to
replenish the supplies since late June. Humanitarian
organizations are ready and willing to do everything
it takes to provide the assistance that the people of
the Sudan so desperately need. But they cannot do so
without the regular facilitation of access by the parties
and the easing of bureaucratic and administrative
impediments. The international humanitarian law is
clear. All the parties to the conflict must facilitate the
rapid and unimpeded passage of humanitarian relief for
civilians in need.

conflict are critical and must continue unabated if the
people of the Sudan are to have any chance of living
in enduring peace and security. Until then, we demand
that all the parties respect international humanitarian
law and minimize human suffering. The parties to the
conflict in the Sudan must ensure the safe passage
of civilians fleeing violence in Khartoum, Darfur
and other areas where there are active hostilities. We
also urge the international community to support the
humanitarian effort on which so many people in the
Sudan increasingly depend.

So far, the limited deliveries of assistance we
have been able to make have been possible only
through intensive negotiations with the parties, much
of it supported through the Jeddah process. Those
negotiations are becoming increasingly complex. It is
urgent that we re-establish a platform for direct and
regular contact on humanitarian issues with the parties
at a senior level in order to negotiate access and protect
the humanitarian operations in the Sudan. We need the
strong support of Member States to facilitate that.

Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
Let me start by thanking Assistant Secretary-General
Pobee and Director Wosornu of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) for
their very helpful updates to the Council.

We can provide assistance at the required speed and
scale only if we have the relevant travel permits to move
within the country and visas to enter it. While we have
already received some visas, for which we are grateful
to the authorities, we have asked them to continue to
ease procedures and expedite approvals. Even with
improved access, we will be unable to prevent a further
slide into a humanitarian catastrophe without the
required resources. It is therefore deeply concerning
that the $2.6 billion humanitarian response plan for
this year is only 25 per cent funded, in the amount of
approximately $680 million, which is what we have so
far received to enable us to assist the people who need
us. I am grateful for the generosity of Member States
and donors for their contributions so far, but we need
more funding. I am appealing to all Member States and
donors to come forward and help us fund the plan as
soon as possible.
During my visit to the Sudan, one message that I
heard very clearly is that the people of the Sudan want and
need peace. In that regard, and as Assistant SecretaryGeneral Pobee said earlier, the ongoing political
mediation efforts aimed at achieving a resolution to the

The President:
her briefing.

I

thank

Ms.

Wosornu

for

I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

I want to start by echoing the alarms that we have
heard today with regard to the conflict’s catastrophic
impact on civilians in the Sudan, with an estimated
24.7 million people in need of humanitarian assistance.
As we have heard, the availability of humanitarian access
in the country is now some of the worst in the world.
The Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid Support
Forces (RSF) continue to double down on their fighting,
while the Sudanese people face rolling blackouts and
the horrifying daily reality of decomposing bodies in
the streets. The humanitarian effects are made worse
by credible evidence suggesting serious violations of
international humanitarian law by both the Sudanese
Armed Forces and the RSF, which could amount to war
crimes and crimes against humanity. As we have heard,
that includes incidents of sexual violence and air strikes
in populated areas, resulting in heavy loss of civilian
life. There are also credible reports of the targeted
killing of civilians and atrocities against specific ethnic
groups in Darfur, with much of the bloodshed attributed
to RSF units and allied militias. We welcome the
decision of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court to start investigations into offences committed in
the current conflict and call on the Sudanese authorities
to ensure full accountability.
First, we need to see the Sudanese Armed Forces
and the Rapid Support Forces put the interests of their
people first, immediately end hostilities and enter into

23-235635/19

S/PV.9394

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

negotiations in good faith. In that context, we welcome
the diplomatic efforts of regional partners, including
the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and the League of Arab States, to restore
peace to the Sudan.
Secondly, in the 11 May Jeddah Declaration, as
we have heard, both parties committed to acting in
accordance with their international obligations and
to enabling and facilitating unhindered humanitarian
access, in line with international humanitarian law. I
congratulate OCHA on its extraordinary efforts to
get humanitarian aid into the Sudan, but I also echo
Ms. Wosornu’s calls. As we have heard, there have been
attacks on humanitarian convoys in areas under RSF
control. And we need to see the removal of bureaucratic
obstacles, such as the restrictive customs procedures
that are causing delays, and the issuance of visas and
travel permits.
The people of the Sudan have suffered for far too
long. Those who have the ability to stop their suffering
should spare no effort to bring an end to the conflict.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Assistant Secretary-General Martha
Pobee and the Director of Operations and Advocacy in
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), Edem Wosornu, for their updates on the
situation in the Sudan. We welcome the participation in
today’s meeting of the Permanent Representative of the
Sudan to the United Nations.
We are deeply concerned about the dangerous
developments in the military and political situation
in the Sudan. The fighting in recent months between
the regular army and the Rapid Support Forces in the
capital region has seriously exacerbated a humanitarian
situation that was already difficult. Thousands of people
have been killed or injured, more than 3 million are
now added to those internally displaced, and hundreds
of thousands have fled to neighbouring countries.
We are concerned about the situation in West Darfur,
particularly in El Geneina. We continue to call on the
Sudanese parties to demonstrate political will and take
immediate steps to bring a definitive end to the armed
confrontation. We believe that any differences can be
resolved at the negotiating table, as part of an inclusive
intra-Sudanese dialogue, and that the Sudanese have
sufficient wisdom and political experience to do that.
The region is actively involved in efforts to
resolve the conflict. We note the work being done by
the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority
6/19

09/08/2023

on Development and in Jeddah. We note the Sudan’s
Neighbouring Countries Summit, held on 13 July
in Egypt, as well as the first meeting, yesterday in
N’Djamena, of the working mechanism at the Foreign
Minister level established at the Summit. We share
the view of the countries of the region about the
need to preserve the country’s State institutions. The
Sudanese authorities have also presented a road map
for a settlement. We hope that the measures being taken
will create the necessary conditions for stabilizing the
situation and for an inclusive relaunch of the Sudanese
political process. We firmly believe that one condition
for success in any mediation initiative is impartiality,
and that any attempts to create divisions in the efforts
of neighbouring countries or regional initiatives would
be counterproductive.
We appreciate the assistance being provided to the
country and the region through OCHA and humanitarian
organizations, including those that have been on the
front lines since the beginning of the conflict and
are working on both sides of the line of contact. We
welcomed the arrival last week of the first humanitarian
convoy to Darfur and call on humanitarian workers to
act in strict accordance with the United Nations guiding
principles for humanitarian action and to give greater
attention to assistance within the country.
We believe that any external interference in the
sovereign affairs of the Sudan that could add fuel to the
fire of the conflict is unacceptable. We call on everyone
to refrain from attempting to influence the situation
through illegitimate unilateral sanctions, which serve
only to further aggravate the situation and increase
the suffering of the local population. Some Western
countries, with the support of Mr. Volker Perthes, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, who
has lost the trust of the Sudanese people, have been
actively interfering in the internal political process in the
Sudan, irresponsibly imposing red lines on the parties,
and therefore bear a significant share of responsibility
for the collapsed situation in the country. Considering
the situation that has arisen surrounding the United
Nations presence, we understand the decision of the
Sudanese authorities and call on the United Nations to
act impartially and to respect the views of Khartoum
and the sovereignty of the country.
We regret to note that such actions, which are
designed among other things to manufacture artificial
competition between the mediation efforts, continue.
Without a clear strategy on how the international
23-23563

09/08/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

community can help the Sudan emerge from the current
situation, pressure and blackmail are useless. We have
been seeing the arm-twisting and direct manipulation
through donor support in the Sudan used in other
African countries as well. We continue to believe that
the Sudanese must be allowed the full right not only to
make decisions about the future of their country and
people but to bear full responsibility for them.
In conclusion, we would like to reaffirm the
Russian Federation’s unwavering readiness to continue
to assist the friendly nation of the Sudan in successfully
overcoming its current difficulties and returning
to a path of peace and sustainable development.
We unfailingly support the territorial integrity,
independence and sovereignty of the Sudan.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Pobee and Ms. Wosornu for their updates.
Japan highly appreciates their dedication to their work
for the Sudanese people. I also welcome the Permanent
Representative of the Sudan, who joins us today.
I thank the United Kingdom for requesting today’s
timely open briefing. It is the Security Council’s
responsibility to continue to express its firm position on
the ongoing clashes, which have severely undermined
efforts to restore the Sudan’s political transition and
have worsened the humanitarian situation.
I would like to mention the following three points.
First, Japan continues its strong call on the
Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid Support Forces
to immediately stop fighting and return to a peaceful
and inclusive political process. It is regrettable that
almost four months have passed without any clear
sign from the parties of a readiness to end hostilities.
Japan urges both parties to seriously commit to
international and regional efforts towards a long-term
ceasefire, the unhindered delivery of humanitarian aid
and the resumption of political dialogue. The parties
must also uphold their obligations under international
humanitarian law and ensure the safety of civilians,
including humanitarian personnel.
Secondly, Japan shares the deep concern of the
United Nations about the severe impact of the fighting
on civilians in the Darfur region. We are especially
concerned by reports of the targeting of civilian
populations and facilities. Japan also seriously takes
note of the Secretary-General’s concern about the
increasing violence. Again, Japan strongly emphasizes

S/PV.9394

that all violence must stop immediately and that
obligations under international humanitarian law must
be upheld by all.
Japan is concerned that the deteriorating situation
could pose a risk beyond the border. We thank the
Sudan’s neighbouring countries for hosting refugees,
despite their own humanitarian challenges. In June,
Japan decided to extend emergency grant aid in the
amount of $5 million for humanitarian assistance in
the Sudan and a grant aid to be implemented through
Japanese non-governmental organizations in the Sudan
and Chad.
Thirdly, I would like to stress that Japan’s strong
support for the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan remains unchanged.
In that regard, Japan is ready to actively contribute
to the upcoming discussions on how best to renew
the Mission’s mandate to adapt to the situation on
the ground.
To conclude, Japan reiterates its commitment to
supporting the Sudanese people.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Martha
Pobee and Ms. Edem Wosornu for their comprehensive
briefings, and I welcome Ambassador Mohamed to
today’s meeting.
This meeting comes more than 100 days after
the outbreak of the fighting in the Sudan, which has
claimed many innocent lives and inflicted immense
suffering on the Sudanese people, as mentioned by our
briefers today. There is therefore a need to intensify
diplomatic efforts to end this crisis in all its dimensions.
Accordingly, I would like to emphasize three points.
First, efforts must continue to alleviate the
dire humanitarian situation facing millions of
Sudanese because of the continued fighting and
lack of commitment to previously declared truces.
In that context, food and water supplies as well as
health services must be provided, as almost half
the population is suffering from high levels of food
insecurity. Attention must also be paid to the needs of
displaced persons and refugees, as their rates are rising
sharply, while some neighbouring countries are already
facing internal challenges. We therefore appeal to the
international community to provide support to the
Sudan and neighbouring countries during this difficult

23-235637/19

S/PV.9394

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

period, given the level of needs on the ground and the
lack of the required funding received by the United
Nations and its humanitarian partners for this year.
For our part, and in the context of our humanitarian
solidarity with the fraternal Sudanese people, the
United Arab Emirates has provided them with urgent
relief assistance and recently transported by air and
sea more than 2,000 tons of medical and food supplies
to Port Sudan and the Republic of Chad to support the
brotherly Sudanese refugees. We have also set up a
field hospital in Chad and opened a coordination office
for aid from the United Arab Emirates to support and
coordinate humanitarian efforts, and we will continue
our support in that regard.
Secondly, we stress the importance of the parties
adhering to international humanitarian law, including
the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure,
and unhindered and safe access for humanitarian
personnel and supplies to those in need. At the same
time, we reiterate our call for the full implementation of
the commitments reached in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
In that context, we condemn the killing of a number
of humanitarian workers in the Sudan and express our
concern at reports of attacks against them and the looting
and theft of humanitarian facilities. We must recall that
10 days from today, on 19 August, we will celebrate
World Humanitarian Day — an occasion to pay tribute
to humanitarian and relief workers and to do everything
possible to protect them and their important work.
Thirdly, the United Arab Emirates reiterates its
call for an immediate and permanent ceasefire, work
towards a peaceful solution to the crisis and return to the
political track. We stress in that regard the importance
of responding to regional and international diplomatic
efforts to address the crisis in the Sudan, the most recent
of which was the meeting held in Chad this week by
the ministerial mechanism emanating from the Cairo
summit of the Sudan’s neighbouring countries. We also
welcome the summit’s final communiqué, which stressed
the importance of a political solution and dialogue for
achieving security and stability.
In the context of the United Arab Emirates’
keenness for regional and international cooperation to
resolve pressing issues, my country also participated
in the first meeting convened by the quartet of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development last
month. We stress the need to intensify that momentum
and coordinate all efforts closely.
8/19

09/08/2023

In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates emphasizes
its continued solidarity with the fraternal Sudanese
people during those difficult circumstances, including by
supporting all efforts aimed at ending the crisis.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the three African
members of the Security Council (A3), namely Gabon,
Ghana and my own country, Mozambique.
We thank the Assistant Secretary-General,
Ms. Martha Pobee, and the Director of Operations
and Advocacy at the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Edem Wosornu, for their
important and insightful update on the situation in the
Sudan. We welcome the participation in this meeting of
His Excellency Mr. Mohamed, Permanent Representative
of the Sudan.
The A3 wishes to condemn the unabated hostilities
between the Rapid Support Forces and the Sudanese
Armed Forces over the past four months. We deeply
regret the immense suffering brought upon the Sudanese
people, with more than 1,000 civilian fatalities resulting
from the ongoing confrontations. We note with concern
the displacement of approximately 2.5 million people
and the disruption of food and medical supplies, with its
correlating negative impact on the vulnerable population.
In addition, we follow with concern the deteriorating
situation in Darfur, especially in Central and North
Darfur, with reports of killings and recorded incidents
of sexual violence, particularly against women and girls.
Mindful of the current situation, the A3 would like
to emphasize the following points.
First, the A3 condemns in particular the persisting
attacks against civilians, hospitals and critical national
infrastructure, and the perpetration of sexual abuses
against women and girls. Such acts are unacceptable and
are a gross violation of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. We also condemn
the repeated violations of the Vienna Convention on
Diplomatic Relations of 1961. We call on the parties
to uphold their international obligations and to protect
diplomatic premises.
It is deplorable to see the fratricidal struggle between
the army and the Rapid Support Forces dragging on
despite the mediation efforts to reach a ceasefire. So
far, all attempts have remained dead letters, and the
rare truces have not held. We reiterate our call on the
parties to cease hostilities and embrace dialogue and
23-23563

09/08/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

diplomacy with a view to achieving peace and prosperity
for the people of the Sudan. We also reiterate our call
for an immediate end to the hostilities and a renewed
commitment to negotiations. The way to peace and
prosperity for the Sudanese people is through dialogue
and national reconciliation.
Secondly, the A3 encourages the regionally led
efforts towards a sustainable solution to the current
crisis, in particular those by the leadership of the
African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and the League of Arab States.
In that regard, we welcomed the communiqué issued
at the Sudan’s Neighbouring States Summit, held on
13 July, as well as the three-party action plan from the
first meeting of the Sudan’s neighbours’ ministerial
mechanism. We also welcomed the communiqué from
the meeting of the IGAD Quartet Group held on 10 July.
We urge the warring parties to engage in the
implementation of the communiqué of the African
Union Peace and Security Council, which reaffirms the
six key elements outlined in the African Union Roadmap
for the Resolution of the Conflict in the Sudan. We look
forward to the outcome of the joint initiative of the
African Union and IGAD to hold a political dialogue
in Addis Ababa of non-military stakeholders. We
emphasize the importance of reinforcing coordination
and maintaining complementarity between the regional
and international efforts in order to address the
prevailing concerns regarding a permanent cessation
of hostilities.
Thirdly and lastly, we remain profoundly concerned
about the dire humanitarian situation in the Sudan, with
an estimated 24.7 million people in need of humanitarian
assistance. We therefore call on donor partners to step
up their financial support to help meet the target for
the humanitarian response plan. Ms. Wosornu made
it very clear how important that is in her briefing. We
welcome the positive and constructive role that the
Sudan’s neighbours have been playing in the efforts to
stabilize the country, especially where managing the
refugee crisis is concerned. There is an urgent need to
accelerate the humanitarian response in order to ensure
that the needs of refugees and internally displaced
persons are properly and adequately addressed. We
consider it important to take a coordinated approach to
the humanitarian and security responses from all actors,
particularly at the borders of neighbouring countries, in
close collaboration with their respective authorities.

S/PV.9394

The A3 would like to reaffirm its solidarity with
the Sudanese people. We are firmly committed to
respect for the independence, sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity of our sister African country. We
want to voice our collective rejection of any external
interference in the ongoing conflict that would further
complicate the situation on the ground. We remain
resolute in our determination to support efforts aimed
at achieving peace, security and stability in the Sudan.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Martha Pobee and Director Edem
Wosornu for their comprehensive briefings, and I
welcome Ambassador Mohamed and the Sudanese
delegation to this meeting.
The violent power struggle that erupted in the
Sudan in April has plunged the country into disarray.
We remain deeply concerned about the ongoing military
clashes that have embroiled several urban areas in the
Sudan in hostilities from the beginning. We are worried
about the situation and the suffering of the millions
of civilians affected by those actions in such violent
and precarious surroundings. The scale of damage
to essential infrastructure caused by major armed
confrontations is appalling. We strongly condemn the
atrocities committed by the parties to the conflict and
regret that the protection of civilians has been utterly
neglected in some parts of the Sudan. We are distressed
by the reports of mass killings in West Darfur. The
fighting has also disrupted vital humanitarian aid and
access to basic nutrition and essential services such
as health care, water and electricity. We are deeply
worried about the lack of detailed information from the
Darfur region and Blue Nile and South Kordofan states
amid the widespread hostilities. Any plan to protect
civilians in those areas demands thorough reporting on
the ground.
Brazil strongly supports the Jeddah Declaration,
commends the Saudi and American efforts to bolster
it and laments the repeated violation of its tenets. We
call on the parties to implement its basic pledges,
which are essential to the flow of vital humanitarian
assistance. We reiterate the calls for an immediate and
unconditional ceasefire and urge the parties to engage
in dialogue to resolve their differences after a truce is
reached. A negotiated solution to the conflict is the only
path to paving the way for a peaceful political transition
in the Sudan. The magnitude of losses and destruction
in the conflict has made it abundantly clear that any
viable solutions to the crisis are not military ones.

23-235639/19

S/PV.9394

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The Sudan can count on support from its neighbours
to engage in a peaceful settlement. In the end, the violent
power struggle that brought about the conflict is both
a tragedy for the Sudanese people and a threat to the
stability and prosperity of the region. The humanitarian
effects of the crisis have been deeply felt on the Sudan’s
borders with Egypt, Chad, South Sudan, Ethiopia, the
Central African Republic, Libya and Eritrea. The Sudan
can also rely on the United Nations, the African Union,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
League of Arab States and many of its key partners for
mediation and good offices.
Peaceful conflict resolution is necessary to build
the bridge to the political transition that millions of
Sudanese desire and deserve. That is an important
message for all Sudanese political forces to heed. Brazil
reaffirms its commitment to the Sudan’s sovereignty,
unity, independence and territorial integrity. Brazil
reiterates its support for the Sudanese people in their
quest for peace, justice and dignity and appeals to
the international community to increase its solidarity
with the Sudan at this critical juncture. The Security
Council must act together to address the challenges
faced by the Sudan. Inaction will impose a heavy toll
on the Sudanese people, who simply cannot afford it.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Pobee and Director Wosornu for their updates.
Malta strongly condemns the cycle of violence that
has engulfed the Sudan over more than 100 days and
reiterates its call on both parties to cease hostilities
without preconditions. We deplore the loss of life
and condemn the targeting of civilian infrastructure,
including hospitals, schools and places of worship,
and on humanitarian and medical personnel, premises
and assets. We are concerned by increasing reports of
civilians being caught in the crossfire, including those
killed in their own homes or in places they sought for
safety. Children also remain at high risk, with over
2,000 having been killed and maimed since the start of
the conflict.
We remind all parties of their obligations under
international law, including redoubling efforts to end
and prevent all grave violations against children. We
are appalled by the extensive reports of sexual and
gender-based violence in Khartoum and El Geneina,
including attacks on women’s human rights defenders
and civil society organizations, and the abductions of
women and girls. Urgent support for survivors’ access
to medical care and psychosocial support must be given
10/19

09/08/2023

priority. Providing justice to victims and survivors of
atrocity crimes and ensuring that perpetrators are held
accountable must remain central to our collective efforts.
We urge for protection measures to be strengthened,
especially for women, children, the elderly, people with
disabilities and other vulnerable groups.
The humanitarian crisis in the Sudan continues
to escalate. As much as 42 per cent of the country’s
population is facing acute food insecurity, on top of
increasing food and fuel prices, poor harvests and
climate shocks. We call for safe, rapid and unhindered
humanitarian access in the Sudan. We also support the
World Food Programme’s resumption of operations,
especially the recent cross-border food delivery on
3 August to Darfur, facilitated by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. As we have heard
today from Director Wosornu, more needs to be done in
that regard. Regrettably, at least 18 humanitarian workers
have been killed since the beginning of the conflict,
and over 53 attacks were carried out against healthcare facilities. Such persons must never be a target.
With an estimated 3.5 million people having been
displaced, the conflict in the Sudan risks setting off a
crisis of regional proportions. Those seeking to flee are
being deliberately targeted, and this is unacceptable.
We are also concerned with the situation of internally
displaced women and children, who are at high risk of
sexual and gender-based violence.
Malta welcomes all efforts that seek an end to the
ongoing hostilities and return the Sudan to its political
transition process. Such efforts must be inclusive, with
the full engagement of women, youth and civil society.
At the same time, we reiterate the importance of ensuring
that regional mediation efforts — including by the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, and by neighbouring countries and other
partners — are synchronized and supported by strong
and unified messages from the Council.
To conclude, we remain convinced that it is only
through dialogue and mediation that the conflict can be
resolved. We urge both parties to act on these calls to
ensure a lasting settlement which places the Sudanese
people at the centre.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank Assistant Secretary-General Martha
Pobee and Director Edem Wosornu for their extremely
comprehensive briefings, and I would like to focus on
two points.
23-23563

09/08/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.9394

First, all parties must cease fighting immediately.
Over the past three months, the security situation in
the Sudan has steadily deteriorated. Civilians are the
chief victims, and the continued fighting is making the
prospect of a transition to a civilian Government, which
the Sudanese people want, even more remote. France is
concerned by the recent large-scale attacks on civilians
and civilian infrastructure, particularly health-care
facilities. The increasing communalization of clashes
in Darfur represents a major risk for the populations
concerned, and the opening up of new fronts in
Southern Kordofan is also a cause for concern. More
broadly, the risk of the break-up of the Sudan raises
fears of destabilization throughout the subregion. It is
imperative that hostilities cease and all parties abide by
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
Any outside interference that contributes to prolonging
the conflict will further exacerbate the humanitarian
situation and jeopardize regional stability.

Despite the urgency of the situation, we know that
humanitarian aid cannot reach Khartoum and Darfur
because of the fighting, the lack of security guarantees,
the obstacles imposed by the combatants and the
recurring attacks targeting humanitarian workers.
France calls on all parties to guarantee safe, complete
and unhindered access to all Sudanese territory.
We encourage neighbouring and transit countries to
facilitate the provision of humanitarian aid, uphold
international humanitarian law and facilitate the
reception of refugees. France is supporting those efforts
by providing more than €41 million in emergency aid
to meet the needs of the population. That solidarity
with the Sudanese people is also being extended by the
European Union. It has pledged more than €256 million
in humanitarian and development aid this year, and
it stands ready to consider using all means at its
disposal, including restrictive measures, to help to end
the conflict.

France will continue to work towards the
establishment of a lasting ceasefire and the resumption
of an inclusive political process that involves political
forces and representatives of civil society as soon
as possible. To that end, we will continue to support
the efforts of the United States, Saudi Arabia, the
African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the European Union and countries
neighbouring or in proximity to the Sudan. We also
support the role and missions of the United Nations,
through the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Volker
Perthes, and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Horn of Africa, Ms. Hanna Tetteh. We commend
their vital work, despite very difficult conditions. It is
imperative that the safety of United Nations personnel
be ensured.

Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I thank
the Assistant Secretary-General for Africa, Ms. Martha
Pobee, and the Director of Operations of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Edem
Wosornu, for their moving briefings. I also welcome the
presence of the Permanent Representative of the Sudan.

The international community must mobilize to
respond to the humanitarian crisis under way in the
Sudan. As the speakers reminded us, the needs of the
civilian population have continued to grow increasingly
rapidly. The fighting has displaced millions of people.
More than 20 million people could be severely foodinsecure in the Sudan by September, and several hundred
thousand people have taken refuge in neighbouring
countries. In that regard, France hails the efforts of the
States of the region that are welcoming those refugees.
It welcomes the support provided by the United Nations
and international humanitarian organizations.

At the outset, I would like to convey my gratitude
to all United Nations staff for their tireless efforts
and reaffirm Switzerland’s full support for the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the
Sudan and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Volker Perthes.
The last time we met in this Chamber to discuss the
situation in the Sudan (see S/PV.9375), we expressed
our shared concern that the continued fighting could
plunge the Sudan into a humanitarian catastrophe.
Since then, the situation has deteriorated considerably,
and we are witnessing a new escalation of violence,
together with serious violations of international law. In
that context, I would like to highlight three points.
First, it is unacceptable that the conflict is being
waged with no regard for the price being paid by the
population. We condemn in the strongest possible terms
the continuing violence and attacks against civilians.
We are receiving alarming allegations from Darfur
of ethnic killings, summary executions and sexual
and gender-based violence, committed primarily by
the Rapid Support Forces and allied militias. Serious
violations of children’s rights are being committed on a

23-2356311/19

S/PV.9394

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

daily basis. We call on all parties to respect international
humanitarian law and human rights. It is essential that
those responsible are held accountable for their actions
to bring justice to the victims and to prevent future
violations. We are grateful to those who risk their
lives to document the facts on the ground. Switzerland
joins the calls for thorough, impartial, independent and
timely investigations into all allegations of human rights
violations and abuses and violations of international
humanitarian law. In addition, the resurgence of
violence in North and South Kordofan and in Blue Nile
only further worsens the conflict.
Secondly, we reiterate our call on the Sudanese
Armed Forces and the Rapid Support Forces to facilitate
safe, rapid and unhindered humanitarian access to
civilians in need and to protect medical personnel
and infrastructure, in accordance with international
humanitarian law and the Jeddah declaration. Nearly
4 million people, half of them children, have fled the
conflict in search of protection and essential goods,
and the figures keep rising. Millions of people are on
the brink of starvation as a result of the conflict, as
we pointed out in our intervention in the open debate
last Thursday (see S/PV.9392). We are pleased that the
countries in the region have welcomed people fleeing
the conflict, and we echo the call made in recent
months for borders to remain open. Switzerland will
continue to support humanitarian efforts in the Sudan
and the region.
Thirdly, we call on the parties to resume
negotiations with a view to achieving a lasting ceasefire
and to engage in good faith. In that respect, Switzerland
welcomes the diplomatic efforts currently under way.
Close coordination and the complementarity of those
initiatives are essential to achieve lasting results and
halt the spiral of violence and destruction. With a view
to a possible return to a political process, the inclusive
participation of civilian actors in the search for any
solution is essential.
The suffering of the Sudanese people will end only
when the fighting stops. All of us Council members must
redouble our efforts to bring an end to this devastating
conflict. The Council must be united on this issue in
order to fully support the mediation efforts under way.
Switzerland will continue to support the Sudanese
people in realizing their aspirations for peace, justice
and democratic governance.
12/19

09/08/2023

Ms. Dautllari (Albania): Let me start by thanking
the United Kingdom for requesting this meeting and
its continued dedication as the penholder on the Sudan
file. Our appreciation also goes to the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan,
Special Representative Perthes and his staff, as well
as to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, for work they do on the ground. We thank
Assistant Secretary-General Pobee and Director
Wosornu for their updates.
As highlighted by the briefers, the Sudan’s dire
humanitarian crisis demands immediate attention
and coordinated efforts, considering that civilians,
including women, children and refugees, bear the
brunt of the conflict’s devastating toll, leaving them in
extreme danger and suffering.
Also, we remain deeply concerned about the continued
fighting. We urge both conflicting parties to immediately
stop the fighting and call on all armed groups in the Sudan
to abstain from further participating in the hostilities.
We are alarmed by figures indicating that more
than 20 million Sudanese will experience acute food
insecurity through September owing to this conflict
and already dire macroeconomic conditions.
The continuation of violence could have irreparable
consequences for the Sudan and the entire region. In that
vein, we urgently call for an unimpeded and unhindered
humanitarian response in the Sudan and the region,
and we urge the Government of the Sudan to facilitate
administrative procedures to enable humanitarian aid.
Albania remains deeply concerned about credible
reports from the Sudan, and particularly from Darfur,
revealing instances of sexual and physical assaults
on women, along with indiscriminate shooting of
women and children. More troubling reports highlight
ethnically targeted violence in Darfur, including
ethnically motivated killings and sexual violence.
The suffering of civilians cannot be ignored. The
Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid Support Forces
have violated human rights and international humanitarian
law and committed atrocities, including sexual violence,
and they must be held accountable. We welcome the
notification by the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court of the start of investigations in that regard. Also, we
urge all parties to uphold international humanitarian law
and prioritize the protection of civilians, especially women
and children, across the nation, including in Darfur.
23-23563

09/08/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The international community must remain united
in pressuring conflicting parties to commit to a national
ceasefire. We welcome the efforts of the United States
and Saudi Arabia in that regard. In that vein, we fully
support and commend all diplomatic and mediation
efforts led by the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the League of Arab States,
the United Nations and other regional stakeholders and
call for close coordination on those efforts. Maximum
pressure must be applied to force the conflicting parties
to reduce violence, allow the delivery of humanitarian
aid and medical supplies, ensure unhindered access to
impacted areas and protect humanitarian workers, who
should never be under attack.
In conclusion, it is important that the Security
Council and the international community are united in
helping the Sudan to bring an end to this conflict.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Pobee and Director
Wosornu for their briefings and welcome the Permanent
Representative of the Sudan to today’s meeting.
The armed conflict in the Sudan has been going
on for nearly four months, with increasing civilian
casualties and a worsening humanitarian situation.
As a good friend and partner of the Sudan, China
deeply deplores those developments. At the same time,
diplomatic efforts to reach a political solution to the
conflict in the Sudan have continued. China hopes that
the parties concerned will, in the interest of the country
and its people, establish a ceasefire and put an end to
the fighting as soon as possible, promote de-escalation
and resolve their disputes through dialogue, so as to
create the conditions for peace and reconciliation.
China welcomes the considerable efforts by the
African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), the League of Arab States
and the countries of the region to resolve the issue of
the Sudan.
Last month, Egypt hosted a summit of the
neighbouring States of the Sudan, and Chad just held a
follow-up ministerial meeting this week. China expects
regional countries and organizations to strengthen their
coordination with the parties in the Sudan and to play
a key role in facilitating peace talks. The international
community and partners outside the region should
provide the necessary support and cooperation.

S/PV.9394

The Sudan is currently facing enormous humanitarian
needs, with spillover effects on neighbouring countries.
China appreciates the efforts of the United Nations and
international humanitarian organizations in delivering
many batches of humanitarian supplies to Darfur and
other regions, despite the difficult circumstances.
China calls on the international community to help
the Sudan and neighbouring countries to improve their
humanitarian response capacity, expand the scale of
relief and support regional humanitarian initiatives.
At the same time, humanitarian support to the Sudan
should respect the sovereignty and ownership of the
Sudan and follow the United Nations guiding principles
of humanitarian emergency assistance. The Sudanese
parties should also comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law and facilitate the
provision of humanitarian relief.
The situation in Darfur has been seriously affected
by the conflict in the Sudan. The international
community should provide constructive support to ease
the situation and avoid aggravating conflicts.
The Sudan is an important country in the Horn of
Africa. An early ceasefire and a return to normalcy
and order is in the fundamental interests of the Sudan
and the countries in the region. Recently, the need to
safeguard the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of the Sudan and oppose external interference
in its internal affairs it has been repeatedly stressed in
the African Union and IGAD and at the summit of the
neighbouring States of the Sudan. The international
community should heed the calls of the countries of the
region, support the good offices of regional countries
and organizations, and avoid externally imposed
programmes, sanctions and pressure. The Council
should encourage the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan to play an
active role in the issue of the Sudan. China believes
that the Sudanese people have the ability and wisdom to
overcome their current difficulties and challenges and
end the fighting as soon as possible. China stands ready
to work with the international community to support
the efforts of the Sudanese people.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Ms. Martha Pobee, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Africa, and Ms. Edem Wosornu, of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
for their briefings.

23-2356313/19

S/PV.9394

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Ecuador condemns the armed violence of the past
116 days and the adverse effects it has had for the
civilian population. We cannot remain silent in the
face of the violations of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law committed
against the Sudanese people, who among other
things have endured crimes of conflict-related sexual
violence, indiscriminate attacks on civilians, forced
disappearances, extrajudicial executions, terror
campaigns, attacks on schools and hospitals, attacks
on camps for internally displaced persons, ethnically
motivated killings, the intentional burning of villages,
a lack of basic services and arms trafficking. The
increase in cases of sexual violence is particularly
worrying. Mechanisms must be set up without delay
to stop such heinous offences, and the perpetrators of
such acts, including crimes against humanity, must be
investigated and brought to justice. The only way to
ensure that such atrocities are not repeated is to ensure
that there is no impunity.
We are concerned about the humanitarian situation
in the country, with more than 3 million people
internally displaced, more than 800,000 Sudanese
refugees and a lack of access to services, all of which
paints a bleak picture of the deepening conflict. It is
therefore imperative that the international community
continue contributing to the humanitarian assistance,
which can go some way to alleviating the suffering
of millions of Sudanese. In that regard, we call on
all the parties to ensure rapid, safe and unimpeded
humanitarian access throughout the Sudan, and we
condemn the killing of humanitarian personnel and
volunteers. We hope for the continued support of the
countries in the region that have kept their borders
open despite the difficult situation that they are
dealing with. We also acknowledge the international,
regional and multilateral initiatives to seek a peaceful
solution to the conflict. It is time to join our efforts in
a single, inclusive and consolidated peace process that
will enable a respite from a conflict that has claimed
so many lives and continues to worsen the country’s
already deteriorating humanitarian, economic and
social situation. We call for providing the Panel of
Experts on the Sudan established under resolution 1591
(2005) with the means and access they need to fulfil
their mandate. It is time for the Sudanese Armed Forces
and the Rapid Support Forces to immediately cease
their hostilities and acts of violence and comply with
their obligations under international law.
14/19

09/08/2023

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
I would like to thank Ms. Wosornu for her
leadership and Assistant Secretary-General Pobee for
her sobering briefing. And while we were grateful for
the Assistant Secretary-General’s participation, we
had expected Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Perthes to brief the Security Council. We now
understand that the Sudanese Government warned
that it would close the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan if the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General participated
in this briefing, and that is unacceptable. I welcome
the participation of the Permanent Representative of
the Sudan, and I look forward to hearing his statement
on the situation in the country and particularly on the
efforts to end the senseless war. I also want to thank
the United Kingdom for requesting this important
meeting. Ms. Wosornu noted in her statement the lack
of international coverage of the situation in the Sudan,
which highlights the importance of having an open
briefing such as this one.
It has been more than 100 days since fighting broke
out between the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid
Support Forces. In that time, senseless violence has
wrought unthinkable suffering. In the words of a doctor
from Khartoum, the situation has become a living hell.
Millions of people have been displaced. We heard the
numbers today. Civilians have been shot dead in the
street. Children have often been forcibly recruited and
subjected to violence. Women have been brutally raped.
The fighting has blocked humanitarian assistance, food,
water, medicine and other essentials from reaching
people in dire need. There are credible reports that the
Rapid Support Forces and allied militias have carried
out continued atrocities and other abuses in West
Darfur. There have been killings based on ethnicity,
widespread sexual violence and the burning and looting
of homes and villages, and tens of thousands of people
have been forced to flee to neighbouring Chad and
other countries. History is repeating itself in the most
tragic way possible.
The United States condemns in the strongest terms
the reported atrocities, which are an ominous reminder
of the horrific events in 2004 that led us to determine
that genocide had been committed in Darfur. And we
are gravely concerned about the risk of further conflict
in North and Central Darfur, specifically through the
reported build-up of the Rapid Support Forces and
23-23563

09/08/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.9394

affiliated forces near El Fasher, which poses a threat
to non-Arab populations in the area. We are deeply
concerned about unconfirmed reports of armed actors
in the Sudan preventing people from leaving the area of
Darfur in search of safety, including across the border
into Chad.

As the situation in the Sudan has spiralled,
neighbouring countries have stepped up to welcome
refugees. We are deeply grateful for those acts of
humanity. We must encourage those countries to
ensure that refugees and asylum-seekers have access to
needed protections.

As we approach the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, we
have a responsibility to live up to the promise of that
foundational document — not just to extol human rights
but to defend them. We must all therefore demand that
the parties comply with their obligations under the
international humanitarian law on the protection of
civilians. Of course, the best way to do that would be for
the parties to end the brutal conflict once and for all. The
United States and regional and international partners
are united in calling on the parties to immediately put
down their weapons, and we echo the calls of countries
in the region, including the 10 July communiqué of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
for preventing any external interference or military
support. That would only intensify and prolong the
conflict at the expense of the people of the Sudan.
We also support coordinated international diplomatic
efforts by the African Union, IGAD, the League of
Arab States, the United Nations and other parties from
the Horn of Africa and the Middle East.

We must work towards a future in which the
Sudan is back on the path of democracy. The Sudan’s
political future belongs to the Sudanese people. We
support members of civil society, professional and
labour unions, resistance committees, women and
youth organizations, as they heroically work to meet
emergency needs, push for peace and resume the stalled
democratic transition so that freedom, peace and justice
in the Sudan can be realized.

But until the guns are silenced, and as long as
the humanitarian crisis continues, we must support
the people of the Sudan, who have endured so much
needless suffering. The United States remains the
largest single donor of humanitarian assistance to the
people of the Sudan. We are working to support the
millions of internally displaced people and the nearly
1 million people who have crossed into neighbouring
countries to seek refuge. We must also work together to
ensure that humanitarian assistance can reach people in
dire need, including those who cannot leave their homes
because of fighting, fuel shortages or simply fear.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.

Bureaucratic hurdles and other barriers have
hindered relief efforts. That, too, is unacceptable.
Humanitarian workers must be free to do what they do
best. They save lives. They need to be able to do that
without roadblocks or delays. We call on the Sudanese
authorities to expedite visa approvals for humanitarian
workers, enable the movement of humanitarian goods
and personnel throughout the Sudan and facilitate the
importation of humanitarian goods and equipment.

At this perilous moment, this body must speak out
unequivocally with one voice in the name of peace.
We should never give in to forces that want to stop the
Council from addressing matters of international peace
and security. In the words of the late Elie Wiesel, a
Holocaust survivor and human rights activist, “silence
encourages the tormentor, never the tormented”. We
must all urge the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid
Support Forces to end the bloodshed and the suffering
of the Sudanese people. There is no acceptable
military solution to the conflict, and peace cannot wait
another day.

I now give the floor to the representative of
the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on your country’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
August. I would also like to thank Ms. Martha Pobee
and Ms. Edem Wosornu for their informative briefings.
I thank the delegations that showed sympathy
and support to the people of the Sudan, given their
suffering and the current situation. In that regard, the
Government of the Sudan has spared no effort to put
an end to a war imposed on it. I would like to recall
that depicting the war as a war between two parties will
lead nowhere. It is not a strategic and realistic reading
of the current events in the Sudan.
There is a regional Power that supported the
aggression and wanted the Sudan to become terra
nullius, according to the definition under international

23-2356315/19

S/PV.9394

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

law. Some delegations noted voluntary self-defence by
the citizens under international law as well as under
national criminal law, which supports self-defence. The
Sudanese Armed Forces welcomed the Jeddah process
supported by the United States of America and the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. They are not fighting for
power but to defend the territories and people of the
Sudan against the indiscriminate ethnic war confirmed
by human rights organizations and condemned by
several countries, including the troika — Norway,
the United Kingdom and the United States — and
other organizations such as Human Rights Watch and
Amnesty International.
I would also like to note that we have an amicable
relationship and mutual respect with Mrs. Linda
Thomas-Greenfield, Permanent Representative of
the United States. I learn from her diplomatic skills.
However, the Permanent Mission of the Sudan sent
no official correspondence to the President of the
Security Council threatening to boycott the meeting if
attended by certain individuals. The Mission also did
not communicate with the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs to that end. However, after we
requested that our name be added to the list of speakers,
we received a letter that was unclear. We were informed
that, in accordance with rule 37, our country is not
allowed to speak without the approval of the Security
Council. That is why I wrote a letter to Mrs. ThomasGreenfield about that. She assured me that I have the
right to participate.
In that context, we sent complete information to
all delegations and to the presidency of the Security
Council on the sexual and gender-based violence that
was mentioned by several delegations. We also sent
them a report by the independent unit to combat violence
against women and children, in which it condemns the
perpetrators, just as they were condemned by most of
the international community. The Sudanese Armed
Forces are not involved in any sexual or gender-based
violence, and the party involved in that atrocity is very
well known. Many delegations identified the party
without naming it.
Current indiscriminate shelling is not perpetrated
by the Sudanese Armed Forces. In fact, the Armed
Forces defend citizens who are forcibly displaced with a
view to changing the current demography and replacing
them with foreign people who carry fake identities.
Accordingly, the Armed Forces need to address that
situation — if such a situation occurred in any of the
16/19

09/08/2023

countries represented on the Council, what would the
reaction be? Would they stand helplessly by, watching
members of aggressive militia forces enter people’s
homes, destroy their property and rape their women, or
would they order armed and security forces to defend
those people?
Regarding the humanitarian aspect, the Sudan
stresses that it is fully committed to cooperating with
the United Nations, in particular the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), to
facilitate delivery of humanitarian aid to those in need
and affected by war. The Government of the Sudan
is keen to address the humanitarian situation that
was triggered by the war and the resultant security
challenges with responsibility, flexibility and realism.
The Government is keen to realistically address the
situation through the following mechanisms.
A supreme committee for crisis management was
established to address the humanitarian situation and is
chaired by the Minister of Social Welfare. Its members
include the High Commissioner for Humanitarian
Assistance, who is participating in the Jeddah
consultations, as well as a number of ambassadors
and diplomats dispatched by the Ministry for Foreign
Affairs to join the Committee’s work in Port Sudan.
Here in New York, the Permanent Mission of the
Sudan deems the mechanism of regular coordination
and consultation with OCHA to be effective. That
continuous cooperation has contributed to visa approvals
in record time for several officials of the United Nations
and OCHA for visits to the Sudan despite the current
situation in the country. The Mission has also expedited
the delivery of humanitarian aid through Port Sudan, in
collaboration with the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
officials in Port Sudan.
The Government of the Sudan has also provided
cross-border aid through Chad despite security concerns.
The first shipment of food aid arrived through the
World Food Programme in West Darfur state last week.
Authorities in Port Sudan have completed all measures
necessary for more than 580 United Nations trucks to
deliver thousands of metric tons of humanitarian aid,
and we can provide the Council with proof of that.
The United Nations, represented by OCHA, should
address the humanitarian situation by cooperating and
coordinating with the countries affected according
to the countries’ own assessments of their priorities
and needs, and should include every issue related
23-23563

09/08/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to the assessment of those priorities, including the
geographical scope of aid distribution and protection,
as provided for in General Assembly resolution 46/182.
Cooperation is an ongoing process that should be
subject to improvement and mutual understanding.
It is not just about meeting short-term requests. We
should therefore consider the whole picture and stress
the importance of cooperation between the Sudan and
the United Nations, something that we have made clear
to the Secretary-General. In that context, we feel it is
important to clarify some issues. Any delayed visas or
measures undertaken by the Government to ensure the
safety and security of humanitarian workers or aid in the
midst of a war should not be considered as bureaucratic
impediments to access. Other issues have contributed to
a slowdown in the provision of services and humanitarian
aid, including diminishing funding and a financial gap
of more than 70 per cent in the $1.5 billion total of
pledges made in Geneva. In our view, the fulfilment of
those pledges has been delayed due to the complexity of
response operations and to other complications hindering
the timely delivery of humanitarian aid.
In order to improve performance in the delivery
of humanitarian aid, the Government of the Sudan
and the United Nations must take into consideration
flexibility, realism and their ongoing partnership in
their cooperative efforts. The Government is in a better
position to assess needs, set priorities and oversee
the distribution of aid to its people. And flexibility is
required where some other issues are concerned because
they concern the Government, in such areas as escorting
and securing humanitarian convoys and ensuring the
safety of humanitarian and medical personnel against
attacks, considering that 18 humanitarian workers have
now been killed during the hostilities. The Government
therefore insists on escorting humanitarian convoys
until they reach their intended destinations and the
people in need. That does not infringe on the work of
voluntary humanitarian organizations. The Government
provides all humanitarian and medical teams, and that
takes time and should not be a controversial issue. In
addition, it is the Government and local authorities that
define priorities and the geographical distribution of aid
in considering the host communities in Gezira, White
Nile, Northern, River Nile and Blue Nile states, without
politicizing humanitarian action.
As for our position on the political track and the
relevant initiatives, the Sudan welcomed the African
Union’s initiative, which resulted in a road map whose

S/PV.9394

elements include the coordination of efforts among
all regional and international partners through an
expanded mechanism, an immediate and permanent
cessation of hostilities, the delivery of humanitarian
aid, respect for international humanitarian law and a
resumption of an inclusive peace process leading to a
democratic Government.
The multiple and broad initiatives that are in play
are causing confusion, while an expanded mechanism
is not necessarily more successful or better than an
initiative that enjoys the consent of the Sudanese
Government. The meeting held by the African Union
Peace and Security Council in Addis Ababa in May had
a positive outcome, resulting in a number of short-term
truces. Moreover, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) reaffirmed its commitment to
promoting peace in the Sudan and welcomed the Jeddah
talks as facilitating talks between the two parties to the
conflict seeking a unified and comprehensive peace
process under the auspices of the African Union, IGAD,
the League of Arab States and the United Nations. The
path forward will be chosen by the people of the Sudan
following a cessation of hostilities and a ceasefire,
which we hope will materialize soon.
It is well known that the Jeddah talks are limited
to addressing the humanitarian situation, managing
the provision of relief and putting an end to military
operations. They are not aimed at holding political
discussions. The current war has changed the Sudan’s
political dynamics and future prospects. That said, the
most viable option is the emergence of new national
civilian leaders to form an independent technocratic
Government that can oversee the holding of general
elections without any delay, leading to the completion
of the political transition. The Sudan welcomes the
support and supervision of the United Nations for the
elections. The return of the army to its barracks must
be ensured so that it plays its normal and constitutional
role in defending the unity and territorial integrity of
its homeland, supporting the new national Government
through a new national coalition that has never called for
war, supported the general aggression and demographic
change of the Sudanese people by force, stolen their
money or assaulted their women.
We need the launch of a new, inclusive national
political dialogue, unlike its byzantine predecessors,
in order to define a democratic pathway forward and
an agenda for peace, reconstruction and development.
The Sudan’s current crisis cannot be resolved by

23-2356317/19

S/PV.9394

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

expanded mechanisms that cause confusion at various
regional and international levels. Like the Titanic, they
are doomed to sink. All of us who want to contribute
to finding a solution to the Sudanese crisis must ensure
the Sudan’s sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence. The Sudan is its own master in peace and
war, and is once again seeking the help of its African and
Arab brothers who are most familiar with its traditions,
customs, ideals and values. If the neighbouring countries
want to make progress in finding a solution to the
Sudanese crisis, they must listen to the voice of the Sudan
as it fights its fiercest battle for survival in its history. As
the Sudan rejected all foreign interference in its internal
affairs in April, it has the necessary flexibility to achieve
peace via a resumption of the political track in line with
a new vision and a broad national alliance, with the
participation of civilians, including women and young
people, in a national Government after the war. In that
context, the Sudan is committed to working for peace,
adhering to the Jeddah Declaration, signed on 11 May,
and facilitating the safe passage of humanitarian aid
throughout the country while upholding its sovereignty
and respecting the country’s laws. The indirect
negotiations with rebel forces via the Jeddah platform
under the auspices of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and
the United States of America have stalled due to the
rebel militias’ intransigence. They refuse to comply
with the decisions that have been agreed to, including
sparing civilian homes and health, education and sports
centres in various areas. The Sudanese Armed Forces
will abide by the agreements reached within the Jeddah
process as soon as the rebel forces commit to leaving
those facilities.

09/08/2023

been condemned by States. The Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) has promised to
investigate those actions, which are tantamount to war
crimes and crimes against humanity. The Government of
the Sudan is therefore currently discussing cooperation
with the ICC Prosecutor in their investigation, since
it is the uncontrolled militia’s refusal to commit to a
ceasefire that constitutes the main impediment to ending
the war. Instead, the militia is increasing its recruitment
across the border and adopting a mobile war approach. A
committee has also been established to address the war
crimes and violations committed by the rebel militia.
Members may not be aware that one country in the
region has sent 6,000 combatants to fight the Sudanese
Armed Forces and to support the uncontrolled militia.
In a previous Council meeting, I told Council members
that one day they would be privy to all of the information
available. The Sudanese Government reiterates its
readiness to accept any serious initiative put forward
and continues its cooperation with the United Nations,
regional Powers and organizations and neighbouring
countries with the aim of stopping the war, especially
since the majority of the people of the Sudan call for
and support an end to the rebellion, after suffering
tremendously from hostilities in which 20,000 prisoners
collaborated with drug dealers and uncontrolled militia
to eliminate their well-being and alienate them from their
homeland. The horrific events that took place — with
the help of foreign mercenaries — in West Darfur state,
the city of El Geneina, East and Central Darfur regions,
Sirba and Zalingei are good proof of the objectives of
those rogue groups.

While many Sudanese have been dispersed and
displaced to neighbouring countries, most have stayed in
the country, destitute and suffering under attacks from
the rebel militias. The people should be sovereign. The
Government of the Sudan has been responding to the
indiscriminate shelling by the uncontrolled militias in
Omdurman and other cities and areas in the Sudan, who
are trying to evict citizens from their homes through
criminal settlement schemes involving identity theft,
forgery and looting and plundering banks, including by
stealing gold and deposits, which are causing problems
far beyond the Sudan, in the Nile Valley, the Red Sea, the
Horn of Africa and parts of East Africa and the Sahel.

We affirm that the United Nations and bilateral
humanitarian operations are flowing smoothly — we
have evidence of that — and reaching the needy in all
regions of the Sudan. In that regard, the Sudan refuses
and rejects any encroachment on its sovereignty for any
motives whatsoever — especially through unilateral
positions calling for measures that the Sudan has not
agreed to. I want to recall that in the mid-1980s, the
Sudan was a partner in Operation Lifeline Sudan, one
of the largest United Nations operations, and therefore
does not need lessons on how to deal with regional
and international entities. We condemn those positions
because they do not help to make peace or stop the war
imposed on the Sudan.

The rebel Rapid Support Forces have been dealt
with in accordance with the laws of the Sudanese
Armed Forces. Their continued violations, as recorded
by human rights and civil-society organizations, have

The Sudan commends the League of Arab States
and the sisterly country of Egypt for their efforts to
discuss effective ways to stop the war and preserve the
capabilities and territorial integrity of the Sudanese

18/19

23-23563

09/08/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

people. We call on the international community,
the United Nations and major Powers to support the
Sudanese State in facing this externally backed invasion,
to demonstrate full solidarity with the Sudanese people
in their ordeal and to support the Jeddah process in
reaching an immediate and permanent ceasefire, to
support the choice of the Sudanese people regarding
the new political process and to support the national
Government’s efforts, which will eventually culminate
in achieving a national consensus, addressing the
economic situation, achieving political reforms and
realizing democracy through fair elections while
supporting the efforts to ensure food security in the Sudan.
The Government of the Sudan welcomed the
Sudan’s neighbouring States summit, held in Cairo on
13 July, and its balanced communiqué. We will deal with
the ministerial mechanism that was created thereby, in
line with the Jeddah process. The first meeting of that
mechanism was held in N’Djamena and produced a final
statement with the participation of the foreign ministers.
In that regard, the Sudan will work with all the parties
that seek to end the war, restore security and the rule
of law. The Sudanese Armed Forces stand ready to hold
their defensive military operations as soon as the rebel
militias stop attacking homes, neighbourhoods, civilian
objects and government facilities, blocking roads and
looting — all of which has been documented.
The Rapid Support Forces and their allied militias
have launched a campaign of violence to control some
of the major cities and cut off the trade roads in Darfur,
using heavy artillery indiscriminately in urban areas and
coordinating their ground attacks with allied militias.
They have been forcibly displacing the rural population
and burning people’s homes as part of a strategy to
expand their acquisition of land and have blocked some
of the main roads between Darfur, Chad and the Central
African Republic, as well as into many major cities such

S/PV.9394

as Zalingei and El Fasher. Those forces, supported by
their allied militias, have also carried out coordinated
attacks using heavy artillery, mainly targeting civilians
in Masalit neighbourhoods, including through mass
killings, sexual violence and the systematic targeting
of places hosting internally displaced persons, which
has led to more forced displacement.
After the stalling of the indirect negotiations due
to the intransigence of the Rapid Support Forces,
who insisted on staying in health facilities, military
confrontations have continued in the capital, Khartoum,
and some areas in Western Sudan state. However, the
Sudanese Government is in control of the military
and security initiatives while communicating with all
national and international parties with a view to putting
an end to the war and the suffering of the people. We
stand ready to accept any initiative that leads to ending
the rebellion and stopping the war. We reiterate our
support for all the Sudanese communities, who reject
the continuation of the old political partnership in any
political or security equation.
While the Sudanese Armed Forces control all
military areas in the states, there are still some
skirmishes by the rebel militias in some cities such
as El Fasher, El Obeid and El Geneina. The People’s
Movement, led by Abdelaziz al-Hilu, initiated an attack
in South Darfur state and other areas in White Nile
state, but the Sudanese Armed Forces were able to repel
the attacks.
I thank the Council for its cooperation. The Sudan
is ready to talk to any of the delegations here with regard
to any plans they have for putting an end to the war
in the Sudan. We assure the Council that the Sudanese
Armed Forces will respond to any positive initiative
that includes what I have mentioned to members.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

23-2356319/19
