S/PV.7980

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7980th meeting

Wednesday, 21 June 2017, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Guegen
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Bitimov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skau
Mr. Herasymenko
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Sison
Mrs. Carrión

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2017/508)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-17785 (E)
*1717785*

S/PV.7980

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2017/508)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Australia, Belgium, Canada, Germany, India, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, the Netherlands, Pakistan,
Spain and Turkey to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, to participate in this meeting
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Her Excellency
Ms. Joanne Adamson, Deputy Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/508, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
I now give the floor to Mr. Yamamoto.
Mr. Yamamoto: The months since my most
recent briefing (see S/PV.7896) have been unusually
tense in Afghanistan. The deteriorating security
situation has brought to the surface underlying
political tensions. At the same time, the willingness
of the Government to take steps towards peace was
demonstrated by its successful holding in Kabul of
a meeting on regional peace and security earlier this
month, as well as the continuous implementation of the
political agreement with the former insurgent group
Hizb-i Islami (Gulbuddin). But without enhanced
efforts by the National Unity Government to increase
political inclusiveness, strengthen accountability and
improve the Government’s credibility, particularly in
2/34

21/06/2017

the security sector, we are likely to face more crises
in an increasingly fragile environment. The events of
the early morning of 20 June, when the Government’s
attempt to remove the final protesters resulted in
violence, is a reminder of the need for caution, calm
and unity.
The most recent security and political crisis was
sparked by a terrorist bombing in Kabul’s centre on
31 May. That was followed by large street demonstrations
protesting growing insecurity that turned violent,
followed by a suicide attack at the funeral of one of
those killed in the demonstrations. Chief Executive
Abdullah, Foreign Minister Rabbani and other senior
political officials were near the blasts at the funeral
but were thankfully unhurt. The political fault lines
that emerged are increasingly ethnic-based, which is
particularly worrying at a time when the Islamic State
is attempting to provoke sectarian strife in the country
through attacks against Shia Muslims.
During the anti-Government demonstrations on
2 June, we at the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) conducted extensive
outreach to leaders on all sides, particularly leaders of
political movements who were considering joining the
protests. We urged for restraint, warned of the negative
consequences that the loss of control would entail for
everyone and requested them to give time to allow their
grievances to be addressed without violence. Coupled
with the intensive efforts by the Government and
members of the diplomatic community, the immediate
risk of escalation was defused. We are grateful for the
subsequent acknowledgement from the Government
and political leaders outside the Government that
UNAMA’s efforts contributed to calming the situation.
I remain concerned, however, that, without changes in
governance practices, we are likely to face future crises
that might be more difficult to contain.
What is the root of the problem? There have been
indications, since last summer, that Afghanistan’s
broad political consensus is fraying. In recent months,
a growing number of political factions, some of whom
were formerly part of the National Unity Government
as well as a younger generation of political forces, has
begun to criticize and demand reforms be made to
the Government. They argue that it is not sufficiently
consultative or inclusive. The Government, on the
other hand, claims that opposition groups block
important reforms and stoke tensions by calling for
the Government to be replaced. Each side accuses
17-17785

21/06/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.7980

the other of acting against the national interests. It
appears to me undeniable that those perceptions have
contributed to the tensions that characterize today’s
political environment. The existence of opposition
is natural in any political scene, but the amount of
mistrust is growing, while some increasingly resort
to uncompromising slogans and statements capable of
fuelling further violent protests. Efforts at inclusiveness
and building consensus for political stability are critical.

which is why States must unite to combat it. The proof
of our commitment will be a stable Afghanistan.

The suicide bomb of 31 May exploded just outside
the restricted diplomatic enclave in the middle of Kabul.
It took more than 90 lives and injured approximately
500 people — all of whom were Afghans. While there
were no serious international casualties, a number of
diplomatic facilities, including several United Nations
buildings, were badly damaged. Some Embassies have
had to evacuate staff while their facilities are repaired.
Despite those realities, it is imperative that the attack
not be allowed to undermine international support for
Afghanistan, including development and economic
assistance. The international community must not be
intimidated nor succumb to the terrorists.

Afghanistan faces numerous internal challenges
in addition to fighting an insurgency that seems to be
gaining ground. They include deep-rooted political
tension, the difficulty of socially and economically
reintegrating the thousands of Afghan refugees who
return each day, an economy that is only very slowly
recovering after the international drawdown in 2014,
and pervasive corruption. The economy remains heavily
dependent on development assistance. The private
sector, as the biggest potential provider of employment,
suffers from a lack of investor confidence and
pervasive corruption. As a result, economic growth can
neither match population growth nor generate enough
employment for the many young Afghans entering the
labour market every year. Corruption undermines the
legitimacy of the State. It prevents a real economy from
emerging. It contributes to insecurity. Corruption is
at the heart of the problem of impunity, which itself
is at the heart of the ongoing human rights challenges.
Afghans alone are not to blame, but the consequences
of corruption disproportionately affect Afghanistan.

The Government’s ability to hold a high-level
meeting of the Kabul process on regional peace and
security in Kabul on 6 June, with the participation of
24 States and organizations, demonstrated its resilience
and the determination of the international community
to maintain its support for Afghanistan and the National
Unity Government. In his opening speech President
Ghani Ahmadzai stated,
“We are gathered in this conference because the
world community signed a promise that terrorism
would not be tolerated, and today we are demanding
that the world make good on this promise.”
In that regard, I welcome the General Assembly’s
endorsement of the Secretary-General’s proposal to
create a new office on counter-terrorism headed by an
Under-Secretary-General.
The Afghan vision for peace is premised on the fact
that a stable Afghanistan would lead to a stable and more
prosperous region. Achieving that vision will require
the strong determination of all the States concerned,
particularly of the region and the neighbourhood. The
Afghan Government requested at the Kabul conference
that the international community address this issue in all
its facets. The nexus of crime, corruption and terrorism
eventually undermines all States and the State system,

On the Afghan side, the recent series of security
incidents has demonstrated the urgent need for reforms
in the security sector. I welcome the Government’s
commitment to transparent, merit-based appointments
and credible investigations into the events of 31 May,
2 and 3 June and 20 June, and other reforms in the
Ministry of the Interior and the Ministry of Defence.

In April, UNAMA issued its first comprehensive
report on corruption in Afghanistan. I was gratified
by the intensity of the public’s response to the report.
Afghans understand the effects of corruption and
impunity because they face them every day. The
National Unity Government has taken positive steps
to tackle this problem by. Reforms that have begun to
work in the Ministry of Defence are now being applied
to the Ministry of Interior. The Anti-Corruption Justice
Centre is proving to be an effective instrument.
With regard to human rights, UNAMA remains
committed to provide credible data of the impact of the
conflict of civilians, especially women and children.
It continues to engage with all the main parties to
the conflict to support them in taking measures to
limit harm against civilians. UNAMA’s report on the
treatment of conflict detainees for the period 2015 and
2016 was published in April to coincide with the second

17-177853/34

S/PV.7980

The situation in Afghanistan

periodic review of Afghanistan by the United Nations
Committee against Torture. UNAMA welcomes the
Government’s renewed commitment to ratify the
Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture
and to take further steps to eliminate the torture
and ill-treatment of detainees. Those efforts must be
accelerated to increase accountability and public trust
in the Government.
The attack of 31 May and the events that followed
should serve as a clarifying moment. We are at a point
where we need to take conscious decisions to reverse
negative trends and seek stability, or face far worse.
The recent crisis has illustrated the dangers of pushing
narrow interests, be they domestic or international, in
Afghanistan’s fragile context. There are two specific
issues in particular that we must focus on.
First, in the domestic sphere, preparations must
be accelerated for the next round of elections, both
parliamentary and presidential. Decisions must be
made regarding the use of technology and the role
and modalities of international electoral assistance.
Work must start on voter registration. The electoral
calendar must be made clear. From my discussions with
Afghan political actors, especially outside of Kabul,
it is clear that the lack of clarity on those issues is a
major component of the growing political mistrust. We
understand that the Independent Election Commission
will make an announcement as early as tomorrow
regarding the date for parliamentary elections. I believe
that announcement will contribute to allaying the
political tensions I have referred to in this briefing.
Secondly, as I have repeatedly stated in this forum
and elsewhere, a genuine peace process with the Taliban
is essential and urgent. In the 6 June Kabul meeting, the
need for a modus vivendi between Afghanistan and its
neighbours was stressed. At the same time, I encourage
the people of Afghanistan to begin an internal dialogue
on the meaning of peace and reconciliation. The
Government and the Taliban need to engage directly
with each other to define a political solution. In that
regard, the appointment of the new Chair of the High
Peace Council is a welcome development, but it is only
a first step towards the Council’s revitalization and its
new role in driving the peace process.
UNAMA is doing all it can to help contain political
tensions, using its long-standing relationships and
experience. I have been tremendously proud of the
entire Mission and country team for those efforts.
4/34

21/06/2017

I was honoured to welcome the Secretary-General
to Afghanistan last week, where his visit clearly
demonstrated his and the Organization’s commitment
to Afghanistan, solidarity with its people and
perseverance in the pursuit of peace.
We also look forward to the results of the strategic
review that the Council has requested. We are hopeful
and confident that it will ensure that we have the tools
to continue to work for peace in Afghanistan. On the
eve of the important Muslim holiday of Eid, I wish to
reiterate my call for unity and to urge restraint, so that
families and communities can enjoy a peaceful end
of Ramadan.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Yamamoto for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Afghanistan.
Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President on Bolivia’s
assumption of the Security Council’s presidency in
June. We thank you for convening today’s open debate
on the situation in Afghanistan to take stock of the
overall situation in our country. I am pleased by the
presence of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ambassador Yamamoto. We thank him for the
comprehensive briefing.
We meet at a time when Afghanistan is undergoing
another phase in its test to overcome adversity. Much
has happened since the Council’s deliberations on
Afghanistan in March (see S/PV.7896). I will focus
my remarks on some of the most pressing issues of my
country’s security and stability, as well as regional and
international cooperation.
After almost four decades of imposed conflict,
with hundreds of thousands of casualties and
millions of displaced people — I emphasize millions
of displaced people — our country remains under
almost constant attack. Earlier this year, thanks to the
effective measures taken by our security forces and
their pre-emptive strikes, the so-called Taliban spring
offensive came later than expected and was dealt
heavy blows in different parts of the country. Unable
to confront our forces directly, the orchestrators of our
insecurity resorted to desperate urban terrorist attacks
on soft targets and attempts to sow discord among
our people.
17-17785

21/06/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

In recent months, we have seen attacks of an
unprecedented nature across Afghanistan — on the
streets, in hospitals, cemeteries, mosques, diplomatic
missions and political institutions. Since the start of
2017, major terrorist attacks in urban centres have
caused significant losses of lives and property — more
than 500 killed and more than 1,100 wounded in Kabul,
Mazar-e Sharif, Kandahar, Lashkar Gah, Khost and
Herat. The most recent barbarous attack took place last
week when worshippers were offering evening prayers
in a Kabul mosque.
While all attacks are equally condemnable, the sheer
carnage of the 31 May attack was unprecedented in its
kind in the history of Afghanistan. The truck-bombing
in the heart of Kabul was by all accounts a crime against
humanity and Islamic values, spreading horror instead
of peace and piety during the holy month of Ramadan.
More than 150 innocent souls were lost, including
women, children and some of our young journalists.
Several disappeared, without a trace, from the impact
of the explosion. In fact, this morning, I was watching a
television programme showing a young mother and her
children walking around town on the streets of Kabul
looking for her husband and their father — not knowing
what happened him. The nation was plunged into deep
mourning. The attack reaffirmed the obvious — that the
enemies of Afghanistan know no limit in their brutality
to break our pride and prevent peace and stability from
taking root in our society. Beyond the human tragedy,
the local economy lost millions of dollars and several
diplomatic missions suffered damages.
The attack triggered the culmination of social
frustration and a wave of angry protests seeking
security reform, which unfortunately has been leaving
more death and injury in its wake, including a triple
terrorist attack at one of the slain protester’s funeral.
We firmly believe in the constitutional right of our
people to protest and know that, if the door of dialogue
is shut down between the Government and protestors,
violence will increase. No element of the Afghan
security forces, supported by national and international
taxpayers, should ever inflict unnecessary harm
upon civilians. Given recent events, the commander
of the Kabul garrison and the police chief have been
suspended and the incidents are being investigated. We
remain committed to reassuring our people that our
security forces are there to protect all Afghans and are
at their disposal and service. In short, what transpired
on that dreadful Wednesday morning was an attack

S/PV.7980

on our people, our democracy, our economy and our
partnership with the international community.
While Afghanistan continues to bleed, we have
witnessed increased terrorist attacks in the United
Kingdom, France, Turkey, Iraq, Syria, Mali, Russia,
Sweden and Egypt — proving that terrorism has
no boundaries and continues to threaten people
everywhere. It is important that the civilized world,
in its modern meaning, stand united in defiance of
terror and secure peace and prosperity for current and
future generations. We Afghans will do so in a spirit
of national and global unity, which has enabled us to
overcome difficult moments in our nation’s life.
Reversing the tide against terror is contingent upon
eliminating support centres beyond our frontiers that
produce, nurture and empower terrorists operating
in Afghanistan. The recently released outcome of a
joint investigation by Afghanistan, the United Arab
Emirates and the United States clearly establishes that
the 10 January Kandahar attack was planned in Quetta,
Pakistan. Similarly, early investigations verified the
link between the Kabul truck bombing of 31 May
and the Haqqani Network, based in Pakistan. A joint
Afghan-German comprehensive investigation on the
attack is currently under way. We shall release the
outcome in due course.
The other external threat to Afghan sovereignty
is the number of cross-frontier violations, which have
increased dramatically — almost four-fold — since my
presentation to the Council in March. Those violations,
ranging from the firing of artillery shells, airspace
violations and the construction of military posts and
barriers to the digging of deep ditches — all of which
exacerbate the current situation — if left unaddressed,
will undoubtedly continue to undermine peace and
security in our region.
In the Council, we have heard from a known
neighbouring State that our Government “should not
externalize its internal problems and blame others for its
own failures.” It is the same State that has been highly
determined to do all it can to weaken and destabilize our
country while accusing us of weakness. Let me remind
everyone that those who would attribute Afghanistan’s
security and other challenges solely to internal issues
are doing so to detract focus and attention from their
long-standing policy of propagating violence and
disorder in our country.

17-177855/34

S/PV.7980

The situation in Afghanistan

In dealing with the situation, we have been pursuing
a three-pronged strategy: first, strengthening global
counter-terrorism consensus with a focus on engaging
Pakistan in genuine cooperation, ending cross-frontier
violations and facilitating the peace process; secondly,
strengthening our security and defensive capabilities;
and, thirdly, improving national unity, governance and
service-delivery to our people. Given the nature of
the conflict, the success of our strategy depends upon
collaborative and sustained work at national, regional
and global levels.
Despite the enormous violence imposed on us over
nearly four decades, especially this year, we remain
firmly committed to the goal of sustaining peace. In
that light, the 6 June Kabul process conference marked
the resumption of an important initiative for stability in
Afghanistan. The conference brought together regional
countries, key international partners and relevant
international institutions to focus on two imperatives:
first, garnering a new level of commitment in support of
our peace agenda and, secondly, identifying a common
approach to end the cycle of terror and violence in
the country.
We are pleased with the outcome of that conference,
which reinstated cooperation mechanisms to promote
peace and security. Naturally, Pakistan has an
important role to play in ending violent extremism and
promoting peace. We hope it will seize the opportunity
for the benefit of its own citizens and stability in the
region. Meeting on the margins of the recent Shanghai
Cooperation Organization Summit in Astana, President
Ghani Ahmadzai and Prime Minister Sharif agreed to
hold a bilateral working group meeting in Kabul in the
near future on confronting terrorism. Moreover, we
also look forward to additional discussion within the
framework of the Quadrilateral Coordination Group,
with the participation of China and the United States.
Despite the difficult situation in the country, our
security forces stand vigilant, protecting our people and
infrastructure and preventing terrorists from capturing
and establishing a presence in different provinces.
They have responded robustly despite various logistical
constraints in terms of resources, heavy weaponry and
air capability. Let me pay tribute to the commitment and
professionalism of those police officers who sacrificed
their lives to prevent both the truck bomber of 31 May and
last week’s Kabul mosque attackers from reaching their
intended targets and causing maximum casualties. The
enemy is doing its best to stage so-called green-on-blue
6/34

21/06/2017

attacks in order to undermine international training
programmes and support of our security forces. In
addition, through selective targeting and the careful
allocation of responsibility claims for terrorist attacks,
the handlers of terrorism in the neighbourhood seek
to create discord and distrust between our people and
security forces. We will leave no room for any possible
enemy infiltrators in our security forces.
The Government of National Unity is currently
in the process of a national dialogue to strengthen
consensus on relevant issues and address political
grievances. We believe good governance can flourish
only in an environment free of any particular ethnic
or linguistic considerations. We will continue to
focus on the greater task at hand — working towards
economic self-sufficiency, tackling corruption and
providing humanitarian relief for our people. Increasing
economic development opportunities, with a focus
on alleviating poverty and creating jobs, remains our
key priority. Recent projects such as the AfghanistanIndia air cargo corridor, the inauguration of public
transport infrastructure in Kabul and the World Bank’s
$500 million financing for various development sector
investments are few examples.
Today, the world faces an enemy united in its sole
desire to bring death and destruction, dismantle State
institutions and create chaos. Hence, it is imperative
that the United Nations act decisively on its mandate,
which is to maintain international peace and security.
Last week, Secretary-General Guterres paid a visit to
Kabul to express his solidarity with, and support for,
the people and the Government of Afghanistan. That
was a strong sign of his personal commitment to peace
and security in our country, for which we are deeply
grateful. In the broader context, his visit reaffirmed
that the United Nations would remain beside us over
the coming years as we continue our journey towards
prosperity. We welcome the establishment of the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and hope that its
activities and mandate will help bring real and tangible
change to counter-terrorism efforts in Afghanistan
and elsewhere.
In the past two years, we have reiterated time and
again two key concerns for Afghanistan: first, concrete
action against regional safe havens and logistical
support to terrorists and ,secondly, cross-frontier
violations, which I referred to before. On both issues,
we have provided full briefings to the SecretaryGeneral and the Security Council. The Council is yet
17-17785

21/06/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

to take the necessary and appropriate action to address
those two issues of concern. In our view, had it done
so in the past, the situation would be different today.
Another outstanding issue for the Council to act upon
is the strict enforcement and strengthening of the
sanctions regimes. Furthermore, the irreconcilable
Taliban should be recognized as a terrorist group after
its failure to engage meaningfully in the peace talks.
The United Nations must also specify concrete criteria
to clearly define State sponsorship of terrorism.
I take this opportunity to thank the Security Council
for initiating a review of the structure, resources and
activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan. We consider it a necessary initiative for
ensuring a more efficient and effective United Nations
support role in the country. During the review process,
we highlighted the imperative of the One United
Nations initiative and an adjusted assistance role that
would be in conformity with the principles of Afghan
ownership and leadership, as well as the priority needs
of Afghanistan. We wholeheartedly thank UnderSecretary-General Ján Kubiš for leading the review
process in the most able manner, and the United
Nations team on the ground for their contributions to
the process.
In conclusion, despite all the challenges, our people
are looking to the future with confidence. They have
made enormous sacrifices thus far. As such, failure is
not an option. That said, the support of the international
community, including the Council, will be critically
important for our success.
I would like to reiterate our gratitude for the
Council’s expression of firm support for the stability
and prosperity of Afghanistan. Today, as we stand at
a crossroads in our stabilization efforts, we look to
the Security Council to help us overcome our security
challenges by confronting the source of the ongoing
conflict, and not by dealing with the consequences. In
that connection, the need for an appropriate response
by the Council to the task at hand cannot be overstated.
We hope that that is realized so that our people are able
to meet their basic aspirations of living in peace and
security — free of terror, violence and destruction.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
give the floor to those Council members who wish to
make statements.

S/PV.7980

Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank Special Representative
Tadamichi Yamamoto for his informative and
clear briefing.
I listened very carefully to our colleague
Ambassador Mahmoud Saikal as he explained his
views on the situation in his country.
I would like to begin by expressing Japan’s deep
condolences to the families of the victims of the
terrorist attack that occurred on 31 May in Kabul, and
deep regret for all acts of violence committed in the
country since our last debate in March (see S/PV.7896).
Such brutal attacks have deprived countless Afghans of
their futures. They also crystallize our concerns about
the deteriorating security situation noted in the latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/508). We are
alarmed by the fact that it was not possible to prevent
these appalling crimes from being conducted in the
heart of the capital city.
In order to improve the security situation, the
international community has continued to provide
political support to the Government of Afghanistan, and
financial support and training to the Afghan security
sector. Unfortunately, we see little fundamental change
in the security situation in Afghanistan.
More fundamentally, the seeming erosion of
unity in the National Unity Government is profoundly
concerning. The flare-up of political and ethnic tensions
within the Government must be absolutely avoided
given the enormity of the challenges Afghanistan faces.
There need to be more effective measures for engaging
with ethnic communities, which are underrepresented
in the Government. The Government must return to its
2014 commitments, which underscored the necessity of
equitable representation, with attention to inclusiveness
and the unique political and societal composition
of Afghanistan.
Also among the unmet commitments are the longoverdue parliamentary elections, which should have
been held in 2015. We are aware that elections have
the potential to worsen existing tensions and create
new ones, leading to further fragmentation, as noted
in the Secretary-General’s report. However, continued
delays are also problematic, and we urge the Afghan
Government to demonstrate its commitment by
announcing the timeline for parliamentary and district
council elections. I was pleased to hear today from
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in this Chamber that there may be an announcement

17-177857/34

S/PV.7980

The situation in Afghanistan

soon from the Afghan Government. The Government
can make good use of the extensive United Nations
experience in electoral support to ensure that the voices
of Afghan voters are heard through the parliamentary
and district council elections, as well as the 2019
presidential election.
The devastating terrorist attack on 31 May was a
tragic wake-up call for Afghanistan and the international
community to recognize the urgency of revitalizing the
peace process. The Kabul process meeting on 6 June
was a good opportunity for Afghanistan to show its
strong commitment to making progress in the peace
process with the support of international and regional
partners. Japan emphasizes that the Government must
not only express willingness, it must also deliver
concrete results to the Afghan people. Support from
regional and international stakeholders is also crucial.
We therefore welcome the 10 June talks in Astana
between Afghanistan and Pakistan, where they agreed
to reinvigorate the Quadrilateral Coordination Group.
Japan is pleased to note positive efforts in the area
of displacement. We have seen improved protection of
civilians as well as coordination among Afghanistan,
Pakistan, Iran and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees. In a recent informal
meeting with Council members, the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees noted improved
Afghan Government efforts to absorb and integrate
the dramatically increased number of returning
refugees from neighbouring countries. We welcome
the Secretary-General’s visit to the internally displaced
persons camp in Kabul on 14 June, which sent a very
encouraging signal to some of the country’s most
desperate people. This visit underlines the necessity
of international and United Nations support for the
Afghan people’s aspirations for peace and stability.
In
these
challenging
circumstances,
the
implementation of resolution 2344 (2017), which
mandated the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) to support the people and
the Government of Afghanistan in achieving peace
and stability, is essential. We also await the results
next month of the strategic review authorized by the
resolution. We look forward to the Secretary-General’s
fresh inputs into the review following his visit to Kabul.
Japan believes that the review must be an objective and
impartial guideline for Council members in considering
next steps. Once we have received the review, Japan,
as the lead country on this file, will work with other
8/34

21/06/2017

Council members and stakeholders participating
in today’s debate to determine UNAMA’s role in
overcoming the difficult realities we currently face.
Mr. Bitimov (Kazakhstan) (spoke in Russian):
We are grateful to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamato, for his
substantive briefing and for his commitment to the
personnel of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), which seeks to restore
peace and security in Afghanistan, and for UNAMA’s
contribution to achieving that goal. We are also grateful
to the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan for
his statement. I know Mr. Saikal very well: he is an
excellent political statesman in Kabul.
My delegation would like to share the following
substantive considerations on the issue of the agenda
before us. Since the previous report (S/2017/189),
a number of major changes have taken place in the
country at the political level. Kazakhstan welcomes
intensification in the reporting period of the efforts
of the Afghanistan Government to settle the internal
political crisis and establish peace in the country. Proof
of this, inter alia, is the return to Kabul of Gulbuddin
Hekmatyar, the release of detainees of the Hizb-i
Islami party, the holding, in complex conditions, of
the international conference of the Kabul process on
peace and security cooperation, on 6 June, and the
recent meeting between Afghan President Ghani
Ahmadzai and Pakistani Prime Minister Sharif in
Astana as part of the Summit meeting of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO), which gives hope for
improved bilateral relations and new joint measures to
combat terrorism.
We believe that the consultations on Afghanistan
in various formats are important and necessary if the
political differences are to be overcome and if joint
efforts are to be made to facilitate the peace talks.
Despite the open refusal of the Taliban to sit at the
negotiating table with the Afghan Government, we need
to continue to make efforts to find a peaceful solution,
as no other alternative exists.
The situation in Afghanistan was the focus of the
historic Shanghai Cooperation Organization Summit
in Astana on 8 and 9 June, where India and Pakistan
became full-fledged members. We believe that, thanks
to the accession of these two States to the SCO, the issue
of tackling regional problems, including with regard to
Afghanistan, will take place more dynamically. At the
17-17785

21/06/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

same time, we note the deteriorating security situation
in Afghanistan. The latest series of major terrorist
acts in the country means that whole international
community must take more decisive steps to eradicate
this scourge.
At the counter-terrorist level, Kazakhstan is
troubled by the appearance of certain radical terror
groups in the north of Afghanistan and notes, in that
respect, the growing threat to the security of the
Central Asian States. The situation of Afghanistan
plays a special role in providing long-term stability and
security for the whole region. In that regard, Kazakhstan
comprehensively shares and supports the vision of
Secretary General Guterres on bolstering preventive
diplomacy. Just a few days ago, on 13 June, this issue
was raised at the ministerial conference in Ashgabat. It
was also raised during the Secretary-General’s visit to
Kabul on 15 June.
On the anti-narcotics front, we are concerned about
the spread of opium poppy cultivation and the increase
in drug production in Afghanistan. By some estimates,
in 2016 drug dealers’ total income in Afghanistan
amounted to approximately $400 million. In our view,
only joint efforts at the international and regional levels
can achieve positive results in the fight against drug
trafficking, which is a source of financing for terrorism.
One of the legacies of the ongoing armed conflict
in Afghanistan is the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation, in which the civilian population, especially
its more vulnerable sectors, such as women, children
and the elderly, is suffering and dying, while their
homes and agricultural infrastructure are being ruined.
We call for comprehensive steps to be taken to assist
Afghanistan on the humanitarian front.
On the economic front, the continued critical
condition of Afghanistan’s socioeconomic sector is
very worrying. Unfortunately, the measures that have
been taken by the Government of Afghanistan and the
international community are not enough. According to
the experts, the main reason for the economic recession
is the continuing lack of security, which is closely tied
to development issues. In that regard, Kazakhstan has
always believed that security and development are
intertwined and should be promoted in parallel. With
that in mind, we will continue to assist Afghanistan
with development. Since 2008, Kazakhstan has donated
approximately $100 million worth of aid, including free
education for 1,000 Afghan students. At the Kazakhstan

S/PV.7980

Government’s expense, the road between Kunduz and
Takhar has been repaved and a school in Dara Suf, in
Samangan province, built, and a hospital in the Waras
district of Bamyan province is being completed. In
Samangan province, a number of bridges are being built
over the Aybak River and its banks are being fortified.
In the light of all the issues I have mentioned, we
would like to make the following recommendations.
On the political front, the current international
approaches to Afghanistan, including the position
of the Security Council, should be reviewed with
the aim of strengthening regional relationships with
Afghanistan’s neighbours, particularly in Central
Asia. We should define a limited number of vital,
high-priority tasks and put all the focus on solving
them, without wasting energy and resources on lowerpriority issues. As the principal United Nations body
responsible for international peace and security, the
Council should take regional interests into account
while developing and adopting a clear, step-by-step
plan for stabilizing Afghanistan, with the participation
of the National Unity Government, that will outline the
highest-priority tasks and the sequence and timing for
dealing with them. Without this, and with a focus only
on peacekeeping rhetoric, humanitarian assistance and
donor infusions for the conflict-resolution process, it
will be exceedingly difficult to achieve the goals of
peace and stability for Afghanistan.
As a body specifically empowered by the Security
Council and as an unbiased player, UNAMA’s role in
the intra-Afghan political settlement process should
be enhanced. It should collaborate more actively with
the National Unity Government in the interests of the
Afghan people and all members of civil society working
to help Afghanistan achieve national reconciliation and
advance the peace process.
On the economic front, we must change perceptions
of Afghanistan so that it is seen not as a threat, but
as an important partner. In that regard, it is essential
to help the Afghan economy integrate with those
of the countries of Central Asia by implementing
infrastructure, trade, investment and transittransportation projects. In Almaty, which already hosts
18 regional and subregional United Nations offices, we
should establish a regional centre for coordinating and
directing the implementation of all activity aimed at
promoting sustainable development, building economic
capacity for countering terrorism and channelling cost-

17-177859/34

S/PV.7980

The situation in Afghanistan

effective humanitarian assistance from the Organization
to Afghanistan.
On the anti-drug front, we should support the
coordinated measures that are being undertaken by the
Government of Afghanistan, the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), INTERPOL and the
Central Asian Regional Information and Coordination
Centre for Combating the Illicit Trafficking of Narcotic
Drugs, Psychotropic Substances and Their Precursors,
as recommended at the sixth Steering Committee
Meeting of the UNODC Regional Programme for
Afghanistan and Neighbouring Countries, organized in
Astana in April by the Government of Kazakhstan.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would
like to thank Special Representative Yamamoto for his
briefing and the courageous dedication of the entire
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) team to supporting governance, development
and reconciliation in Afghanistan.
I would like to begin by offering our deepest
condolences to the victims of the recent violence in
Kabul and their families. Such events are a sad reminder
of the unacceptable toll that the conflict in Afghanistan
continues to take on its people. The 31 May bombing
sought to divide the Afghan Government and people, as
well as Afghanistan’s international partners. As armed
groups inflict suffering on innocent civilians, our
resolve to stand with the people and the Government
of Afghanistan in pursuing a peaceful resolution of the
conflict and stability in the country will not waver.
The United States is reviewing its engagement and
security posture in Afghanistan. It is appropriate to take
the time to make sure that we are carrying forward our
commitment to Afghanistan in the most effective way
possible. While the review continues, there can be no
question that the United States remains wholly engaged
in supporting the Afghan Government, diplomatically
and militarily; supporting the development of the
Afghan security forces, including through the
NATO-led Resolute Support Mission; continuing its
generous provision of civilian assistance; doing its
part diplomatically to strengthen the international and
regional consensus; and working to advance an Afghan
peace process.
That leads me to a point I want to make about
the political process in Afghanistan. The first
meeting of the Kabul process for peace and security
cooperation, convened by the Afghan Government on
10/34

21/06/2017

6 June, reaffirmed the commitment of Afghanistan,
its neighbours in the region and the international
community to supporting an Afghan-led and -owned
political process for achieving peace in Afghanistan.
The United States joined the 27 countries and
organizations represented at the meeting to call on
armed and extremist groups to announce an immediate
end to their attacks and their entry into peace talks with
the Afghan Government. In that context, we commend
the Government for its continued commitment to
an inclusive, Afghan-led peace process, despite the
ongoing attacks.
Progress in implementing the peace agreement with
Hizb-i Islami gives us hope for similar progress towards
a peaceful resolution of the conflict with the Taliban.
Such talks are essential. There is no military solution
that will bring a durable peace. The path to a negotiated
settlement is available, and the Taliban must choose to
take it. In fact, a durable peace and genuine stability
in Afghanistan can come only with the commitment of
Afghanistan’s neighbours and near-neighbours to those
goals. We welcome the commitments made during
the Kabul process meetings and call on Afghanistan’s
neighbours to unconditionally cease their support
for armed and violent-extremist groups. Those
commitments are important right now. The Taliban,
along with the Haqqani Network and affiliates of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham and other armed
groups, is increasing its attacks, killing and injuring
thousands of Afghans and delaying the progress
that Afghanistan so desperately needs. And while
development assistance remains robust, a precipitous
drop in domestic and foreign direct investment has
stalled the private-sector-led growth that Afghanistan
needs in order to employ its youth, reduce poverty and
give communities hope.
In the context of those and other challenges
Afghanistan continues to face, we strongly support
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
as an essential partner of Afghanistan and the
international community. UNAMA plays a critical role
in supporting peace and reconciliation, empowering
women, defending the human rights of all Afghans
and coordinating humanitarian assistance. We look
forward to the completion next month of the SecretaryGeneral’s strategic review and to discussing ways to
strengthen the Mission’s efficiency, cost-effectiveness
and core competencies.
17-17785

21/06/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

Mr. Skau (Sweden): I thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Yamamoto,
for his candid briefing, and we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s
comprehensive
report
(S/2017/508).
We also welcome the Secretary-General’s visit to
Afghanistan, which demonstrated his solidarity with
the Afghan people.
Despite decades of effort by national and
international actors to stabilize the security situation
in Afghanistan, the situation today remains volatile
and has deteriorated further since we last met (see
S/PV.7896). The ongoing violence takes a heavy toll on
the civilian population. Each attack on a mosque, each
bazaar, home, hospital or school targeted, each life lost,
undermines the ability of the Afghan people to plan
their lives and futures with hope or certainty.
Let me reiterate Sweden’s condemnation of the
recent terrorist attacks in Kabul and extend our
heartfelt condolences to the families of those affected.
We call for an end to this senseless violence and for
those responsible to be held to account.
We encourage the Afghan Government to take
the necessary steps to defuse the tensions following
the attacks. As we heard today from the Special
Representative, unity is of the utmost importance if the
people of Afghanistan are to tackle the many challenges
ahead. Internal differences must be put aside in order to
make progress with the reform agenda and to bring an
end to the conflict.
As the Secretary-General says in his report,
“[p]eace must be attained through negotiations and not
on the battlefield” (S/2017/508, para. 58). With that in
mind, we commend the Afghan Government on the first
meeting of the Kabul process for peace and security
cooperation. We look forward to the next meeting
under the process and to cooperating closely with the
Afghan authorities to ensure women’s participation. A
peace process without women is not a peace process.
Sweden remains fully committed to supporting an
Afghan-owned and Afghan-led peace process. We
also echo the calls of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on the need to restart the dialogue
with the Taliban towards a lasting political settlement.
All of us, but particularly the countries of the region,
have an interest in a peaceful and stable Afghanistan.
In turn, sustained and constructive engagement by the
region will be essential to make that a reality. Regional
tensions continue to undermine Afghanistan’s long-

S/PV.7980

term stability and economic growth. We call on all
parties to act constructively and responsibly and work
together towards sustainable peace. Enhanced dialogue
between Afghanistan and Pakistan is an important part
of this complex puzzle.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) continues to play a critical role in supporting
the Government and the people of Afghanistan as they
work towards building a democratic, prosperous and
peaceful society. However, significant challenges to
that goal remain. Against that background, an efficient,
effective and appropriately configured United Nations
presence in Afghanistan — in Kabul, as well as in the
provinces — continues to be vital to support efforts
to achieve lasting peace. We welcome the ongoing
strategic review and await the final report. Looking
forward, Sweden sees the following priorities for
United Nations support to Afghanistan.
First, there is a need for a comprehensive approach
that includes development, human rights, the rule of
law and humanitarian assistance. Providing appropriate
support will require a coherent and well-coordinated
United Nations.
Secondly, it is important to continue UNAMA’s
field presence at current levels, so as to safeguard
crucial contacts between international and local
actors, build local capacities, as well as facilitate
humanitarian access.
Thirdly, there is a need for a stronger political
mandate for the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, including on regional issues related to peace
efforts, and with sufficient resources to implement this
political mandate.
Fourthly, we see the need for improved donor
coordination, with a continued sharp focus on
development, humanitarian and human rights issues.
Fifthly, women’s participation and integration into
the political, economic and social life of Afghanistan
must be at the core of UNAMA’s activities.
Finally, children continue to suffer disproportionately
from the violence in Afghanistan. We welcome an
enhanced focus on children and armed conflict. Words
must now be translated into action with respect to this
agenda. In addition, ensuring respect for humanitarian
principles, human rights and international humanitarian
law should always be an integral part of United
Nations missions.

17-1778511/34

S/PV.7980

The situation in Afghanistan

Building peaceful and inclusive societies is not
easy. It takes patience, courage and determination from
all the parties involved. We must now ensure that the
gains made in Afghanistan are not lost. Renewed efforts
from Afghan leaders and the international community
are needed to move the country down the path to peace.
Sweden has provided assistance to Afghanistan for
more than three decades, and we are committed to
stand with the Afghans for the long term.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
also like to thank Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan
and the Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan to the United Nations,
Mr. Mahmoud Saikal, for their important briefings.
Unfortunately, during the first half of 2017, the
security situation in Afghanistan deteriorated, with
an increase in deadly terrorist attacks. The attacks,
including the 31 May suicide bombing in Kabul, which
caused at least 90 dead and more than 500 wounded
have once again covered Afghanistan with blood. My
delegation reiterates its firm condemnation of those
attacks, which have once again cost the lives of hundreds
of innocent people. My delegation also wish to express
its condolences to the victims and to their families.
The demonstrations that took place in the wake
of those attacks, far from calming the political
situation, have only served to exacerbate both political
and ethnic tensions. Nevertheless, we are pleased
that the two highest authorities of the country, the
President, Mr. Ashraf Ghani, and the Chief Executive,
Mr. Abdullah Abdullah, undertook a constructive
dialogue aimed at improving their relations.
Another positive event that my delegation wishes to
welcome is the continued implementation of the peace
agreement between the Government and the Hizb-i
Islami organization of Mr. Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, as
attested to by the return to Kabul of Mr. Hekmatyar
on 4 May. However, we regret the lack of meaningful
progress in the peace talks between the Government
and the Taliban, a situation that contributes to the
high level of violence, which we deplore, throughout
the country.
Nevertheless, despite this environment, we are
pleased to note that the Afghan Government, as well
as its partners, remain determined to make efforts for
peace and stability to return to Afghanistan. As such,
12/34

21/06/2017

we believe that the vision for peace expressed by the
Afghan Government in a document that stresses the
need for an inclusive peace process to put an end to the
conflict, as well as the appointment of the Chair of the
High Peace Council, are steps in the right direction.
The efforts of international forces to support their
Afghan counterparts has continued to be a determining
factor in combating terrorist groups, in particular the
Taliban and Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. With
regard to regional cooperation, besides the efforts of
the Afghan and Pakistan Governments to improve
relations, we can also highlight the fact that the
countries of the region have spared no effort to restore
peace in Afghanistan. Accordingly, the situation in
that country fortunately remained the primary focus of
concern during substantive meetings held in Astana, as
well as during the recent Kabul process for peace and
security cooperation conference on 6 June.
For its part, UNAMA, whose outstanding work I
would like to take the opportunity to commend, has
continued to actively support local peace initiatives
in a number of provinces and, moreover, worked in
multiple ways to support the Government and the
people of Afghanistan.
I am pleased to note that, on 6 June, UNAMA
supported a conference on women’s role in the peace
process — something that we deem to be important — in
Herat province at which participants vigorously called
for concrete action to implement Afghanistan’s national
action plan on resolution 1325 (2000).
The human rights and humanitarian situation
remains concerning because of persistent insecurity,
which, as we know, has entailed an increase in the
number of civilian casualties, including, unfortunately,
many women and children.
My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to commend the commitment of not only the relevant
United Nations agencies but also that of the relevant
non-governmental organizations as well as their crucial
contribution to meeting the needs of the population — a
push spurred by solidarity that Afghanistan still urgently
requires in a difficult economic situation characterized
by weak growth and a regrettable level of productivity.
On behalf of the Senegalese delegation, I would
like to conclude by reiterating its encouragement to the
Afghan Government as well as its full support for the
Special Representative and the UNAMA team.
17-17785

21/06/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, for his comprehensive
analysis of the situation in Afghanistan. We listened
with interest to the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Mr. Mahmoud Saikal.
We agree with the assessments made in the report
(S/2017/508) of the Secretary-General on the situation
in Afghanistan. We support the personal efforts of
Secretary-General Guterres with regard to ensuring
a sustainable Afghan settlement. In that regard, we
echo the profound and far-reaching statement by the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Afghanistan needs to become an active participant
in future regional and integrational processes.
Afghanistan has always been and will remain a friend
of Russia. In that regard, the recent series of terrorist
attacks that recently swept the country have weighed
heavily on us. We extend our sincere condolences to
the Government and the people of Afghanistan for
the victims of those appalling crimes. We express our
solidarity with those from the diplomatic corps who
suffered from those attacks. We are seriously concerned
about the growing internal political and military
tension within the country. Afghanistan is seemingly
unable to break the vicious cycle of violence, and the
situation continues to grow worse, with low levels of
economic growth and the increasing terrorist threat.
This string of problems is a major burden for the people
of Afghanistan, including its selfless armed forces.
In that vein, what is increasingly important with
regard to stabilizing the situation in Afghanistan is the
task of achieving national reconciliation. We support
the corresponding efforts undertaken by Kabul in that
respect. We proceed from the premise that the process
must be guided and implemented by the Afghans
themselves. We are ready to provide assistance in
promoting that, including through flexibly approaching
issues that concern potentially loosening the sanctions
regime of the relevant Security Council committees. At
the same time, we note the decreasing effectiveness of
many of the international mechanisms for supporting
national reconciliation in Afghanistan, which seem to
involve too many actors. On the other hand, narrow
formats clearly do not take into account the interests
of many of the countries of the region, which also
negatively affects the results of their work.

S/PV.7980

In that regard, we are convinced that the launch of
the Moscow talks on Afghanistan at the beginning of
the year is an inclusive and the most promising method
for establishing direct and constructive dialogue
on issues concerning national reconciliation. The
refusal of certain States to participate in those talks
for no specific reason has left us perplexed. Given
that India and Pakistan have become full members
of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and that
Afghanistan and Iran have applied, the prospects for
national reconciliation can only grow.
We must acknowledge that the main tasks facing
the international military presence in the country over
the past 15 years remain unrealized. In many cases, the
situation has actually gotten worse. We are not looking
to accuse anyone, as that is not our political practice.
Let me make it clear to everyone that that is not our
goal. The task of reaching a settlement in Afghanistan
requires a consolidation of international and regional
efforts. Only our collective joint efforts will allow us to
unravel the complex tangle of problems and move the
country towards stable development in an atmosphere
of cooperation and good neighbourliness. That is the
only way in which counter-terrorism efforts will yield
the necessary benefits. In that regard, we support the
arrangements reached between President Ahmadzai of
Afghanistan and Prime Minister Sharif of Pakistan at
the Astana meeting.
However, instead of making progress on a unification
agenda, some of our partners would appear to resort
to baseless allegations and rhetoric, including against
Russia. I would like to point out that many years ago
Russia was one of the first countries to draw the attention
of the international community and the Afghans to
the spike in terror activity in the northern part of the
country. Our country made a significant contribution
to counter-terrorism efforts in Afghanistan, including
in cooperation with the United States and NATO. We
are referring to the transit of military cargo, supplying
helicopters and the training of Afghan troops. We are
very troubled by the intensification of the capabilities
of Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham in Afghanistan.
The ranks of that group are being filled. Its devastating
potential is growing. The problem is dangerous and
must not be ignored or glossed over.
We have received reports of flights of unidentified
aircraft that have been observed providing assistance to
Afghan militants. The scale and scope of those flights
are expanding. They are already reaching the provinces

17-1778513/34

S/PV.7980

The situation in Afghanistan

of Sari Pul, Farah Kandahar, Herat and Nangarhar.
The flights often end as soon as the Afghan authorities
publish the relevant information. We need to keep the
situation under close review and we need to clamp
down on that type of cove activities. We deem the
demand by Afghan members of Parliament to clarify
the situation well grounded, and we expect the United
Nations Mission to provide a comprehensive report on
those events.
Narcotics pose a serious threat to stability in
Afghanistan and its neighbours, and to our friends and
allies in Central Asia. We are troubled by data showing
that drug production and poppy crops are once again
expanding. The rise in income from drug trafficking
is inevitably spurring terrorist activity. In that regard,
we call for international efforts to be stepped up in
combating Afghan drug trafficking. We see good
potential for bolstering counter-narcotics cooperation
between Afghanistan and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization.
Once again we repeat that the complex problems
in Afghanistan can be solved only on the basis of
broad, sincere cooperation at international and regional
levels. The task of harmonizing the approaches of
external players is becoming more urgent. Addressing
that task with a view to achieving sustainable national
reconciliation in Afghanistan is the very purpose of the
Moscow negotiations.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me join others
in welcoming Special Representative Yamamoto back
to the Security Council. At the outset, I would like to
reiterate the full support of the United Kingdom for him
and for the vital work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
Sadly, as he and the Afghan Ambassador have
made clear, these are trying times for Afghanistan. The
horrific truck-bomb three weeks ago in Kabul was a
stark reminder of the threat that ordinary Afghans face
as they go about their daily peaceful lives. It is a threat
that we read about, that we watch on the news or hear
about in the Chamber, and yet the proximity of the attack
to the British Embassy and other diplomatic missions in
Kabul really brought home to us the barbarity of those
who seek to terrorize Afghanistan. Sadly, it was once
again innocent Afghan men, women and children who
bore the terrible toll of that attack.
In response to this horrific tide of violence, the
United Kingdom stands in solidarity with the people,
14/34

21/06/2017

the Government and the armed forces of Afghanistan.
We stand in solidarity, knowing what it means to endure
terror in our streets, knowing what it means to stand up
to those who seek to divide us. Whether in the streets
of Kabul, Manchester or London, our message must be
clear and unwavering: enough is enough.
Those attacks must come to an end. All support to
those who commit such terrible acts must come to an
end. For Afghanistan, that means the region working
together to create the conditions for a more stable future
for Afghanistan. It means continuing to prioritize an
Afghan-led and -owned peace process — one that leads
to a political settlement that ends the violence. It means
acknowledging the successes the Afghan Government
has achieved in such challenging circumstances. It
means Afghans coming together to protect those gains
in the face of such huge challenges.
Afghanistan needs to be united now more than
ever. It needs to be looking to the future in hope,
not in fear. The people of Afghanistan need to feel
that they have a stake in that future. We believe that
holding parliamentary elections based on a credible and
realistic timeline would be an important step towards
creating that stake, towards creating broader political
inclusion. The setting of a date would be good news
and should serve as a catalyst for the necessary reforms
to be undertaken and processes to be put in place
with due speed to ensure that elections are free, fair
and transparent.
We welcome President Ghani’s work to reshape
and re-energize his Government’s efforts in pursuit of
peace. As the tragic events in Kabul remind us, now
is the time for action and for the implementation of
the structures and the processes that will bring about
progress on this daunting but essential issue. Afghans
from across the country, its ethnic groups and its
socioeconomic divides have a stake in this process
and need to be embraced and included in pursuit of a
national consensus on peace. We encourage meaningful
dialogue with all sectors of society, including women
and girls.
In all of this, the United Kingdom believes that the
United Nations has a crucial role to play — whether
by helping to ensure that the rights of Afghan people
are protected and upheld or by supporting the Kabul
process and its vital work, on building a regional
consensus on peace.
17-17785

21/06/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

I want to thank Special Representative Yamamoto
for his role in facilitating the launch of the Kabul process
earlier this month. That was the first step in a long
journey that will need to emphasize both the security
and the political tracks, and which will require energy
and commitment from all of us to sustain, including
from the United Nations. As such, we look forward
to the outcome of the strategic review of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. UNAMA
is at the heart of the international community’s work
on Afghanistan. It is more important now than ever that
the Mission be properly configured and empowered to
deliver the maximum effect on the issues that are so
crucial for Afghanistan’s future — whether it is efforts
to support the Government’s pursuit of peace or its
work to uphold the human rights of the Afghan people.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the convening of this open debate on
Afghanistan. I wish to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Tadamichi Yamamoto for
his briefing.
Peace and stability in Afghanistan has a bearing
on the fundamental interests of the Afghan people,
as well as regional security, stability, development
and prosperity. China commends the efforts of the
Afghan Government in promoting national stability,
reconciliation and economic development, and
appreciates the constructive help of the neighbours of
Afghanistan and the relevant countries in the region.
Afghanistan faces daunting challenges in the
political, economic and security sectors. Recently,
the security situation in Afghanistan has deteriorated,
with frequent armed conflicts and terrorist incidents
leading to massive civilian casualties, which has
captured the attention of all parties. It is imperative
for the international community to step up efforts in
taking comprehensive measures to promote the peace
and reconciliation process in Afghanistan so as to help
the country overcome difficulties and get through this
challenging period.
First of all, priority should be given to the prompt
restoration of security and stability in the country. The
international community should vigorously support
the capacity-building efforts of the Afghan national
security forces to improve its self-defence capabilities
in order to effectively cope with the threats posed by
terrorism, cross-border crime and drug trafficking.
The international community should stick to a unified

S/PV.7980

standard in enhancing coordination and cooperation to
fight against terrorist forces in Afghanistan, cut off the
supply of funds and weapons to terrorist organizations,
prevent the inflow and return of terrorist combatants,
curb the spread of terrorist ideology and eliminate the
root causes of terrorism.
Secondly, promoting the national reconciliation
process is an important foundation for the long-term
peace and stability of the country. Parties in Afghanistan
should bear in mind the future of the country and the
interests of its people by actively participating in
the reconciliation process, resolve differences and
conflicts and restore trust through dialogue with a view
to finding a solution that is acceptable to all.
The peace agreement between the Afghan
Government and the Hezb-i Islami (Gulbuddin)
should be implemented, which will serve as a model
for further promoting national reconcil the country.
The international community should continue its full
support for an inclusive reconciliation process that is
led and owned by the Afghan people and encourage the
parties concerned in Afghanistan to launch peace talks
as soon as possible.
Thirdly, strengthening governance capabilities is an
important guarantee for peace and reconstruction in the
country. Afghan issues should ultimately be managed by
the Afghan people. All political factions in Afghanistan
should strengthen unity, resolve differences through
dialogue and consultations and reach consensus in order
to build strong and effective governance capabilities.
The international community should respect the right
of the Afghan people to independently choose their
political system and path to development. Meanwhile,
in the light of the national development strategy and
Afghanistan’s special needs, targeted assistance should
be provided to help the Afghan Government improve its
governance capabilities.
Fourthly, integration in regional development
is a viable solution for peace and reconstruction in
Afghanistan. The international community should
actively honour its commitments to provide assistance
and support the economic and social development
of the country. Afghanistan enjoys advantages in
resources and geographic location, which brings about
great prospects for regional cooperation. As resolution
2344 (2017) and the relevant General Assembly
resolutions stipulate, parties should be committed
to creating a community with a shared destiny in a

17-1778515/34

S/PV.7980

The situation in Afghanistan

21/06/2017

spirit of cooperation in which everyone wins, and to
promoting the economic and social development of
Afghanistan and regional cooperation through the Belt
and Road Initiative. We hope that parties will actively
encourage the alignment of the Afghanistan national
development strategy with the Belt and Road Initiative,
improve links between Afghanistan and Central Asia
and other neighbouring countries and provide security
guarantees for the implementation of relevant projects
so as to help Afghanistan achieve regional development
and capitalize on shared development opportunities.

in Afghanistan and the activities of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).

China commends the efforts of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and
hopes UNAMA will play an active role in helping
Afghanistan restore stability, advance national
reconciliation, improve its governance capabilities
and promote economic and social development. China
will continue to support UNAMA’s work. China hopes
that the ongoing strategic review will help UNAMA
focus more on peace, reconciliation and development,
strengthen its capabilities in coordinating international
support, further optimize resource allocation, improve
the management process and enhance its ability to cope
with complicated situations.

We also welcome the recent visit by the SecretaryGeneral to the country to express solidarity with the
people and the Government of Afghanistan following
the recent terrorist attacks. We condemn those
senseless attacks in the strongest possible terms and
express our sympathy and solidarity with the people
and the Government of Afghanistan. The threats posed
by terrorist groups of all kinds are indeed a matter of
serious security concern, not only for the country but
also for the wider region. We cannot agree more with the
Secretary-General’s comments in his report in favour of
concerted international efforts in countering terrorism.

China has always been a friendly neighbour to
Afghanistan and respects the country’s sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity. We have been
promoting the peace and reconciliation process in
Afghanistan through the Quadrilateral Coordination
Group ­— made up of Afghanistan, Pakistan, China and
the United States. We support Afghanistan’s efforts to
eliminate the threats of terrorism, extremism and drugrelated crime, in order to achieve peace, stability and
prosperity as soon as possible. China will continue to
support Afghanistan in stepping up capacity-building
in the security sector and we support an active role
by the Shanghai Cooperation Organization in helping
Afghanistan combat terrorism. China supports
Afghanistan’s integration in regional cooperation and
actively promotes the alignment of the Belt and Road
Initiative with the Afghanistan national development
strategy. We stand ready to work with the international
community to make unremitting efforts in promoting
peace, stability and development in Afghanistan as
soon as possible.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We express our appreciation
to Special Representative Mr. Yamamoto for his
comprehensive briefing on the most recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/508) on the overall situation
16/34

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report, which highlights the key political and security
challenges facing Afghanistan. The briefing by Special
Representative Yamamoto was not only comprehensive,
it was also very frank and insightful.
Let me also take this opportunity to thank our
colleague the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan
for his briefing. It was a very useful briefing.

The long-term security and stability of Afghanistan
can be assured only through a comprehensive and
inclusive Afghan-led and owned political process.
In that connection, we note that some progress has
been made. However, we understand that peace talks
between the Government and the Taliban have shown no
progress and the trajectory does not appear promising
on that front. We agree with the Secretary-General
that a regional environment conducive to an Afghanled peace process is indeed essential. It is that context
that we welcome the Afghan Government’s initiative
to convene the Kabul process conference on peace and
security cooperation, which was held this month in spite
of a difficult security situation. The efforts of UNAMA
and the promotion of peace, reconciliation and dialogue
in support for development in Afghanistan, with full
respect for the country’s sovereignty and leadership
and ownership of the Afghan Government, remains
very important. The role of countries of the region is
also very critical in creating the necessary conditions
for the fight against terrorism and the advancement
of peace efforts. In that regard, the recent meeting
between the President of Afghanistan and the Prime
Minister of Pakistan to improve bilateral relations
between their countries is noteworthy but needs to be
pursued with greater vigour, all the more so in the light
17-17785

21/06/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

of the fact that mutual trust is always critical and its
absence detrimental.
We welcome the efforts made by the National Unity
Government in pushing its reform agenda, fighting
corruption and enhancing accountability. We also
understand from the report of the Secretary-General
that progress has been made towards the holding of
credible and transparent elections. We nonetheless
stress how critical it is to ensure that there is some level
of coherence and unity of purpose in the country’s top
leadership — and that is true with any Government.
Afghanistan faces enormous security, social and
economic challenges. Without continued inclusive
economic growth and development, sustained peace
and security cannot be achieved. That is why there is
a need to support the Government’s continued efforts
to detail its development priorities in 10 national
priority programmes for 10 sectors, as envisioned in
the Afghanistan National Peace and Development
Framework. We hope that the commitments made at
the Brussels Conference last October will be honoured.
But, once again, for that all to succeed, peace and
security in the country will need to be secured and
confidence generated.
Let me conclude by expressing support and
solidarity with the Afghan Government in its difficult
task of addressing the country’s multiple challenges
with a view to promoting peace, reconciliation and
development. I also wish to express appreciation to
UNAMA for its continued role in support of those
endeavours and for its efforts in carrying out its
mandate under very difficult circumstances.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Italy aligns itself with
the statement to be made by the observer of the
European Union. I wish to make some remarks in my
national capacity.
At the outset, I would like first of all to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Yamamoto, for his presence here today, for his
briefing and for his commitment to the work.
My country joins other Security Council members
in strongly condemning the recent terrorist attacks
in Kabul and other parts of the country. We extend
our condolences to the victims and their families and
express our full solidarity with the people and the
Government of Afghanistan. Those despicable acts
strengthens our determination to support Afghanistan’s

S/PV.7980

institutions in the fight against terrorism and violent
extremism, which continue to pose a grave threat
to peace and stability. That is why we welcome, like
others, the Secretary-General’s visit to Kabul last
week, as it sent an important signal to the international
community as a whole.
We welcome the successful outcome of the first
meeting of the Kabul process for peace and security
cooperation. By taking this initiative, our Afghan
partners have signalled their willingness to pursue the
peace and reconciliation process with renewed vigour.
We commend the Afghan leadership on these issues,
which further reinforces the principle that the process
should be Afghan-led and Afghan-owned. Through
its participation in the Kabul process, Italy seeks to
express its full support for this initiative. We believe
that it is a starting point, and not an end point, and we
also hope that broad international backing can provide
a solid foundation for positive outcomes in this area.
The Kabul process also confirms the crucial
importance of cooperation among regional stakeholders.
Afghanistan’s terrorist and violent extremist
phenomenon, both in its national dimension and beyond,
cannot be tackled effectively without close cooperation
and unity of purpose among neighbouring countries
of the region. Terrorism and violence extremism are
a concrete threat to those countries’ stability as well.
There is a clear convergence of interests. However,
tangible measures to extend cooperation, especially at
the regional level, must be adopted. Italy supports all
initiatives geared towards that goal.
The need for a credible and broad-based reconciliation
process underscores the fact that peace in Afghanistan
can be achieved only through political means. There
is no military solution to this conflict, as we are all
reminded by the latest report of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) on
the protection of civilians, which demonstrates how
the most vulnerable categories, especially women
and children, are increasingly at risk. The focus on a
broad-based and inclusive consensus as the foundation
for a successful reconciliation process is key, and we
welcome the decision by the Afghan Government to
make it the centrepiece of its strategy.
In that context, it will be essential to ensure women’s
active inclusion and participation, and we renew our
hope that the commitment of the Afghan Government
and the High Peace Council in this area may find

17-1778517/34

S/PV.7980

The situation in Afghanistan

further tangible application, for instance, through the
full implementation of the Afghanistan national action
plan on resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace
and security. That goal is all the more important in the
framework of safeguarding and further building upon
the progress made in women’s rights in Afghanistan
over the course of the past 16 years.
The continued violent acts by hostile insurgent
groups remind us of the fundamental importance of
strengthening Afghanistan’s institutions, specifically
those with the task of ensuring the security and defence
of the country and its people. My country supports
and encourages the Afghan Government to continue
to enhance its efforts to improve the capability of the
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces. To be
successful, those efforts will also require a determined
fight against all forms of corruption, which Italy will
continue to support through its training and advisory
activities in the framework of Operation Resolute
Support, the NATO-led mission.
The challenges Afghanistan is facing continue
to be enormously complex, and one cannot imagine
a successful pact for the future of the country in the
absence of unity and internal cohesion within the
Government and all Afghan institutions, to which we
renew our call for a constructive and inclusive approach
aimed at resolving outstanding disputes, which are not
compatible with the urgent needs of the country. That
is also an essential prerequisite for the implementation
of other indispensable reforms, as agreed with the
international community, which are necessary for
consolidating Afghan institutions and generating selfsustaining growth in order to meet the legitimate needs
and expectations of the Afghan people. In that context,
we hope that the long-awaited electoral reform agenda
will soon be completed, thereby allowing the relevant
institutions to rapidly set an electoral calendar and
ensure a credible, inclusive and transparent process.
I wish to conclude by renewing our appreciation for
the crucial work that UNAMA carries out in many areas
and under very difficult conditions. Italy looks forward
to engaging within the Council on the outcomes of the
strategic review mandated by resolution 2344 (2017)
last March, in order to further strengthen the Mission
and enhance its overall effectiveness.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Mr. Yamamoto, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
18/34

21/06/2017

Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his
work towards implementing the Mission’s mandate. We
also thank him for his informative and detailed briefing.
We commend the role of the United Nations in
Afghanistan. The Secretary-General’s visit to Kabul
was timely and focused attention on the future of
Afghanistan and of the entire Central Asia region.
The visit serves as a reminder for the international
community of its obligations and responsibilities
towards this critical region and its future.
The security situation across Afghanistan is
deteriorating, especially with the Taliban’s announcement
last April of the launch of its seasonal spring offensive
and the increase in terrorist attacks, which have recently
reached unprecedented levels. We recall the tragic
attack that claimed hundreds of victims during the
early days of Ramadan and other despicable terrorist
attacks that occur on an almost-daily basis across the
regions of Afghanistan.
We hope that Afghan militias and armed groups
will follow the example set by the agreement between
the Government and the Hizb-i Islami, which allowed
for the return of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar to the legitimate
and legal political stage after the delisting of his party
from the Security Council sanctions list. It is important
to fight and eliminate terrorist groups wherever they
exist, particularly the Islamic State of Iraq and the
Levant — Khorasan Province, within the framework of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Egypt has traditional and historical links in
relations with Afghanistan and feels the influence that
the political and security situations in Central Asia
and the Middle East have on each other. We therefore
reiterate our support for the Afghan Government in
its war against terror and its effort to extend State
authority across its territory. We support all regional
and international efforts aimed at economic and
social development in order to bring about the return
and repatriation of internally displaced persons and
refugees and achieve prosperity for all the people
of Afghanistan.
We oppose the lenient approach towards the drug
trafficking phenomenon, which is a major threat,
particularly in the case of opium, to the stability and
security of Afghanistan and Central Asia. We stress the
importance of regional and international coordination
with the Afghan authorities in the fight against
trafficking in drugs, which must be part of the efforts to
17-17785

21/06/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.7980

fight terrorism, as drugs are a main source of funding
for terrorist groups and armed militias.

done by the United Nations, particularly by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

In conclusion, Cairo attaches great importance
to the implementation of Egypt’s role as a supporting
State for the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process. We also
affirm the importance of following up on all of the
outcomes of the ministerial conference on Afghanistan
held in Brussels in October. Egypt’s partnership
development agency is continuing with its high-quality
training programmes for elements of the Afghan police
and security forces. We have also been sending Arabic
experts to the University of Kabul for a number of
years. We attach great importance to building Afghan
capacity in the areas of the judiciary, culture, health
care and nursing and agriculture and irrigation, as well
as in the banking sector. And we continue to provide
humanitarian assistance to the people of Afghanistan.

In this highly volatile security situation, it is more
important than ever for the Afghan Government to
remain united. The best response to the terrorists is to
display unity, to rally to the cause and to demonstrate
a determination to deepen and consolidate Afghan
democracy. The Government should continue to make
a priority of working to achieve the reforms to which
it is committed, especially electoral reform and the
fight against corruption and drug trafficking, which
continues to fuel the Taliban’s insurgency. I would like
to emphasize that last point in particular, since in view
of the fact that in 2016, drug production in Afghanistan
reached a new record of 4,800 tons, the Afghan
authorities’ implementation of its national anti-drug
plan of action is urgent.

Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to reiterate France’s condolences to the
Afghan people and the families of the victims of the
terrible attack of 31 May in Kabul and the incidents
that followed it. France stands with the Government of
Afghanistan in the fight against terrorism.

On the human rights front, the situation of women
and children continues to be extremely precarious. It
is vital to ensure that the Afghan authorities continue
to work to fully implement their commitments to
women’s rights and the protection of children. Besides
the Government’s implementation of reforms in both
the short and long term, lasting stability in Afghanistan
can be achieved only through national reconciliation.
France welcomed President Ghani’s initiative on 6 June
in convening the Kabul process for peace and security
cooperation, for which we reiterate our full support.
While it is up to Afghans to lead the process of restoring
peace in their country, the wholehearted commitment
and unambiguous support of all its neighbours is
essential. We urge them to work with renewed energy
and concrete efforts to that end. We have a collective
responsibility to actively support the stabilization
of Afghanistan and contribute to establishing lasting
peace there.

I would like to warmly thank Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for his informative briefing, and pay tribute
through him to the United Nations personnel who
are working every day, in difficult conditions, for
Afghanistan’s recovery.
France associates itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union.
France is deeply concerned about the deterioration
of the security situation in Afghanistan, first because
the principal victims of the conflict continue to
be civilians, especially women and children, and,
secondly, because the increasing numbers of attacks
serve only to destabilize the country even more, despite
the considerable progress made by the Afghan security
forces, whose commitment and courage I pay tribute to
today. We should therefore treat the establishment and
spread of armed and terrorist groups in Afghanistan
very seriously. Lastly, the deterioration in security is
exacerbating an already fragile humanitarian situation
that has recently been intensified by the large-scale
return of refugees from Pakistan and Iran. In that
regard, France encourages the Afghan Government to
focus on ensuring equal treatment for all refugees and
displaced persons. We also welcome the work being

In that context, support for Afghanistan by the
international community in general, and the United
Nations in particular, has never been so important, as
the Secretary-General’s recent visit emphasized. In that
regard, France and the European Union continue to be
fully committed to Afghanistan’s cause. We await with
great interest the conclusions of the strategic review of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) next month. We value the Mission’s role in
exercising its good offices. We also have to ask what the
role of the United Nations and UNAMA in supporting
Afghanistan’s reconciliation and peacebuilding efforts
will be. Ultimately, simplifying the coordination

17-1778519/34

S/PV.7980

The situation in Afghanistan

mechanisms that are in place could very likely bring
about an improvement in the effectiveness and visibility
of United Nations assistance.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my country’s
full support to Afghanistan and its Government and to
the activities of the United Nations in aid of their efforts.
Mr. Herasymenko (Ukraine): I would like to start by
expressing my delegation’s condemnation of the recent
terrorist attacks in Afghanistan, and our condolences
to the relatives of the victims and to the Government
of Afghanistan. We hope that those responsible will be
brought to justice.
I, too, join others in expressing our gratitude to
Special Representative Yamamoto and his team for
their efforts in Afghanistan.
While we align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered later today by the observer of the European
Union, I would also like to raise several points in my
national capacity.
We take positive note of the Afghan National Unity
Government’s recent accomplishments in addressing
the country’s challenges. First, we are seeing
encouraging progress on the political front with highlevel merit-based appointments, as well as consistent
efforts to counter corruption and create an environment
conducive to future parliamentary and presidential
elections by strengthening electoral institutions and
improving the relevant legislation.
Secondly, the Government is moving forward
with justice-sector reform, particularly its anticipated
revision of the penal code in order to incorporate State
obligations under the Rome Statute and the United
Nations conventions against corruption and torture,
which will ensure that those who commit war crimes
and crimes against humanity will be held accountable.

21/06/2017

narcotics operations, while the eradication of opium
poppy fields has almost doubled.
Lastly, the Kabul process conference held on 6 June
at President Ghani’s initiative should help to foster
regional cooperation on peace and security.
At the same time, those achievements have
been accompanied by complex internal political
developments and increased tensions between political
parties in anticipation of the upcoming election season.
I should emphasize that it is absolutely imperative to
preserve what has been achieved with such enormous
effort and sacrifice. It is up to the Afghan stakeholders to
demonstrate maturity and put aside their differences for
the sake of achieving a sustainable and comprehensive
peace and national accord.
Meanwhile, terrorism remains a major threat to
Afghanistan and directly affects peace and stability
in the region, with the Taliban announcing its annual
offensive and affiliates of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) raising their heads. The attempts
by several regional players to cooperate with certain
factions and the Taliban, ostensibly with the goal
of preventing ISIL from expanding its presence in
Afghanistan, are alarming. We express concern at
those endeavours. Tactics based on the notion that the
enemy of my enemy is my friend are questionable in
general and should in no way be applied to contacts with
terrorists. We are of the view that such collaboration
can only exacerbate the already difficult situation in
the country. Let us not forget the lessons of the not-sodistant past.

Thirdly, the protection of human rights and the
promotion of gender equality have received additional
impetus. The Government continues to work diligently
to draft legislation aimed at combating and ending
the harassment of women and children. Overall, the
country’s progress in the area of human rights has
been impressive.

It is also disturbing that, despite extensive military
pressure and the attempts to eradicate the ISIL
presence in Afghanistan, the group launched a series of
high-profile attacks in Kabul, including on a military
hospital in March and, more recently, in the heart of
the diplomatic district in May. All of that creates an
atmosphere of fear and terror, thereby contributing
to instability and prolonged conflict, and provokes
social frustration and protest, as we saw recently in the
capital. In that light, we call on the Afghan authorities
to conduct a thorough investigation into those attacks
so as to prevent their recurrence in future, as well as
to improve the protection of diplomatic missions and
their personnel.

Fourthly, efforts to counter the production of illicit
drugs used for financing terrorism have been resumed,
resulting in the successful conduct of several counter-

Let me also take this opportunity to echo and support
the call of the Afghan Ambassador on the Council to
strictly enforce and strengthen the sanctions regime.

20/34

17-17785

21/06/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

We are also concerned by the continued suffering
of civilians, especially the high number of losses
among women and children as a result of the fighting,
as well as from landmines and explosive remnants of
war. We note the Government’s commitment to the
prevention and the mitigation of civilian casualties,
as well as its intention to ratify Protocol V to the
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons. In that
regard, we call on international humanitarian demining
actors, in particular the United Nations Mine Action
Service, to work together with the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) with a
view to promoting mine-risk education programmes
and assisting the Government in conducting
mine-clearance operations.
The growing number of internally displaced
persons, as well as of refugees repatriated to
Afghanistan, is another point of concern. The
International Organization for Migration estimates that
at least 600,000 refugees could return this year. Yet the
reports by UNAMA about the sharp increase in civilian
casualties during clashes between the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces and the Taliban show
how unsafe this situation is for the affected population.
In that regard, we also regret that the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees had
to significantly cut cash grants, from $400 to $200, to
Afghan returnees while they continue to struggle with
severe food insecurity.
Regional cooperation is crucial for stabilizing the
situation in Afghanistan. In order to bring sustainable
peace and prosperity to the country, key stakeholders
have to spare no effort in confronting the major regional
threat posed by terrorism. We agree with the SecretaryGeneral’s findings that this goal can be achieved
with the improvement of bilateral relations between
Afghanistan and Pakistan through a constructive
dialogue. We commend the readiness of the Afghan
leadership to extend the hand of friendship and to seek
ways of improving bilateral relations with neighbours
by developing mutual security cooperation. In this
vein, it is imperative to strengthen border controls to
cut terrorist flows and to deprive Taliban fighters of
shelter or any kind of assistance.
We also hope that the arrangements made at the
Kabul process conference on 6 June will help to reboot
peace talks and enlist neighbours in a regional fight
against terrorism. In that regard, we urge the guarantors

S/PV.7980

in the Quadrilateral Coordination Group to assist in
accomplishing these endeavours.
In conclusion, Ukraine would like to reiterate
its strong support for UNAMA activities in assisting
Afghanistan to cope with security, economic and
development challenges, as well as to enact national
reforms aimed at creating a sound foundation for peace,
security and prosperity, both in the country and in the
wider region. We expect that the strategic review of
UNAMA’s mandate, priorities and related resources,
as requested by resolution 2344 (2017) and to be
completed by this July, will result in enhanced Mission
efficiency. Our common goal is to make irreversible the
process of transformation of Afghanistan into a steady
and prosperous nation that lives in peace and harmony
with all of its neighbours.
Ms. Carrión (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Afghanistan, Mr. Yamamoto, for his
comprehensive briefing. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2017/508), which reflects the
complex situation that Afghanistan continues to face,
as well as for his recent visit to the country.
Uruguay reaffirms its support for the Government
of Afghanistan and encourages it to continue its efforts
to achieve lasting peace based on the principles of
sovereignty, territorial integrity and national unity.
The consolidation of democratic institutions remains
essential to the achievement of stability. The progress
made in relation to the Government’s programme of
priority reforms is encouraging, in particular the fight
against corruption, the improved accountability on the
part of senior officials and electoral preparations.
It is nonetheless discouraging that the lack of
dialogue and progress towards a peace agreement
between the Afghan Government and the Taliban
continue to cause great suffering to the Afghan people.
It is worrying that, according to the report, securityrelated incidents have reached the highest recorded
number since 2001. The situation of instability and
insecurity continues to expose the vulnerability of
civilians. The fighting continues to cause a large
number of casualties among the civilian population,
particularly women and children, who, as usual, are
disproportionately affected by the upsurge in violence.
The number of victims among women and children has
been increasing due to the effects of aerial operations,

17-1778521/34

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.7980

attacks with improvised
suicide bombings.

explosive

devices

21/06/2017

and

Those responsible for those acts must be brought to
justice and punished to the full extent of the law.

It is worth recalling the 31 May attack on in Kabul,
which resulted in a large number of fatalities and
hundreds of wounded. In that connection, we wish to
express our heartfelt condolences to the Afghan people
and Government.

Bolivia commends the visit by the SecretaryGeneral to Afghanistan and shares his concern
about the proliferation of various terrorist groups in
Afghan territory and the need for a more coordinated
international response to counter terrorism. We also
underscore the Secretary-General’s reference to the
need for the United Nations to continue support for the
Kabul process, led by Afghanistan and in line with the
strategy of the Afghan Government.

The serious human rights situation and humanitarian
issues arising from the rapid increase in the number
of newly internally displaced persons caused by the
intensification of the conflict, to which can be added
the large number of refugees returning to the country,
are also alarming.
Uruguay reiterates its vigorous condemnation and
repudiation of terrorist violence, and reiterates as well
that violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law must not go unpunished.
The political, economic and security challenges that
continue to confront Afghanistan require the continued
support of the countries of the region, the international
community, the United Nations and, in particular,
the Security Council. In that regard, we express our
appreciation for the work of the Kabul process, which
was recently launched. Similarly, we would like to
recognize, and express our appreciation for, the work of
Special Representative and the entire staff of UNAMA,
who with their unwavering dedication continue to
support the Afghan people. We would also like to
thank to all those involved in providing humanitarian
aid, who often work in extremely difficult conditions,
which include being directly targeted by attacks.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as the representative
of the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
Bolivia thanks the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, for
his detailed briefing and presentation of the report
(S/2017/508) of the Secretary-General on Afghanistan,
and welcomes this opportunity to express its
overwhelming support for his work. Similarly, Bolivia
thanks the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan
for the information that he provided to the members of
the Security Council today. Through its Ambassador,
Bolivia reiterates its condolences to the Government
and the people of Afghanistan for the victims of the
recent terrorist attacks that Afghanistan has endured.
22/34

We would be remiss if we did not mention our
concern about the high number of internally displaced
persons. According to the report presented by
Mr. Yamamoto, between January and mid-May more
than 100,000 people became internally displaced
within the country. We call for concerted efforts aimed
at the sustainable return of citizens, with international
organizations providing concrete and tangible support,
in particular for enhancing assistance to internally
displaced Afghans and Afghan refugees so as to
facilitate their voluntary, safe and dignified return
and their sustainable reinsertion into their society
of origin so that they can contribute to the stability
of Afghanistan.
We commend the work of United Nations Mine
Action Service, which has been working to provide
education at transit centres to ensure that returnees are
informed of the existence and danger of antipersonnel
mines, explosive remnants of war and other improvised
explosive devices. We also highlight that 18
communities have been declared mine-free, thereby
making it possible for approximately 20,000 people in
an area of nearly 10 square kilometres to move freely
about their community.
With respect to political events, we recognize the
major efforts made by the Government and the people
of Afghanistan, and we reiterate our commitment to
defend the country’s sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity. We recall the interconnected nature
of the challenges facing the people of Afghanistan and
sustainable progress relating to security, development
and governance, which are mutually reinforcing.
With regard to the report of the Secretary-General,
it is very important to highlight the work on the peace
agreement between various factions, such as Hizb-i
Islami, and on negotiations to release prisoners. We
recognize and express our gratitude for the efforts of
17-17785

21/06/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

the Government, which devised a road map in April
based on the need for a process of inclusive dialogue
that brings all parties involved to the negotiating table
wiht a view to strengthen institutions through which
differences of a political nature can be channelled.
Bolivia is also grateful to UNAMA for its logistical
and technical work in a broad-based, Afghan-led
process in support of new local peace initiatives in nine
different provinces aimed at the non-violent settlement
of disputes and conflicts.
UNAMA recorded 5,687 security-related incidents
in Afghanistan between January and March of this
year — an unprecedented number, including in areas
that previously had been considered secure. We strongly
condemn the attacks of recent days, and we call on the
international community to take firm measures so as to
ensure the strengthening of, and support for the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces and to achieve
a stable and democratic Afghanistan — to which
end there is a need to shore up its ability to maintain
security and stability in the entire country.
We welcome the multilateral and bilateral initiatives
mentioned in the report, such as the various regional
initiatives in Central Asia and the conferences on
Afghanistan held in Moscow in April and in Kabul on
6 June — otherwise known as the Kabul process — which
proposed to coordinate efforts at the regional level and
make it possible for our brotherly country to emerge
from the situation which it is undergoing.
We reiterate the crucial importance of encouraging
regional cooperation as an effective means to promote
security, stability and economic and social development
in Afghanistan, while recognizing the importance of the
contributions of neighbouring and regional partners.
Lastly, we must recall that the conflict has been
ongoing for several years, and different types of
solutions, including a military solution, have been tried.
We have come to a point where there are now more
than 100,000 troops in Afghan territory, while, at the
same time, terrorist groups have multiplied, with the
increased presence of groups like Da’esh. We therefore
call on the entire international community, in particular
countries in the region, to contribute positively so that
the Government and the people of Afghanistan, as well
as the groups involved, can achieve a reconciliation that
is inclusive of everyone.

S/PV.7980

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2017/508), and Special
Representative Yamamoto for his comprehensive
briefing this morning. These reports and the SecretaryGeneral’s own conclusions following his visit to Kabul
last week confirm the growing concern, if not alarm,
at the deteriorating political, economic and security
situation in Afghanistan.
Pakistan strongly condemns the repeated,
large-scale and orchestrated terrorist attacks in
Kabul and elsewhere in Afghanistan. There can be
no justification for the murder and mayhem aimed at
innocent civilians. Pakistan is also a principal victim
of terrorism. We share the pain and the agony of the
Afghan people and wish to work with them to defeat
and eliminate the scourge of terrorism and violence
from Afghanistan and our region.
We hope that the political differences that have
become more pronounced recently within the Afghan
Government will be reconciled by President Ghani
Ahmadzai, Chief Executive Abdullah and other
political leaders and groups. The continued economic
and political support to the Afghan Government from
the international community remains essential for the
preservation of political amity and the implementation
of much-needed governance reforms.
Besides internal differences, Afghanistan’s
security faces a twin challenge: the insurgency led by
the Tehrik-e-Taliban Afghanistan, on the one hand, and
the campaign of terrorism promoted by the so-called
Islamic State, or Da’esh, on the other. Several terrorist
groups are now associated with the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham, including Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan,
Jamaat-ul-Ahrar, the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan
and Eastern Turkistan Islamic Movement, among other
terrorist groups. Those violent groups not only threaten
Afghanistan and its neighbours, but also pose a global
terrorist threat.
It has been my country’s consistent view that
peace can be restored in Afghanistan only — and this I
emphasize — through a negotiated settlement between
Kabul and the Afghan Taliban. That has also long been
the consensus of the international community — one
that we saw expressed this morning. A negotiated peace

17-1778523/34

S/PV.7980

The situation in Afghanistan

was also the conclusion reached by the SecretaryGeneral following his visit to Afghanistan last week.
Over the years, Pakistan has done what it could, when
asked, to help facilitate such a negotiated settlement.
Pakistan initiated the Murree talks in July 2015, which
were scuttled by a series of well-known developments.
Thereafter, we sought to resuscitate the talks under the
Quadrilateral Coordination Group (QCG).
Pakistan has continued to engage in all other
processes designed to promote a political solution: the
Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, the 6+1 peace formula,
the International Contact Group for Afghanistan, the
QCG, the Moscow format of regional consultations
on Afghanistan and, most recently, the Kabul process.
We believe that the promotion of a political settlement
and the pursuit of a military solution in Afghanistan
are mutually incompatible. Continued reliance on a
military option or an enhancement in troop numbers
without an accompanying political strategy will not
produce a result different from the one witnessed in the
past 15 or 16 years. It will instead lead to more violence
and bloodshed for the Afghan people; it will not yield a
political solution.
Nor can, in our opinion, the resilience of the
insurgency be explained away by convenient references
to external safe havens or support centres. Given that
large areas of Afghanistan are now under the control
of the Afghan Taliban, their safe havens are inside, not
outside, Afghanistan. As a country that continues to host
over 2 million Afghan refugees, and many more who
are undocumented, Pakistan expects the gratitude, not
the hostility, of the Afghan Government. On our part,
Pakistan’s successive military operations have managed
to crush or expel all terrorist and militant groups from
our tribal territory, which borders Afghanistan.
Despite the provocative remarks made by my
colleague from Afghanistan, my country remains
committed to not allowing its territory to be used
for terrorism against any other country. We are
implementing border controls, including the fencing
and monitoring of vulnerable sections of the PakistanAfghanistan border. Any issue relating to cross-border
terrorism and cross-border violations can be raised and
discussed in the coordination mechanisms, including
the bilateral mechanism for intelligence-sharing
and cooperation in border management, established
in March.
24/34

21/06/2017

In Astana earlier this month, Prime Minister
Nawaz Sharif and President Ashraf Ghani agreed to
re-energize Pakistan-Afghanistan cooperation so as to
eliminate the menace of terrorism from our region. They
also agreed to revitalize the QCG to promote peace and
reconciliation in Afghanistan. We urge all parties — in
particular the Tehrik-e-Taliban Afghanistan and all its
constituent groups — to return to the path of negotiations
in response to the call made by the Secretary-General.
Pakistan and Afghanistan’s other friends can assist in
promoting a negotiated settlement. But peace can be
negotiated only — only — when the Afghan parties
desire it and they agree to eschew a military solution.
Today there is every reason for the Afghan parties
and their friends to pursue the path of a negotiated peace.
All of them face a common threat from the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham and the terrorist groups affiliated
with it. Among them, the Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan and
the Jamaat ul-Ahrar target Pakistan from their bases
in Afghanistan. Those groups must be rooted out from
their bases as part of an effective counter-terrorism
campaign in Afghanistan.
In conclusion, apart from Afghanistan itself,
Pakistan has suffered more from the wars and violence
that have engulfed Afghanistan for over 35 years than
any other country. No country other than mine would
gain more from peace in Afghanistan. We are confident
that, whatever our differences in the past, in the end the
deep bonds of religion, culture, history and geography
between Pakistan and Afghanistan will assert
themselves and produce an era of peaceful and mutually
beneficial cooperation between our fraternal nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): We thank Special
Representative Yamamoto for his briefing, and
the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, His
Excellency Mr. Mahmoud Saikal, for his statement.
At the outset, let me reiterate our heartfelt
condolences for those who lost their lives in the series
of terrorist attacks that began on 31 May in Kabul.
We once again strongly condemn those heinous
acts of terror. Turkey will continue its support to
the Government of Afghanistan in its fight against
terrorism and in its efforts to bring peace, security and
stability to the country.
17-17785

21/06/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

I would also like to take this opportunity to
commend the members of the diplomatic community
in Kabul for their perseverance in the execution of
their duties despite all the challenges they face. We
also commend the role played by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in
standing with the Afghan people and coordinating the
efforts of the international stakeholders in Afghanistan.
We will continue to support UNAMA’s activities and
efforts in that regard.
I would like to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2017/508). We share his concerns regarding the
deteriorating security situation in Afghanistan.
We also applaud the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces (ANDSF) for their determined stance
against terrorism. We acknowledge the sacrifices of
the ANDSF.
The presence of Da’esh in the country is also a
cause for serious concern and constitutes yet another
reason to continue supporting Afghanistan.
The achievements of the past 15 years need to be
consolidated. The continued support of the international
community during the transformation decade is crucial.
We are pleased to see that the international community
reiterated its support for Afghanistan in the NATO
Warsaw Summit and the Brussels Conference last year.
It is imperative to live up to the commitments made
to Afghanistan.
Turkey upheld its previous development contributions
and pledged another $150 million for the period 20182020. We are also providing $60 million to sustain the
ANDSF for the period 2018-2020, in line with the NATO
Warsaw Summit decisions. We will contiue to support
the Afghan Government’s security and development
efforts, both bilaterally and on multilateral platforms.
In that context, our support through the NATO Resolute
Support mission and the training of Afghan women
police officers in Turkey will continue.
In line with the international community’s
continued support to Afghanistan, we welcome the
anti-corruption efforts of the Afghan Government. We
attach importance to the functioning of the National
Unity Government, as it symbolizes Afghan unity. The
international community should continue to support
the National Unity Government and encourage its
components to work in harmony with each other.

S/PV.7980

We are closely following the developments regarding
First Vice-President Dostum, who is currently in Turkey
for medical purposes. He will return to Afghanistan
upon completion of those medical procedures. We
agree that upholding the rule of law and eliminating
impunity are imperative for stability in Afghanistan.
However, the case against First Vice-President Dostum
might not be the most appropriate occasion to prove
that point. The case needs to be handled in a way that
will not put at risk the support provided to the National
Unity Government or create further deterioration of the
security situation, especially in northern Afghanistan.
We support Afghan-led and -owned peace and
reconciliation efforts, which aim at achieving lasting
peace and stability in Afghanistan. The first meeting
of the Kabul process for eace and security cooperation
conference, held on 6 June, was a positive development
in that direction. The meeting also provided the
international community with an opportunity to display
its solidarity with Afghanistan in a difficult period.
We hope that the agreement between the Afghan
Government and Hezb-i Islami will serve as a model
for others. The progress made in the implementation of
the agreement is encouraging, and we were pleased to
see them participating in the Kabul process meeting.
Enhanced cooperation and increased dialogue
among the countries of the region is also necessary.
In fact, it is the region itself that has the greatest role,
interest and responsibility in establishing and sustaining
a secure, prosperous and peaceful Afghanistan. In
that regard, Turkey will continue its contributions to
Afghanistan, inter alia within the multilateral platforms,
including through the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Braun (Germany): To start, let me thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), Mr. Yamamoto, for his comprehensive
briefing and both him and his staff for their
tireless efforts.
Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.
Afghanistan finds itself in a tense political
situation. The despicable attack in the vicinity of the
German Embassy in Kabul on 31 May was one of the
deadliest suicide attacks in Afghan history, leaving

17-1778525/34

S/PV.7980

The situation in Afghanistan

over 80 dead and more than 400 injured. The Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan provided some details in
his statement earlier today. We condemn in the strongest
terms the senseless killing of so many innocent victims.
As in numerous similar attacks in the past, once again
civilians were the targets most affected. We call on
the Afghan authorities to conduct a thorough criminal
investigation and to hold those responsible accountable
for their crimes.
Those perverse attacks, carried out in the holy month
of Ramadan, resulted in far too many casualties and
caused significant damage to our Embassy. Numerous
other diplomatic missions and non-governmental
organizations were also affected. But that heinous
act only strengthens our resolve. Germany remains
strongly committed to working side by side with our
Afghan partners to tackle the challenges before us.
We commend the National Unity Government for
keeping its doors open to peace negotiations with the
Taliban. A comprehensive peace and reconciliation
process remains the only way to long-term stability in
Afghanistan and the region. Only an Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned process will result in a sustainable
solution. Germany continues to stand ready to assist
Afghanistan in the process. The Kabul process is the
Afghan-led solution on the way towards peace.
The fragile security situation remains the main
challenge in Afghanistan. As Secretary-General
Guterres points out in his report (S/2017/508), the
number of casualties among women and children
increased by 24 per cent and 17 per cent, respectively.
More needs to be done to protect the most vulnerable
in Afghan society. The adoption of a national civilian
casualty prevention and mitigation strategy by the
Government is an important step in the right direction.
It now needs to be implemented with vigour. In addition,
the imminent ratification of Protocol V to the 1980
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons will also
help reduce the number of civilian fatalities.
Furthermore, we encourage the National Unity
Government to proceed with electoral reforms. For
some months now, Afghanistan has had the necessary
institutions in place for the holding of parliamentary
and district council elections. A clear and realistic
timetable is crucial for pushing through the remaining
electoral reforms and for holding credible, fair, equal
and free elections.
26/34

21/06/2017

Let me conclude by reiterating Germany’s full
support for the crucial role played by UNAMA and
United Nations agencies working in Afghanistan.
As co-Chair of the International Contact Group
on Afghanistan, Germany especially commends
UNAMA’s efforts to strengthen cohesion among
international and regional stakeholders in Afghanistan.
We look forward to receiving the results of the strategic
review of the Mission requested by the Security
Council. The review should be conducted with the aim
of optimizing ongoing activities and strengthening the
Mission even further. Germany remains committed to
supporting Afghanistan, in close cooperation with the
Afghan Government and our international partners.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Ms. Samson (Netherlands): I thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to speak at today’s debate on behalf
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be made by the observer of the European Union and
joins others in thanking the Secretary-General for his
detailed and thorough report (S/2017/508).
I would also like to thank Special Representative
Yamamoto for his dedicated work, and Ambassador
Saikal for his statement.
Allow me to focus on three issues: the security
situation and political stability in Afghanistan;
reconciliation and meaningful participation by women
in Afghan society; and the review of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
First, the attack on the army base in Mazar-i-Sharif
and the recent attacks in Kabul are a stark reminder of
the suffering that the Afghan people and the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces have had to
endure in ever-greater numbers. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands is deeply saddened by the loss of life. We
express our condolences and support to all affected by
such violence. In such challenging security conditions,
good governance and political stability are essential
for maintaining nationwide stability. We continue to
stand with the National Unity Government in facing
those challenges.
Secondly, in order to realize long-term stability in
the region, peace talks remain an important objective.
We join others in calling upon all parties involved to
cooperate within the framework of an Afghan-led and
17-17785

21/06/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.7980

Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation process. The
constructive engagement of regional partners is also of
paramount importance.

Council in 2018, the Kingdom of the Netherlands will
continue to support Afghanistan with the same vision
and commitment.

During the Kabul process on 6 June, President
Ghani Ahmadzai reaffirmed his commitment to the
peace process and to the start of a national dialogue.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes his strong
personal commitment. We commend President Ghani
Ahmadzai for his efforts to encourage the meaningful
participation of women, civil society organizations
and young Afghans in the process. If all Afghans
are represented in the peace talks — formal or
informal — sustainable peace can be reached.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain.

However, there will be no peace in Afghanistan
without the active participation of women. We applaud
the results of the fourth Kabul National Symposium on
Afghan Women, held on the theme “Afghan Women:
Messengers of Peace” on 15 May. We commend the
leadership of Afghanistan’s First Lady, Rula Ghani,
in her efforts to increase the political participation
of women in Afghanistan by boosting the number of
women taking part in provincial councils and provincial
peace councils. We call upon the Afghan Government
and all stakeholders involved to implement resolution
1325 (2000) as a matter of the utmost priority.
Thirdly, the Kingdom of the Netherlands strongly
supports UNAMA’s work in accordance with its
current nationwide mandate. We would like to reiterate
our appreciation for the implementation of the broad
United Nations mandate throughout Afghanistan.
UNAMA’s regional presence is crucial for its success,
and we emphasize the need for a strong regional United
Nations presence throughout the country. We hope
that the UNAMA review will support that notion and
safeguard UNAMA’s regional presence in Afghanistan.
We would like to underline the importance of
UNAMA’s role in regional political cooperation. We
support UNAMA as it takes on a stronger role in
such processes. We would also like to underscore our
appreciation for UNAMA’s thorough reporting on the
human rights situation and on civilian casualties.
In conclusion, the international community should
not waver and should remain fully committed to the
situation in Afghanistan. UNAMA is a key partner
in achieving long-term stability in Afghanistan. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands remains dedicated to
supporting Afghanistan throughout the transformation
decade. During its membership of the Security

Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke
in Spanish): Believe me, Mr. President, when I say
that I regret having yet again to begin a statement by
expressing my delegation’s consternation and deepest
sympathy following the reprehensible terrorist attacks
that have rocked Afghanistan in the past few weeks.
Through the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
who is here with us today, I would like to convey our
solidarity with the victims and our gratitude to, and
support for, the Afghan Government in its resolute
efforts to combat the scourge of terrorism.
Spain fully subscribes to the statement to be
delivered shortly by the observer of the European Union,
but I would also like to make a couple of comments in
my national capacity.
I would first like to commend the SecretaryGeneral for his recent trip to Kabul, just a few days ago,
which once again served to emphasize the international
community’s strong support for Afghanistan and the
solidarity of the States Members of the United Nations
with the Afghan nation and its people.
The challenges facing Afghanistan right now are
numerous and significant. They include maintaining
security and combating terrorism and insurgency;
effectively implementing the reform agenda and
achieving sustained economic growth that has an impact
on citizens’ daily lives; preparing for the next elections
and consolidating democracy and institutionality
through an inclusive political process; managing the
humanitarian crisis posed by the situation of internally
displaced persons; and combating the festering wounds
that drug production and trafficking have inflicted
on the country’s economy. While much progress has
been made in the past few years, much remains to be
done. The report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/508)
and today’s briefing by Ambassador Yamamoto, his
Special Representative, show that the reality is far from
positive. However, as the Secretary-General pointed out
during his visit to Kabul, the resolute commitment of
the citizens of Afghanistan to moving forward despite
the difficulties is clear. The international community
cannot be less stubborn.

17-1778527/34

S/PV.7980

The situation in Afghanistan

I would like to emphasize Spain’s support to the
Afghan authorities in their determined efforts in all
those areas, and at the same time to urge all political
stakeholders to keep the progress and well-being of
all Afghans at the forefront of their minds in order to
ensure that it is that goal that ultimately guides their
actions. I want to particularly encourage efforts to
achieve reconciliation and support the quest for peace.
When that goal is reached, while at the same time the
achievements relating to respect for the rule of law
and human rights and the equality of all Afghans are
maintained, the other challenges I mentioned can be
tackled in the full certainty of success. That peace,
moreover, will redound positively to the benefit of the
citizens of the entire region, not just of Afghanistan. We
welcome the recent regional initiatives for peace and
urge all actors in the region to commit unreservedly to
supporting all efforts to end the conflict and achieve
reconciliation.
I would like to conclude by reiterating Spain’s
firm and resolute support for the work of United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and all
the United Nations agencies and programmes that
benefit Afghanistan and all Afghans. We await with
great interest the results of the strategic review of
the Mission, which is called on to contribute to the
international effort in support of Afghanistan through
better and more efficient use of available resources,
while also strengthening Afghanistan’s ownership of
its own future.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s debate on
the situation in Afghanistan. We also appreciate the
briefing by Special Representative Yamamoto and the
statement by Ambassador Mahmoud Saikal, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, which have added to
our understanding of the current crises in Afghanistan.
The recent flurry of terrorist attacks in Afghanistan,
including the massive Kabul bomb attack, have left
many of us horror-struck. Clearly, in Afghanistan the
international community is dealing with an adversary
not averse to flagrantly violating international
humanitarian law and human rights laws — an adversary
flush with resources, weapons and operational support;
an adversary with access to sanctuaries outside the
sovereignty of Afghanistan and operational command
28/34

21/06/2017

of the international forces deployed there; an adversary
that sees no reason or incentive to give up violence
and participate in creation of a democratic, united,
stable, secure and prosperous State. Unfortunately, the
multiple crises that have been inflicted on this wartorn country have once again made Afghan territory
attractive to criminal and terrorist groups that now
appear to be well connected to international terror
and crime networks that in turn prey on Afghanistan’s
resources. The situation is affecting security in South
Asia, Central Asia and regions beyond.
More often than not, a crisis can be seen as a
catalyst for real change and genuine solutions. However,
for that to happen, our perceptions must be straight
and forthright. After all, we cannot change what we
cannot see, or what we are unwilling to see. For a long
time, we believe, that has been the conundrum facing
the international community in Afghanistan — that
the international community’s collective inability and
unwillingness to see the problem for what it is has
inflicted huge costs on the people of Afghanistan.
While no two conflicts are identical, one wonders
why, despite the fact that we have witnessed the worst
possible violence in Afghanistan, the Council does not
think it appropriate to meet more often than in routine
quarterly debates on the situation there. At times it has
even shied away from condemning some of the terrorist
attacks in Afghanistan. Is it that there are far too many
to keep track of? Is it because there is a threshold below
which human lives lost to terrorism are not required to
be addressed?
We see a growing tendency to treat the violence
in Afghanistan as routine. Brutality committed by
terrorist and criminal networks are ignored, labelled as
a product of anti-Government elements or the inevitable
consequence of a civil and political conflict. In doing
so we seem to be failing to ask some crucial questions.
For example, where are those anti-Government
elements getting their weapons, explosives, training
and funding? Where do they find safe havens and
sanctuary? How is it that they have resisted one of the
biggest collective military efforts in the world? How is
it that they collaborate with the world’s most dreadful
terrorists in killing and brutalizing Afghans? How is
it that the phenomenal increase in opium production,
accompanied by a rise in global narcotic prices, has
been totally ignored by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011)? Why is the 1988
sanctions regime still maintained when there is no effort
17-17785

21/06/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

to use its leverage for progress in the peace process?
Why do we hear nothing about the stalled peace
process from those involved, or about the activities of
the Quadrilateral Coordination Group? Why are we not
hearing discussions in the Security Council about ideas
and plans of action for a conflict that has left many
Afghan lives shattered and brutalized?
In the past few months, the attacks on hospitals,
schools, funerals, international development agencies
and diplomatic missions seem to have been designed to
send a message to a nation trying to stand on its feet. We
salute the Afghan national security forces, which are
doing their best to combat the forces of terrorism and
extremism as they continue to strike, one after another.
India remains committed to standing with Afghanistan
and to supporting and strengthening its capabilities, not
just for fighting terrorism and violence but also to assist
it with development and nation-building. Our efforts to
that end will be improved by the opening of a direct
air corridor between our two countries, as agreed on
between our two Heads of State in December. The first
cargoes of goods arrived in both countries a few days
ago, overcoming the obstructions that we have faced in
connecting and trading directly with each other.
While we welcome the efforts to renew the United
Nations approach to dealing with Afghanistan through
the upcoming strategic review of UNAMA, such
efforts should be guided by the needs and priorities of
Afghanistan, its people and its Government. We would
appreciate broader and more informal discussions on
the matter with all important stakeholders.
In this regard, we must not differentiate between
good and bad terrorists or play one group against the
other. The Taliban, the Haggani Network, Al-Qaida,
Da’esh, Lashkar-e-Tayyiba, Jaish-e-Mohammed and
others of their ilk are all terror organizations, many
of them proscribed by the United Nations. They
should be treated like terrorist organizations, with no
justifications offered for their activities.
India, for its part, will continue to stand, in the
words of our Prime Minister, not behind but shoulder to
shoulder with the democratically elected Government
of Afghanistan as it battles terror and the multiple
crises inflicted on it. We hope that the Council,
which is tasked with the responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security, will also play its role
in restoring peace in Afghanistan.

S/PV.7980

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): Let
me begin by expressing my heartfelt condolences and
condemnation in connection with the most recent
terrorist attacks that took place during the Muslim
holy month of Ramadan in Kabul, which resulted in
considerable damage to surrounding areas and some
diplomatic facilities, including ours, as well as the
attack on a Shia mosque on 15 June.
As the Secretary-General observed during his
first visit to Kabul, peace remains the foundation for
Afghanistan’s sustainable development. At the same
time, according to his report (S/2017/508), the security
situation in Afghanistan remains extremely volatile,
with 6,252 security-related incidents from 1 March to
31 May this year, a 2 per cent increase compared with
last year. This is the highest total ever recorded for this
period of time since 2001.
More than a decade after its invasion, Afghanistan,
the region and the world are no safer. The deteriorating
security situation in Afghanistan has deep roots and
cannot be addressed solely through military buildup.
The Taliban, Da’esh and its offshoots, such as the
Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant — Khorasan
Province, continue their heinous attacks against
the civilian population. They are reinforcing and
recruiting, and continuing complex attacks such as
those of 17 May and 31 May attacks, in Jalalabad and
Kabul. The proliferation of terrorist groups on Afghan
territory necessitates concerted international efforts on
counter-terrorism. We need to deal with this increasing
threat in a very comprehensive and resolute manner.
The sustained support of the international community
for the Afghan National Unity Government is more
than ever necessary to help the Government in its fight
against terrorism and extremism and those who have
created and continue to support them.
Our support for the Afghan National Unity
Government is unswerving. We welcome any
achievement on the path to an Afghan-owned and
Afghan-led peace process leading to lasting and
comprehensive peace in the country and the region.
The progress achieved in the implementation of the
peace agreement between the Government and Hizb-i
Islami is an indication of the Government’s will to
establish peace.

17-1778529/34

S/PV.7980

The situation in Afghanistan

Iran is indeed very eager to see a peaceful and
prosperous Afghanistan as its neighbour, as security
in Afghanistan directly and indirectly affects security
on our borders and in the region. It was in this context
that Iran welcomed and participated in the conference
hosted by the Russian Federation on 14 April in
Moscow, as well as the Kabul process meeting hosted
by the Afghan Government on 6 June.
The full text of my statement, dealing with regional
economic cooperation, combating narcotic drugs and
the problem of refugees, will be distributed.
Finally, we support the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) as well as United
Nations agencies in their efforts to provide development
and reconstruction assistance to Afghanistan through
a genuine commitment by the United Nations to a
sustained partnership with that country. We must utilize
the UNAMA mandate and its good offices to strengthen
national institutions and capacities in priority areas, as
requested by the Government.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.
Ms. Adamson (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
28 member States.
The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania, the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

21/06/2017

these crimes and the identification of the perpetrators,
who should be brought to justice.
As stated on several occasions, the EU strongly
acknowledges the crucial role played by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and all the United Nations agencies in supporting the
Afghan people, encouraging peace and reconciliation,
monitoring and promoting human rights, and
coordinating the international community’s assistance.
The Brussels Conference on Afghanistan, held
in October last year, demonstrated a very strong
international commitment to Afghanistan. At the
conference, the international community sent a clear
signal in support of peace, security and stability in
Afghanistan. We should continue to build on this
emerging consensus on regional and international
support for the peace and reconciliation process. The
EU stands ready to do its part in this political process.
All international efforts, whether they be
security-related, political, economic, developmental
or regional, should now be aligned to promote such a
political process. Terrorism and violent extremism are
fundamental threats to all State actors, undermining
regional peace and stability.
The European Union remains fully committed to
supporting an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace
process. Such a process must include all Afghan men
and women and their legitimate interests and must
preserve Afghanistan’s unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity as well as the equal rights of all Afghans
under the Constitution of Afghanistan. We welcome
the recently launched new regional peace initiative, the
Kabul process on peace and security cooperation.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2017/508). I would also
like to thank Special Representative Yamamoto for
his briefing.

We welcome the undeterred willingness of the
Afghan Government to engage in a political process
with the Taliban and other Afghan groups opposing
the Kabul Government to reach a lasting political
settlement. We welcome all initiatives aimed at creating
a conducive environment for such a process and call on
all parties to engage in constructive solutions.

First of all, I would like to express the EU’s
most sincere condolences to the Afghan people and
Government for the recent horrific terrorist attacks in
Kabul. At the same time, I would like to confirm the
EU’s unwavering engagement to stand by Afghanistan
in the fight against the global threat of terrorism. At the
same time, the EU calls for an in-depth investigation of

We also welcome the work that has been done by
the Afghan Government to advance the implementation
of its commitments and the progress achieved on
anti-corruption, election preparation, revenue collection
and budget execution. This must now be followed by
further tangible results in the implementation of the
reform agenda. On 18 February, the signature between

I shall read out a shortened version of my statement;
the full version of the text will be distributed.

30/34

17-17785

21/06/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

the EU and the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan of
their first contractual relationship, the Cooperation
Agreement on Partnership and Development, sent a
strong political signal of the EU’s enduring support for
the country. We hope that Afghanistan can ratify the
agreement soon, to start the provisional application and
to set up the institutional structures.
The EU and its member States welcome the
Government’s efforts to move ahead with the delayed
parliamentary and district council elections. We
nevertheless note that the key decisions to start fully
the electoral preparations are still pending. We urge the
Government to take the necessary decisions promptly,
and the electoral management bodies to implement
the electoral process in a professional, transparent
and inclusive manner. That will help in rebuilding
public confidence. While technical aspects of elections
play an important role, the political will of Afghan
stakeholders and a strong and cohesive leadership are
necessary to deliver credible elections. The EU supports
the electoral process capacity-building and institutional
strengthening of the electoral management bodies and
UNAMA’s coordinating role.
On behalf of the EU and its member States, I would
like to reiterate that joint Statebuilding and development
efforts in Afghanistan need to build on reinforced
regional cooperation. Regional cooperation remains
key to lasting peace and stability in Afghanistan
and the region. The treats of terrorism affecting all
countries of the region can be confronted only with
increased security cooperation. In the same vein, it is
indispensable for sustainable development.
Migration continues to represent a common concern
on which the dialogue between the EU and Afghanistan
proceeds in a meaningful way. In the framework
of the joint way forward, a political engagement to
enhance cooperation on migration and re-admission,
both sides have reaffirmed their commitment to
deepen cooperation on the basis of solidarity and
information-sharing.
At the same time, the EU monitors the Afghan
refugees’ regional dimension. We raise this issue
continuously during our political dialogues with
relevant partners. The EU supports a regional approach
in dealing with this issue, and our actions focus on
addressing the root causes of irregular migration and
forced displacement. We also want to focus on the
long-term reintegration of returned migrants. Let me

S/PV.7980

reassure the Council that the EU will continue its work
and engagement in these areas.
In that context, UNAMA should be encouraged
to uphold its work and the dialogue with the Afghan
Government on the inclusion of internally displaced
persons and returnees. The EU aims to develop a
comprehensive EU response to bridge the humanitariandevelopment nexus and promote durable solutions to the
challenges posed by the protracted nature of the crisis.
Although UNAMA’s 2017 first quarterly report
on civilian casualties in Afghanistan documents a
4 per cent decrease in the number of civilian casualties
compared to the same period in 2016, we are concerned
by increases in both child and women civilian casualties.
We call on all parties to do their utmost to protect the
civilian population, especially women and children.
We also need to continue to protect the vital role of
humanitarian agencies and respect their impartiality
and humanitarian space in addressing the most urgent
needs of the vulnerable. In view of the threat posed by
the many mines and improvised explosive devices to
the population, the EU also encourages Afghanistan to
maintain the current demining rhythm.
In conclusion, it is important that the international
community remain strongly committed to support
Afghanistan towards long-term stability. The EU
continues to consider UNAMA as a key partner in
achieving lasting peace in Afghanistan. UNAMA has
an invaluable role in ensuring the broadest possible
international support for an Afghan-led and Afghanowned process. The EU will continue to support those
efforts with all means at its disposal.
In that regard, I would like to inform colleagues that
the European Union High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Ms. Federica Mogherini,
has today announced the appointment of Mr. Roland
Kobia as the Special Envoy of the European Union to
Afghanistan. His main task will be to advance the EU’s
contribution to delivering lasting peace and prosperity
in Afghanistan and the region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Mr. Bogaert (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General for his quarterly report on the
situation in Afghanistan (S/2017/508), as well as the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his

17-1778531/34

S/PV.7980

The situation in Afghanistan

briefing and his commitment in support of Afghanistan
during this critical phase.
First of all, like those who have spoken before
me, I wish to extend my deepest condolences to the
Afghan people and the Government for the victims
of the recent terrorist attacks in Kabul. Belgium will
continue to stand firm with Afghanistan in the fight
against terrorism.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s recent visit to
Afghanistan, which was an expression of international
solidarity for Afghanistan and reflects the continuing
international commitment to the lasting and peaceful
stabilization of the country. We fully support the
messages and appeals of the Secretary-General, as well
as those of his Special Representative, with respect to
preparations for the elections, the importance of an
Afghan-led peace process, the need for a concerted
international effort against terrorism and the need to
successfully integrate a significant number of returnees.
Those are key elements for the transition to succeed and
overcome the very real challenges and risks.
On its part, Belgium remains committed to
contributing to international community efforts in
support of Afghanistan. In particular, we wish to
salute the Afghan Government for launching the Kabul
process. We are also pleased at the announcement just
made as to the imminent announcement concerning the
date of parliamentary elections.
I would like to focus my remarks today on
three points.
First of all, we stress the importance of lasting
action against landmines in Afghanistan. Last week,
Mr. President, you organized an important briefing on
mine action in the Security Council (see S/PV.7966).
Despite the enormous efforts undertaken by the Afghan
Government, with the support of the United Nations
Mine Action Service (UNMAS) and other international
partners, Afghanistan remains one of the countries in
the world most affected by this scourge. Anti-personnel
mines, improvised explosive devices and explosive
remnants of war cause countless civilian casualties and
disproportionately affect children.
More than 80 per cent of victims of unexploded
ordnance are children. The challenge facing
Afghanistan in terms of achieving its mine-clearance
obligations under the Ottawa Convention by 2023 is a
substantial one. I am pleased to announce that Belgium
32/34

21/06/2017

recently decided to support a new UNMAS project to
strengthen the capacity of the Afghan National Mine
Action Authority to coordinate and manage the quality
of all mine action activities in the country.
Secondly, I would like to express our deep
concern about the increased impact of conflict on
children. During the first quarter of 2017, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
unfortunately documented a sharp increase in the
number of child victims. While anti-Government forces
are responsible for the vast majority of recruitment
into armed groups, torture and other violations against
children, we also call on the Government to step up its
efforts to implement its commitments.
UNAMA reported progress with respect to detention
practices concerning children, but it is still important
to fully implement the directives issued by the National
Security Directorate. Too many schools continued to be
used for military purposes. We call on the SecretaryGeneral to maintain a special child-protection unit
within UNAMA. We also wish to reiterate our call on all
parties to the conflict to fully respect their obligations
under international humanitarian law.
Thirdly, and lastly, it is clear that the national
peace process and concerted action at the regional and
international levels, including the recently launched
Kabul process, are essential to make meaningful
progress in the fight against terrorism. I would also
like to reiterate the importance of a comprehensive
national plan of action against violent extremism in
order to effectively combat terrorism. Ground-level
understanding of the factors influencing radicalization
and recruitment, as well as an adequate understanding
of terrorist financing networks and religious dialogue,
are key elements for effective action. Belgium
commends the Government of Afghanistan for its
significant efforts to date, such as the action plan to
combat the financing of terrorism. Several speakers
mentioned drug trafficking, which plays a significant
role in that regard. Belgium encourages the Government
to continue to work on a national plan of action, while
taking advantage of the support and expertise of the
United Nations in that area.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): At the outset, Australia joins
others in strongly condemning the horrific bombing in
Kabul on 31 May — a shocking attack to take place
17-17785

21/06/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

during the holy month of Ramadan. In a letter of
condolence to President Ghani Ahmadzai and in his
remarks to the Australian Parliament, Prime Minister
Turnbull restated Australia’s commitment to supporting
Afghanistan in its fight against terrorism and its longterm security and development.
Attacks like those only strengthen our resolve
to stand with the Afghan people to achieve peace
and prosperity. We stand with the National Unity
Government as it pursues unity and stability for
Afghanistan’s future. We urge the people of Afghanistan
to maintain solidarity despite their frustration and
suffering, and commend the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in encouraging
political dialogue through the use of its good offices
in Kabul.
The events of the last quarter underline the
ongoing need for the international community as a
whole to stand with Afghanistan as it works to end
the cycle of violence. To that end, Australia recently
announced an increase to its military commitment in
Afghanistan to approximately 300 personnel so as to
support the development of the long-term capabilities
of Afghanistan’s security forces. That important work
is part of our broader commitment to Afghanistan’s
governance and reform agenda, because securing a
future for Afghanistan is not just about security.
We
commend
Afghanistan’s
commitment
to implementing reform and note the important
progress achieved, including improved projections
for economic growth this year. The revised penal
code and anti-corruption initiatives are commendable
achievements in connection with governance and the
rule of law. Positive steps on human rights, particularly
withdrawing the reservation to the Optional Protocol
to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
are also welcome. To build on that progress, we urge
sustained momentum on electoral reform as a critical
building block for democratic progress. We were
encouraged to hear here today that an announcement
on a date for delayed parliamentary elections may
be imminent.
We also congratulate Afghanistan on inaugurating
the Kabul process initiative. Afghanistan’s ownership
of the regional discussion about sustainable peace
demonstrates a commitment to seek fresh, smart and
practical ideas on how stability can be achieved. We

S/PV.7980

encourage Afghanistan’s neighbours and partners
to join with the National Unity Government in that
effort. We welcome the recent constructive engagement
between Prime Minister Sharif and President Ghani
Ahmadzai. The international community stands with
Afghanistan and is ready to support Kabul as it leads
on finding solutions to Afghanistan’s challenges.
In conclusion, Afghanistan remains at the forefront
of global counter-terrorism efforts. Recent events in
London, Manchester, Tehran, Egypt and Afghanistan
itself serve to underline the potential consequences
of failure. Afghanistan remains an urgent priority for
regional and international security, and it remains
essential that we act together in support.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Ms. Boucher (Canada): I thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to address the Security Council. I would
also like to thank Special Representative Yamamoto for
his insightful briefing.
I would like to begin by offering my sincere
condolences to the Government and the people of
Afghanistan affected by ongoing terrorist attacks,
including the bombing in Kabul on 31 May. It is crucial
for us to continue our efforts to counter terrorism and
all forms of violent extremism.
I would also like to congratulate the Afghan
Government on convening the Kabul process for peace
and security cooperation conference on 6 June, despite
extremely challenging circumstances. Canada fully
supports an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace
process. It is my hope that the Kabul process will
bear fruit and that Afghanistan will soon be free of
such violence.
Canada remains committed to supporting
Afghanistan on its path towards development. In line
with our recently announced feminist international
assistance policy, we will continue to focus on
women’s and girls’ rights in all of our programming
in Afghanistan. For example, we actively support
women’s inclusion and empowerment in Afghanistan.
We provide assistance to help implement the law on
the elimination of violence against women and offer
programmes that provide education, awareness-raising
and capacity-building on women’s rights and genderbased violence. Our partners also help women assume
greater decision-making roles in their households

17-1778533/34

S/PV.7980

The situation in Afghanistan

and communities and build their livelihood skills and
capacities. For peace, security and development to take
root and endure in Afghanistan, women must join men
at the centre of decision-making at all levels in Afghan
politics, society and the economy.
Canada commends the Afghan Government
for pledging to increase the presence of women in
Government institutions to 30 per cent by 2020.
Canada also commends the Afghan Government for
launching its national action plan to eliminate early
and child marriages. On 15 May, Canada joined women
from across Afghanistan who gathered to discuss
their experiences, vision and contributions to peace
at the fourth Kabul Symposium, held on the theme
“Afghan Women: Messengers of Peace”. Women’s
participation in the peace and reconciliation process is
essential. I hope that events such as that, along with
efforts to alleviate gender-based violence and provide
more education to girls and young women, will push
Afghanistan closer to peace and stability.

34/34

21/06/2017

(spoke in French)
Allow me to express my deep concern about the
continuing deterioration of the security situation in
Afghanistan, in particular with regard to the number of
casualties among civilian and aid workers reported thus
far for 2017. We are troubled by the number civilian
casualties. Their displacement, increased vulnerability
and losses are unacceptable. We are dismayed by the
impact of instability and insecurity on women and
children. All parties to the conflict must take urgent
steps to end the killing and wounding of civilians.
We call on Afghanistan’s neighbours and partners to
continue to work with the Government of Afghanistan
to increase regional stability and decrease violence
within the country.
Canada supports the Afghan people in their efforts
to ensure a more secure, prosperous and peaceful future.
The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.

17-17785
