S/PV.7672

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7672nd meeting

Friday, 15 April 2016, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Yoshikawa
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Gasso Matoses
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-10641 (E)
*1610641*

S/PV.7672

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Ismail
Ould Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen; and Ms. Kyung-wha Kang,
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed.
Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed (spoke in Arabic):
I thank you, Sir, for giving me this opportunity to
brief the Security Council once again on the latest
developments in Yemen. This briefing falls on the eve
of the next round of face-to-face talks in Kuwait, where
I hope the parties will come to an agreement on a clear
way to end the violence and devastation in Yemen.
As a result of months of intense negotiations, on
9 April I received letters from the Government of Yemen,
the Ansar Allah and the General People’s Congress,
confirming their commitment to a nationwide cessation
of hostilities. The cessation of hostilities began at
midnight on 10 April, and I hope that it will provide
an environment conducive to the upcoming talks, offer
an opportunity for expanded humanitarian assistance,
and provide a rare ray of hope to Yemenis longing for a
return to peace.
The de-escalation and coordination committee
established in the last round of peace talks in Switzerland
has been working hard to prevent violations and avoid
any military escalation. I commend the parties for
their commitment to the work of the committee and
thank the European Union, Germany, the Netherlands,
Turkey, the United Kingdom and the United States for
providing training to members of the committee and
support for its operations.
2/7

15/04/2016

The agreement on the cessation of hostilities
also raised local levels of support. The Government
of Yemen and Ansar Allah have nominated local
committees in militarily contested areas to work with
the de-escalation and coordination committee to ensure
better compliance with the cessation of hostilities. The
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia bore witness to the signing
of an agreement to form such committees upon the
request of both parties. Most local communities are not
yet fully functional, but we are working to ensure that
they become more effective in the coming days.
The early days of the cessation of hostilities
witnessed a notable decrease in the level of military
violence in most parts of the country. However, there
are have also been an alarming number of serious
violations, particularly in Al-Jawf, Amran, Marib and
Ta’izz. Fighting in Ta’izz continues to claim civilian
casualties, and I am concerned that a spiral of escalating
violence could threaten the success of the peace
process. However, the events of the past two weeks
have given me hope. I should like to acknowledge the
courage displayed by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and
Ansar Allah in agreeing to settle border disputes. Both
parties confirm that these agreements pave the way for
a general cessation of hostilities in Yemen.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has supported
both the Government of Yemen and the Houthis in
signing a landmark agreement aimed at supporting
the cessation of hostilities and the work of the
de-escalation and coordination committee, as well as
the local de-escalation committees, and supports the
role of the United Nations. The role of the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia has been praised by both parties, which
represents an important positive development in the
current crisis.
The humanitarian situation of the Yemeni people
continues to deteriorate, causing additional human
misery. As part of their commitments under the cessation
of hostilities, the parties have pledged to respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
ensure unhindered access to humanitarian agencies. I
call on all parties to support the important work being
carried out by the humanitarian agencies. There is no
doubt that humanitarian workers will do their utmost
to deliver assistance to those in need, in particular in
affected hard-to-reach areas. My colleague, Assistant
Secretary-General Kyung-wha Kang, will brief the
Council further on these efforts.
16-10641

15/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East

There is no doubt that Yemen’s rapidly deteriorating
economy is further undermining the humanitarian
situation. In order to help Yemen maintain its economic
stability in this crisis, I have also pursued agreements
seeking to maintain the operations of key State
institutions, including the central bank, on which many
people depend. Re-establishing institutions like the
Social Welfare Fund, which provides cash transfers
to the most vulnerable sectors of the population, will
help prevent the disintegration of the social fabric and
extreme poverty and accelerate economic recovery
once an agreement is reached.
On the security front, Yemen is facing a brutal war,
on the one hand, and a significant terrorist threat, on
the other. The Yemeni people continue to witness the
devastation caused by terrorist attacks throughout the
country. In my recent visit to Brussels, which suffered
a tragic terrorist attack on 22 March, I noted that
the absence of the State in many parts of Yemen has
encouraged the expansion of terrorist groups, creating
a long-term threat to the country. The current cessation
of hostilities will help to create an environment more
conducive to preventing further radicalization and
violent extremism, but much more needs to be done
in order to prevent irreparable damage to the future
of Yemen.
I take this opportunity to note that this morning
the Government of Yemen, supported by coalition
forces, regained control of Al Hawtah, the capital of
Lahij governorate, from Al-Qaida forces, which seized
control of the city last summer.
My team and I have been engaged in extensive
discussions over the past few months with Yemeni
leaders and regional and international partners on the
future direction of the country and possible outcomes
of the Kuwait talks. I met with President Abdrabuh
Mansour Hadi Mansour four times, and wish to thank
him for his support for my mission. I also met with senior
Yemeni Government officials. I visited Sana’a several
times for meetings with representatives of Ansar Allah
and the General Popular Congress; His Royal Highness
the Deputy Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia, Mohammad
bin Salman Al Saud; the Foreign Ministers of Saudi
Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Qatar and Jordan;
and the Deputy Foreign Minister of Russia. I also
engaged in telephone calls with the Foreign Ministers
of France, the United Kingdom and the United States
of America, all of whom reiterated their support for the
cessation of hostilities and the peace process facilitated

S/PV.7672

by the United Nations. The success of the upcoming
talks will require the consistent and coherent support
of the region and the international community at large.
In a few hours, I shall leave for Kuwait in order
to facilitate the next round of Yemeni peace talks.
In that context, I should like to express my sincere
gratitude to the Government of Kuwait, which has
generously offered to host the talks. I also extend my
thanks to the Sultanate of Oman for its political and
logistical support for the efforts of the United Nations
in the region. The talks will begin on 18 April and
seek to reach a comprehensive agreement to end the
conflict and allow the resumption of inclusive political
dialogue, in accordance with resolution 2216 (2015)
and other relevant resolutions. The talks will build on a
negotiating framework that provides a mechanism for a
return to a peaceful and orderly transition based on the
Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and the National
Dialogue outcomes.
I will encourage the parties to the talks to
negotiate a detailed way forward, starting with each
of the following areas: the creation of interim security
arrangements; the withdrawal of militias and armed
groups; the hand-over of heavy weapons to the State;
the restoration of State institutions and the resumption
of inclusive political dialogue; and the release of
prisoners and detainees. With these components, we
are building on what has been discussed and agreed
in principle in resolution 2216 (2015). This framework
provides a strong foundation for developing a new
political consensus that will help Yemen to achieve
the stability and security that its people deserve and
its future requires. A positive outcome will require
difficult compromises on the part of all sides, as well
as determination to reach an agreement. I encourage
all sides to come to the talks in good faith and with a
flexible attitude in order to reach a political solution
and a final way out of the current crisis. The path to
peace may be arduous, but it can be navigated.
Yemen is now at a crucial crossroads. One path
leads to peace, while the other can only lead to a
humanitarian and security crisis. The Security Council
must maintain its support for Yemen and the peace
process in the coming weeks, which will help Yemen
to reach a comprehensive ceasefire and return to a
peaceful, inclusive political process. I wish to thank all
members of the Council for the trust and unyielding
support in ensuring that the rights of Yemenis are well
respected.

16-106413/7

S/PV.7672

The situation in the Middle East

In conclusion, I would ask all Council members
to dwell on this critical, historic moment. We have
never been so close to peace. Will all parties rise to
the occasion and genuinely engage in peace talks?
Can they acknowledge their differences and agree to
overcome obstacles? Can they drop their belligerent
and destructive attitudes now that we are so close to
peace? That is what we are asking for. We will have our
answer in the coming days.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Cheikh Ahmed for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Kang.
Ms. Kang: I thank the Security Council for this
opportunity to brief it on the latest humanitarian
developments in Yemen on behalf of the Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Stephen O’Brien.
We welcome the cessation of hostilities, which is
a long-awaited respite at a time of appalling suffering
and trauma in Yemen. More than 6,400 people have
now been killed, and over 30,500 have been injured.
Displacement has spiked, with some 2.8 million people
having been forced from their homes. Livelihoods have
been ravaged. Some 14.1 million people now need help
accessing adequate health care as a result of a year of
intensified conflict. The lack of supplies, medicines,
electricity, fuel for generators, and staff or equipment
have caused health services to decline across the
country. Entire governorates have been engulfed in
relentless violence. For example, in Ta’izz governorate,
intensified fighting in and around Ta’izz City since
mid-March has left scores of people dead and wounded
and has also significantly hampered relief work.
Children have been particularly affected; they are
among the most vulnerable in any society but they are
all the more so in Yemen. Up until 10 April, when the
cessation took effect, an average of six children had
been killed or maimed in hostilities each day since
March last year. Secondary effects of war and neglect
also kill. UNICEF estimates that some 10,000 children
under the age of 5 may have died in the past year from
preventable diseases, and this in addition to the 40,000
children who die in Yemen every year before their
fifth birthday.
Nor can we ignore the dismal reality that women face
in Yemen today, which is a crisis that barely registers on
the world’s radar. Over half a million pregnant women
lack access to health care that would ensure safe births,
4/7

15/04/2016

and, although notoriously underreported in Yemen, the
number of recorded cases of gender-based violence is
steadily increasing. And at the time when the burden
upon the women of Yemen is increasing, with women
the primary providers for nearly a third of all displaced
households across the country, over 40 per cent of
women-run businesses have closed in the past year.
This paints a very bleak picture, but there is
some cause for very cautious optimism. The cessation
of hostilities is bringing calm to many areas of the
country, reducing the crippling violence that has
devastated communities. In addition, following efforts
by the United Nations and partners to prepare to scale
up operations where possible in anticipation of the
cessation of hostilities, humanitarian organizations
have begun to respond in areas that were previously
difficult to access. For example, in Sa’ada, UNICEF
was able to restart the rehabilitation of a water facility
in Kitaf district serving some 10,000 people, which had
been damaged in air strikes. As a result of the calm,
parents in the governorate are also more willing to send
their children to school again, and efforts are being
undertaken to reopen around 100 schools. And unlike
in previous efforts in Sa’ada, the calm has allowed for
vaccination teams to go door to door, increasing the
number of children reached.
In Ta’izz City, one of the most severely affected by
hostilities, three mobile health and nutrition teams have
been deployed, including to districts in the enclave,
and partners will be delivering medical supplies for
over 130,000 people. Some 240,000 people are now
receiving food assistance in the Al Jawf, Al Dhale’e
and Ta’izz governorates. As the cessation of hostilities
continues to strengthen, the humanitarian community
will similarly increase assistance on the ground in the
most affected areas.
At the same time, United Nations agencies and
partners continue to ramp up ongoing relief efforts
across the country. Coinciding with the start of the
cessation of hostilities, a nationwide polio vaccination
campaign targeting around 5 million children was
successfully launched with the support of UNICEF,
the World Health Organization and the World Bank.
This extraordinary effort has involved more than
19,000 mobile vaccination teams of over 46,000 health
workers and some 5,000 vehicles that were rented to
facilitate monitoring across all governorates. Around
3.5 million people are receiving food assistance each
month from the World Food Programme. So far this
16-10641

15/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East

year, around 2.2 million people have been reached with
health interventions in 22 governorates through the
procurement of medicines, the provision of trauma kits,
immunizations, and the maintaining of an uninterrupted
supply-chain management system. Some 2.3 million
people have been reached with emergency water and
sanitation programmes, and United Nations Population
Fund has this month established two shelters in Yemen
where survivors of gender-based violence can receive
legal, psychosocial and health services.
Millions of fearful, innocent civilians across
Yemen, on whichever side of the conflict lines they
reside, are being reached, and lives are being saved. But
this is hardly enough. The cessation of hostilities must
be made to hold.
Despite these efforts by humanitarian agencies,
vital operations continue to be hampered by a variety of
bureaucratic impediments, principally by the authorities
on the ground. Missions are frequently cancelled due
to lack of clearance. Interference with implementingpartner selection is common. There has been no
headway in negotiating the start of the nationwide
emergency food-security and nutrition assessment,
which has been blocked for seven months now, and
there remain long lists of critical humanitarian supplies
sitting in warehouses or in ports awaiting clearance by
the authorities. These include United Nations armoured
vehicles, along with approximately 100 protective vests
and helmets required for United Nations staff to expand
and operate safely, particularly on missions outside
Sana’a.
Progress is also required towards simplifying the
current deconfliction mechanism with the coalition. For
operations to meaningfully expand during the cessation
and beyond, as well as for existing humanitarian relief
efforts to consistently reach those most in need, these
impediments must be immediately removed.
In that context, I underscore that the terms for
the cessation of hostilities not only include a halt
in hostilities but also obligate the parties to allow
unhindered humanitarian assistance. I remind all
parties that this facilitation is an obligation under
international humanitarian law. While air strikes,
rockets and ground fighting indiscriminately kill
civilians, these administrative obstacles are only
nominally less devastating, as they directly contribute
to hunger, sickness, deprivation and death.

S/PV.7672

Operations are also being impacted financially.
Now into the second quarter of 2016, the Yemen
humanitarian response plan remains critically
underfunded, at only 16 per cent. To date, $296 million
has been received against the $1.8 billion requested. In
order for humanitarian agencies, both United Nations
bodies and non-governmental organizations, to continue
their work, more funding is required now. Because it is
so critical that this assistance reach everyone in need
across the country with impartiality, it is important that
funding be given through the humanitarian response
plan released earlier this year.
Commercial imports have notably decreased over
the past two months, primarily because of delays in the
coalition clearance process, in particular for vessels
trying to reach the port at Al Hudaydah. Delays in the
delivery of commercial goods into Yemen have a direct
humanitarian consequence. Constricting the pipeline of
food, fuel and medical supplies into the country means
that less will be available for civilian consumption
and that what is delivered will be available only at an
inflated price. For example, in February, only 15 per
cent of the monthly fuel requirement was delivered,
while food imports fell by a quarter. As a consequence,
prices rose and civilians faced greater hardship.
The Steering Committee of the United Nations
Verification and Inspection Mechanism (UNVIM)
met for the first time on 11 April, to be followed by a
second meeting on 18 April. In the past 12 hours, the
representative from the Government of Yemen to the
Steering Committee affirmed to the United Nations that
the Government of Yemen had agreed to the UNVIM
head office being located in Djibouti. It is now a matter
of urgency that, during the upcoming meeting, UNVIM
be fully operationalized as a single mechanism for the
clearance of commercial vessels into Yemen. To delay
further will have far-reaching consequences, increasing
the already severe humanitarian needs.
Despite the overwhelming human tragedy that
characterizes Yemen today, we maintain hope that the
parties to the conflict will choose the only path to a
solution, namely, negotiation and dialogue over the
coming weeks, no matter how challenging that path may
seem. There is no military solution. We will continue to
deliver humanitarian assistance to those in need, but
what is needed above all in Yemen is peace — peace for
nearly three and a half million children, the country’s
next generation, to return to school; for the displaced
to return home; for livelihoods to recover and for the

16-106415/7

S/PV.7672

The situation in the Middle East

rebuilding of social service infrastructure, heritage
sites and communities.
For the people of Yemen, peace is not something
abstract; it is vital to their survival. I call on the parties
to redouble their commitment to finding a negotiated
political settlement to the conflict, and call upon all
Member States and the Council to continue to support
such genuine efforts. Meanwhile, as the process
develops, we cannot simply wait and hope. Action is
required. Parties to the conflict must recognize their
responsibility to protect the civilians of Yemen and
facilitate the unfettered delivery of impartial aid to the
people in need. Similarly, the delivery of commercial
goods to the country must be better managed through
the UNVIM process to relieve the acute price and
availability pressures on daily necessities. Building
barriers around the people of Yemen — through
access restrictions, delivery delays or visa denials for
humanitarian staff — is not in the interest of peace or of
the Yemeni people. It will prolong the suffering of those
in need and drive more and more communities into real
and life-threatening risk. The cessation of hostilities is
a crucial window of action, both for the parties to the
conflict to consider peace and for those civilians caught
in its grasp to receive much-needed aid.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Ms. Kang
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to convey our gratitude to the members
of the Security Council for their ongoing efforts and
attention to the issue of Yemen through their scrupulous
following of the peace process in my country. I also
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, who has paid
particular attention to the crisis in Yemen through his
Special Adviser on Yemen, Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed,
and his working team.
Significant efforts have been undertaken to ensure
the success of the political talks in Kuwait in order
to make progress on a comprehensive solution to the
conflict and to prevent any backsliding. The Government
of the Yemeni Republic has extended an olive branch
and worked in a constructive manner to support United
Nations efforts to achieve a lasting peace and put an
end to unilateral measures that undermine the political
solution, a process that has been organized by the
United Nations since 2011. Today, we are working with
the United Nations team to ensure the success of the
6/7

15/04/2016

talks with the putschists, which are to be held in the
brotherly country of Kuwait in the days to come. Those
talks, in the eyes of the Yemeni people and observers,
are the last chance for peace in the country.
The convening of the Yemeni talks in Kuwait are
symbolic in many ways. Kuwait is an active member
of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), which has not
abandoned Yemen in its darkest hours. It has organized
numerous inter-Yemeni dialogue events during the
conflict in Yemen. Our patient and resilient people await
the talks in Kuwait in order to achieve lasting peace
and agreements that bring new life to the changes under
way in the country, in the light of the GCC Initiative,
the outcomes of the National Dialogue and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, namely, resolution 2216
(2015).
Our people support the urgent humanitarian actions
undertaken to begin the rebuilding and economic
recovery period to put an end to this coup d’état
nightmare, which has ripped apart the country’s social
fabric and led civilians to flee.
We reiterate the Yemeni Government’s support
for the efforts undertaken by the Special Adviser and
his team. We call upon the international community to
provide all forms of support necessary to the efforts
of the Under-Secretary-General and his Office. The
process conducted by the United Nations is the only
one we support because of its clear agenda and terms
of reference, which were drawn up together with the
GCC Initiative; the outcomes of the National Dialogue
and Security Council resolutions, such as resolution
2216 (2015); and other relevant United Nations
resolutions, which summarize the outcomes of the
Bonn negotiations.
After five days of the cessation of hostilities, the
De-escalation and Coordination Committee began
its work in Kuwait on 3 April. It has received several
reports regarding attacks perpetrated by the Houthi
and pro-Saleh militias against Ta’izz City and its
inhabitants, which are aimed at forcing them to submit
and which target civilians and densely populated cities
with Katyusha rockets and mortar fire. The Al-Wazia
region in Ta’izz has been besieged by putschists and
Houthis, who continue with their goal of opening a new
fronts. This demonstrates clearly to the international
community that these individuals refuse the transition
to peace and think that violence can benefit them at the
negotiating table. However, that is an illusion.
16-10641

15/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East

The same thing is happening in Sana’a, the beloved
capital of Yemen, which has been transformed by
putschist militias into an open-air prison. Thousands
of people — be they politicians, military officers,
intellectuals, journalists and activists — have all fallen
subject to many forms of physical and psychological
torture. We are waiting for the Houthis and pro-Saleh
elements to act in good faith, before the talks in Kuwait
begin, and free prisoners, as this nightmare has lasted
far too long. On behalf of my people, the resilient Yemeni
people, we ask the Houthis and the pro-Saleh elements
to choose peace and put an end to the bloodletting in
order to save my country, Yemen.
As we head to Kuwait, we wait for peace to return
to Yemen and for the militias that control the State
to return to the negotiating table. A society built on
the rule of law, a unified State, a State of justice and
equality must not accept a State within a State or the
existence of militia bearing arms in Yemen.
We call upon the Security Council and the United
Nations to reject the interference of Iran and its
terrorist affiliates in the region, which seek to interfere
in Yemen’s affairs and to destabilize regional security.
Iran’s interference is clear and hardly needs proof,
as heard in the statements of high-ranking Iranian
officials who encourage violence by sending weapons
to Houthi rebels and to Ali Abdullah Saleh. The most
recent examples of that were three arms convoys on
27 February, 20 and 27 March, incidents that were
reported by the American authorities and which
included Kalishnikov rifles, missiles, shells, rocket
launchers and other equipment used to perpetuate
the conflict and sow chaos in Yemen and the region,

S/PV.7672

in flagrant violation of the arms embargo pursuant to
resolution 2216 (2015).
It has become clear to everyone that there is
a relation between the Houthi and Saleh militias.
Investigations have been undertaken by the Security
Council sanctions committees with regard to the link
connecting terrorist networks, Al-Qaida and Da’esh
in particular, with regard to the sale of oil and arms
trafficking.
The Yemeni Government calls on the international
community to cooperate in its fight against that
terrorism, in particular with regard to the phenomenon
of foreign terrorist fighters and the financing of
terrorism. Those two issues are the direct responsibility
of the international community. Not dealing with them
will result in providing additional resources to terrorist
activities in every region throughout the world.
It is appropriate for me to conclude by highlighting
the core nature of United Nations activities. There
is an extremely important issue at hand, that is, the
recruitment of children by the Houthi militias, which
put them in harm’s way and use them as cannon fodder
for their unjust wars against the Yemini people. The
Houthi and Saleh coalition of death militias recruit
children in the regions that they control, which is an
assault on the youth and future generations in Yemen.
Finally, I reiterate our gratitude for all of the efforts
that the Council is carrying out, and in Yemen we will
never forget those efforts and will record them in the
our history books.
The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.

16-106417/7
