S/PV.7778

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7778th meeting

Tuesday, 27 September 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Taula. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(New Zealand)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Okamura
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia (S/2016/763)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-29970 (E)
*1629970*

S/PV.7778

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

and secondly, that this delay may only be one of yet
further rolling delays.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
(S/2016/763)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Somalia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Abdusalam Hadliyeh Omer, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Investment Promotion of the Federal
Republic of Somalia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Michael
Keating, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Somalia and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia, and Mr. Francisco
Caetano Jose Madeira, Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in
Somalia, to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Madeira, who
is joining us via video-teleconference from Mogadishu.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2016/763, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on Somalia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Keating.
Mr. Keating: Much has happened since the Council
visited Mogadishu on 19 May. Let me begin straight
away with what is no doubt for all of us the immediate
concern — the electoral process — before I turn to
related developments in Somalia.
About 24 hours ago, the Federal Indirect Electoral
Implementation Team (FIEIT) announced that Somalia’s
electoral process would require an additional 30 days,
culminating in the election of a new President of the
Federal Republic by the end of November. The renewed
delay raises a number of fears. Let me name just two:
first, that the process is being politically manipulated,
2/9

27/09/2016

The scope for political manipulation of the process
remains high, but having closely accompanied the work
of the FIEIT and its regional counterparts, the state-level
indirect electoral implementation teams, I believe that
this further delay was not orchestrated by any actor
seeking immediate political benefit. Indeed, the FIEIT
insisted that it needed more time over the objections
of powerful political actors, including presidential
candidates, the international community and this very
Council. The President has actually shared his concerns
about the delay with me, as have other leading actors.
The Council repeatedly stressed that Somalia must
avoid an extension of the constitutionally mandated
term limits, but the Council has also emphasized
the importance of a transparent, inclusive, fair and
credible process that yields a Somali Government and
Parliament enjoying enhanced legitimacy. There is a
creative tension between doing this as thoroughly as
possible and doing it on time.
Parliamentary elections will now take place between
23 October and 10 November, and the presidential
election by 30 November. What is most critical at this
point is that the new extension does not create additional
space for manipulation or disruption by spoilers. Rather,
the urgency and momentum must be maintained and
the additional time used to ensure that the process is as
transparent and credible as possible. Much preparatory
work has been completed and implementation has in
fact begun. Registration of the 14,000 delegates and
hundreds of parliamentary candidates is in progress.
In parallel, the nomination of candidates for the new
federal Upper House is under way.
There is a further challenge. Under the constitution,
the mandate of President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud
was to have ended by 10 September. The Security
Council, in its presidential statement of 19 August
(S/PRST/2016/13), noted the National Leadership
Forum’s consensual decision to extend the current
mandates of the federal institutions to respect the
electoral calendar adopted in early August. Against
the backdrop of an additional delay, it will nonetheless
be critical to avoid an institutional vacuum while, at
the same time stressing that this should be a de facto
caretaker period, with no major decisions or declarations
by any of the existing institutions.
16-29970

27/09/2016

The situation in Somalia

The 2016 electoral process is a novel and exciting
experience for a country that last held national elections
in 1969. It is best described as a political process with
electoral features, rather than just as an election. Every
aspect of the electoral model has been politically
negotiated, with many painful compromises made
between interest groups and clans. There has been a
tendency among many actors to try and resolve longstanding and highly complex political issues through
this process, including — to name just a few — the
status of the federal capital, Somaliland, Hiraan and
Middle Shabelle, the role of political parties, corruption
and illicit financial flows, the rights of minorities, and
women’s long fight for justice and equality .
The electoral model is imperfect. No one is entirely
happy with it, and that may be a good sign. It is literally
extraordinary — a one-off never to be repeated again.
It took over a year to fashion, in an exhaustive process
that included unprecedented public consultations. And
yet, this process has electoral features that are critical to
Somalia’s aspiration to undertake one-person/one-vote
elections in 2020, and that signify the overall progress
that Somalia has made since 2012.
These features include the election of a new Upper
House on a geographical, not just clan basis; a step
away from the so-called 4.5 formula; the conduct of the
election in at least five locations around the country,
not just Mogadishu; genuine competition for seats
in both houses; the establishment of an independent
implementation body; and the setting of clear rules
of the game. They also include the broadening of the
electoral college from just 135 men in 2012 to more than
14,000 citizens, 30 per cent of whom must be women
and 20 per cent youth. And there have been a number of
hard-won provisions to realize the commitment made
by the National Leadership Forum to 30 per cent seats
being reserved for women.
Even though the numbers involved may seem
relatively modest, this is a complicated process
requiring a high degree of dedication, organizational
capacity and some bravery to implement. The security
and logistical challenges alone are considerable. Allow
me to pay tribute here to the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and Somali security authorities for
planning and protecting the process. There are likely
to be attacks by Al-Shabaab, and possibly violence
instigated by others.

S/PV.7778

The process includes not just a secret ballot and
instantaneous communication of results, but also
other measures put in place with United Nations
technical support to bolster the credibility of the
process. These include a code of conduct for all
candidates — parliamentary and presidential — and the
creation of an electoral dispute resolution mechanism.
The latter is now being established with, significantly,
the inclusion of advisors provided by the international
community. There shall also be electoral monitors
provided by the African Union, the European Union,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), the League of Arab States and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, as well as local
Somali organizations.
All this has been organized at great speed, in the
absence of national institutional capacity and with little
local experience of organizing anything on this scale
for many decades. I am therefore under no illusion about
the challenges ahead and the scope for things to go
awry, but if we remain vigilant and unified this process
could mark a positive, watershed moment for Somalia.
The road to peace and stability in Somalia will still
be a long one. The FIEIT declaration that the voting
for the regions of Hiraan and Middle Shabelle should
take place in Mogadishu rather than in those two
regions risks deepening clan differences related to the
formation of the last remaining proto-federal member
state. Efforts must therefore continue to advance an
inclusive and, ultimately, sustainable state formation
process in Hiraan and Middle Shabelle. Allow me to
recognize IGAD’s valiant efforts in that regard.
Violence remains a feature of life for too many
people. Al-Shabaab has continued to mount spectacular
attacks against soft targets, notably in Mogadishu. The
most egregious of these were on 21 August in Galkayo
and on 30 August against the Somali Youth League
hotel in Mogadishu. Civilians have been the main
victims. These attacks have underscored the urgency
of efforts both to degrade, defeat and dismantle Al
Shabaab and to address the conditions that make it
possible for the group to survive. AMISOM remains
vital to Somalia’s security. Its troops are paying a heavy
price to bring security to the country. They need to be
supported in their effort to take the fight to Al Shabaabcontrolled areas.
Somalia has also seen the repatriation of an
unprecedented number of refugees from Dadaab in

16-299703/9

S/PV.7778

The situation in Somalia

neighbouring Kenya. This has raised anxieties about
Somalia’s ability to absorb returnees, given an internally
displaced population already estimated at more than
1 million and extremely fragile host communities.
Efforts are under way, involving federal and federal
member state authorities, as well as the United Nations
and partners, to pursue durable solutions. Concerns
are also increasing about the growing number of
people — now close to 5 million — suffering from
malnutrition and food insecurity. I regret to say that
only 32 per cent of the humanitarian response plan has
been funded at this point.
And Somalis continue to face multiple human rights
deficits. On 4 September, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia, along with the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, issued a public
report on freedom of expression. While significant,
commendable legal and institutional measures are
being put in place by the Somali leadership — including
the passage of the national human rights commission
law — the fact is that harassment and intimidation of
journalists, members of Parliament and civil society
actors remains widespread.
The situation of women and children, including
children captured from Al-Shabaab and sentenced to
death, is of grave concern. The July visit of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict reinforced advocacy with both
the Federal Government and the Government of
Puntland regarding the need to uphold international
law, particularly the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, which Somalia ratified last year. Yesterday,
the Puntland authorities told my Deputy that they
would immediately transfer all children under 15 to a
rehabilitation centre and revisit the death sentences that
were handed down.
The challenges are considerable but, crucially,
progress is being made in almost every domain.
On 10 September, IGAD held a meeting of Heads of
State and Government in Mogadishu— the first such
summit on Somali soil in 42 years. The significance
and psychological impact of this should not be
underestimated. Central to continued progress will be
the arduous task of establishing institutions that are
both capable and trusted by all Somalis. Accountable
governance and capacity across the board is at the heart
of the State-building agenda. The good news is that
many of the conflicts between clans and power-brokers
that have plagued Somalia over the past decades have
4/9

27/09/2016

been converted into politics. Administrative capacity
is gradually being established around the emerging
federal architecture — an architecture that did not
exist a few years ago — and the political basis for that
institutional capacity, whether to strengthen the rule of
law, generate revenues, provide public services, fight
corruption or improve security, is broadening.
An important development has been the
emergence of the National Leadership Forum as a
key decision-making body. Its status will need to be
resolved, like so much else, through the constitutional
review. But its political value as a forum for bringing
the country’s leadership together, both from the
Federal Government and regional states, is beyond
doubt. That has been evident recently in the security
field, not only in approving the new policing model,
consistent with Somalia’s federal architecture, but in its
latest meeting two weeks ago, by deciding to establish
a National Security Committee. That provides the
international community a docking point for advancing
a comprehensive approach to security that encompasses
policing, community recovery and the extension
of State authority, and efforts to counter violent
extremism. I am delighted that the Government issued
a national strategy and action plan for the preventing
and countering of violent extremism only two weeks
ago.
A major priority now is to define and implement
a plan for structuring and strengthening the
Somali national security forces, at the same time
as strengthening the capacity of security forces to
accompany AMISOM in taking the fight back to
Al-Shabaab. The AU Commissioner for Peace and
Security has said that AMISOM’s transition will begin
in October 2018. There is therefore no time to lose
to build capable, accountable and affordable security
forces trusted by all Somalis.
Other key priorities, beyond the electoral process,
include the review and finalization of the federal
constitution, agreement on revenue and resource
management and sharing, preparations for one-person
one-vote elections in 2020, which will be a formidable
undertaking, and steps to attract both private and public
international investment, including through debt relief.
So there is no shortage of tasks at hand, but progress
towards them is encouraging.
Allow me to conclude by thanking the members
of the Security Council for their unified position on
16-29970

27/09/2016

The situation in Somalia

Somalia and for the advice and support that I continue
to receive. We are determined to ensure that the
electoral process is implemented, fully aware of the
risks, with no further delays, and we are aware of the
consequences if it is not seen as legitimate and complete.
But if all goes well, the stage is set for the Somalis to
take their country to a new level of membership of the
international community in the coming months.
The President: I thank Mr. Keating for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Madeira.
Mr. Madeira: I would like to express my full
agreement with everything that Ambassador Keating
said in his briefing. I shall therefore limit my
intervention to security aspects, specifically in relation
to security for the election itself, the security of the
candiates, the offensives and our exit strategy.
The African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
is working hand in hand with the Somali national
security forces and the election security task force,
and we are making progress. There was an issue with
Cadaado, and agreement was recently reached whereby
AMISOM would deploy in Cadaado in the coming days
to ensure that the security aspects of the election are
well looked after.
With regard to the security of the candidates, the
election security plan for the 2016 elections, jointly
adopted by the Federal Government of Somalia,
AMISOM and the United Nations, already foresaw
the possibility of requests for personal security, as is
already happening. However, the issue was equally
widely debated by members of the international
community accredited in Somalia and based in
Mogadishu and Nairobi, who devoted a specific
meeting to discussing the security to be provided to
traditional elders, candidates and other eminent persons
participating in the electoral process, the electorate,
election bodies, observers, election facilities, public
venues, accommodation premises and the community
in general, so as to ensure an incident-free election.
Participants unanimously concluded that, given the
large number of elders, candidates, eminent persons
and other entities in need of special protection and
security during the electoral period, it was materially
impossible to provide dedicated personal security to
individual candidates, elsers and eminent persons at
their residences or in the form of convoys and escorts,
due to reduced capacity and a scarcity of equipment and
other resources. However, it was agreed that collective

S/PV.7778

security for them would be possible. That would be
provided for a predefined period prior to, during and
after the elections, in specifically designated locations,
such as election centres, assembly points, polling
stations, some public venues and buildings, as well
as hotels, residential areas and other duly identified
accommodation premises.
In that context, we are currently seeing the
movement of various security groups converging onto
Mogadishu. That is causing a serious security problem,
as Al-Shabaab can just disguise themselves as such a
group and do damage. Somali national security forces
and AMISOM are working on this and discussing these
matters to see how these specific issues can be handled.
An important meeting will take place tomorrow in
that regard.
Another important aspect is the need to continue
the offensives to dislodge Al-Shabaab from its
hideouts and to degrade and disrupt their activities and
eventually destroy it. In that connection, it becomes
extremely important that this time the offensive not
just be for us to remove Al-Shabaab from its hideouts;
we need to effectively occupy the cities and towns
that Al-Shabaab presently occupies so that they do
not come back to retake them. To that end, we need
to work hand in hand with the forces in place, local
populations and Somali national forces. For that, those
forces and entities need support. Such support is not yet
forthcoming. It is important that specific attention be
given to this matter; otherwise we will continue to do
what we have done many times, removing Al-Shabaab
from towns and then having to do it again once they
return.
Capacity-building for the Somali security forces is
a central concern. There is no way that AMISOM or any
other external forces can bring lasting peace to Somalia
unless and until the Somalis themselves are capable
of taking over responsibility for the security of their
country. We have been given 21,000 uniformed troops,
which are presently benefiting from Security Councilapproved logistical support. Those forces are still
not capable of taking on Al-Shabaab in a sustainable
manner because they lack the basics — coordinated
training, a common doctrine, uniforms, equipment,
rifles and even barracks where they can be housed
and trained. We need to address those issues with the
required urgency.

16-299705/9

S/PV.7778

The situation in Somalia

As was rightly said, AMISOM is organizing
itself in a manner to be able to start leaving Somalia
by 2018. It would not be the right thing to do if by that
time Somalia is still not capable of taking care of its
security responsibilities.
What must be done in that regard is very clear. The
2016 African Union-AMISOM concept of operations
clearly outlines the steps that have to be taken, and
those steps start with us — dislodging Al-Shabaab
from the main towns in Lower Shabelle and from the
main port cities in the north-east of the country, and
to do that we need everyone to cooperate, particularly
the Somali National Army. The Commissioner for
Peace and Security presented a very detailed letter to
the appropriate United Nations bodies in New York.
We would like to ask the Council to look at that letter,
consider what each point means and aims to achieve
and give us a response as quickly as possible, because
the rainy season is starting and we need to launch our
offensives. A plan has already been adopted and we are
about to leave, but we badly need the logistical support
that has to be approved by the Council.
The President: I thank Mr. Madeira for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the member of the
Security Council who wishes to make a statement.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation has asked for the floor in the belief that
today’s meeting is informative not just for the Security
Council but for the membership in general. As an
elected, non-permanent member of the Council, we
feel that it is up to us to share the information with
the membership that elected us — that is, to share our
opinions about what is discussed at such meetings. We
feel that this helps improve transparency in our work.
I would like to thank Mr. Keating and Mr. Madeira
for their detailed briefings, and especially for their
excellent work and untiring dedication in what is an
extremely difficult area in every sense. We saw the
difficulties on the ground for ourselves when we visited
Mogadishu in May.
Uruguay believes that we have seen genuine
progress in recent months in creating a federal State in
Somalia, including preparing the framework needed for
a political transition this year. Somalia has embarked on
the process of transitioning power that will eventually
produce a new Parliament and Government. It is a
decisive and historic moment on the country’s path to
6/9

27/09/2016

consolidating a democratic, inclusive, stable and fully
empowered State. Somalia has also begun to prepare
the way for general elections in 2020 on the basis of
one person, one vote. That progress could still falter,
however, which is why Uruguay was very sorry to
hear the news received in just the past few hours of
another postponement of the election dates previously
announced for October and November. We strongly
urge the Somali authorities to stick to the new dates.
Uruguay deplores the continuing threat of the
terrorist group Al-Shabaab, which is the main threat to
peace and security in Somalia. It continues to be a latent
problem in the centre and southern parts of the country
in spite of the efforts to deal with it. Unfortunately it
appears that Al-Shabaab is likely to step up its activity
during the run-up to the elections. In our view, it seems
clear that security sector reform is key, especially
regarding the provision of fast and effective training for
the Somali National Army. Operations with the regional
forces should be planned and coordinated in order to
facilitate more effective participation by the National
Army in joint operations with the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), which will enable the
Federal Government’s security forces, including the
police, to take on more responsibility for maintaining
peace and security and protecting Somali citizens.
Uruguay is very concerned about the increased
violations of human rights in the first half of the
year, mainly as a result of security operations and
Al-Shabaab’s activities. The measures in place for
preventing sexual violence and protecting people from it
are still inadequate, and the issue is a particular problem
for internally displaced persons and civilians affected
by the conflict. Despite the significant commitments
for protecting children that the Somali authorities have
made in the past few years, the detention of children
for alleged links to Al-Shabaab is still worrying.
Uruguay calls on the Government of Somalia to ensure
that children are treated primarily as victims and
that its guiding principles are the best interests of the
children involved and international standards for their
protection. The death sentences that have been given
to children in Puntland are unacceptable and violate
international instruments regarding children.
Uruguay would particularly like to emphasize
the importance of protecting civilians, particularly
children, women and the elderly, and we urge the
Federal Government of Somalia to pursue mediation and
stability, especially in areas where access to supplies and
16-29970

27/09/2016

The situation in Somalia

humanitarian aid is vital. We reiterate that the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, AMISOM and
the international community should work more closely
than ever, and with better coordination, with regional
administrations and the Federal Government in order
to prioritize capacity-building and the strengthening
of regional institutions, so as to help regional
administrations to consolidate and gradually create the
conditions needed for providing governance, security
and basic services to local populations.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Somalia.
Mr. Omer (Somalia): I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on New Zealand’s stewardship of
the Security Council in the month of September. I am
grateful for this opportunity to brief the Council today.
There is a new dawn in Somalia. As I am speaking
here today, many aspirant parliamentarians are
returning to their constituencies to win over voters so
that they can represent them in the next Parliament.
Billboards and campaign material for the presidential
hopefuls are all over the city as the candidates seek to
win the hearts and minds of the Somali people ahead of
the election. That is a truly historic leap forward in terms
of democratization in Somalia, and clear evidence of
the spirit and values of democracy that are taking shape
in our country. It is clear how much progress has been
made, and Somalis are justly proud of the steps they
have taken to establish institutions, lay the foundations
for an inclusive federal State and rebuild their country
from the ground up. And the direction is upwards. It
may not be as rapid or as smooth as we would like, but
Somalia is making progress.
Somalia faces the dual challenge of advancing
development and reform initiatives in a complex
environment. With the support of our brave national
security services and the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), we are successfully fighting
a war against international terrorism. The threat is
indeed international, because today no country, no
matter how powerful, can insulate itself from terrorism.
Al-Shabaab, Al-Qaida, the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham, Boko Haram and others are a threat to all of us,
wherever we are, simply because we refuse to conform
to their futile, violent ideology. Terrorism is truly an
evil without purpose or geography and can be defeated
only in partnership across all sectors internationally.

S/PV.7778

Over the past four years, the Somali National
Army and AMISOM have regained key towns and
cities. Today, Al-Shabaab controls less than 10 percent
of the country’s territory. In recent months, many of
its key leaders have been eliminated and others have
defected, and their violent ideology is truly shunned by
the Somali people.
The Somali national forces and AMISOM have
proved that Al- Shabaab is vulnerable and divided and
can be defeated through coordinated military action
time and again. Owing to the success of the joint
operations of the Somali National Army and AMISOM,
Al-Shabaab has turned to small-team asymmetric
warfare tactics to conduct higher-impact terror attacks
against soft targets in Somalia and, increasingly, in
neighbouring countries.
In response, our Government is working with
partners and neighbours to enhance security cooperation
so as to enable us to respond to the threat together and
swiftly. The Somali Federal Government and the Somali
people are grateful to the troop-contributing countries
within AMISOM for their support in stabilizing our
nation. We fully recognize the great sacrifices that
their soldiers have made and continue to make in the
service of our country and our people’s future. Their
courage and service will never be forgotten, and their
memories will always be honoured by us.
In the long term, it is fundamental that the Somali
national security forces be in a position to take over
the entire security responsibilities of Somalia and for
Somalis from AMISOM. This is the only way we can
truly achieve sustainable peace and development both
in Somalia and across the region.
In order to achieve this, there is agreement on and
full understanding of the importance of an inclusive
political agreement on the future of Somali security
arrangements and the urgency of building up effective
security-sector reform in Somalia, ahead of the agreed
AMISOM drawdown in 2018.
The best evidence of our Government’s
commitment to leading on our national security is that
the security forces training and integration process is
ongoing and the new policing model has been endorsed
by all stakeholders. In addition, we are ensuring that
our national security forces work closely alongside
AMISOM to ensure that they put their training to
effective use and actively participate in liberating the

16-299707/9

S/PV.7778

The situation in Somalia

few remaining areas of the country held by Al-Shabaab
as soon as possible.
Furthermore, at the last National Leadership
Forum meeting last week, the national security policy
was endorsed. This will be our blueprint and guide to
ensuring a safer Somalia, region and world through
partnership and joint action. Last week’s National
Leadership Forum underscored the importance of
protecting our electoral process from terrorist spoilers
in all areas where elections are scheduled to happen.
On this matter, it was also agreed, during the historic
twenty-eighth Extraordinary Summit of the Heads
of State and Government of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), held in Mogadishu
last week, which was attended by the Presidents of
Uganda and of Kenya, the Prime Minister of Ethiopia
and delegations from Djibouti, the Sudan and other
IGAD member States, that the Somali national security
forces and AMISOM would work even more closely to
meet this need. While our commitment to defending our
country and taking full responsibility for our national
security is ironclad, there is still a need for further
training and mentoring for the national security forces
within a coordinated framework between the Somali
Federal Government and donors. In addition, there
is also a need to adequately equip our national forces
so that they can effectively respond to the AMISOM
drawdown in 2018. Therefore, the continuing financial
and technical assistance of valuable international
partners to the national security forces in a timely and
responsive manner is a must.
In this regard, we welcome the communiqué
of the special event for Somalia on security held in
London and co-hosted by Tobias Ellwood, the United
Kingdom Minister for the Middle East and Africa, and
Mike Penning, the Minister for the Armed Forces, on
7 September 2016, in which many of our partners were
also present and actively participated.
That being said, we recognize the concern that
delays in the electoral process raise for our partners,
and we are not blind to the need to demonstrate our
commitment to holding a credible, timely and inclusive
electoral process. I would like to take this opportunity
to reiterate the commitment of President Hassan
Sheikh Mohamud, the Federal Government of Somalia,
the National Leadership Forum and all political
stakeholders in Somalia to this process.
8/9

27/09/2016

The Federal Government of Somalia has worked
tirelessly in the past four years to reduce key threats to
peace, security and stability in Somalia. I would like
to reassure the Security Council of the unwavering
commitment of the Federal Government to holding a
credible and inclusive electoral process in 2016. The
Somali people are excited by this positive move towards
democracy, and the different electoral commissions,
as well as the Somali people in general, are working
tirelessly on the implementation of the electoral
mechanism in line with the new agreed timelines.
We are fully engaged in working to ensure that more
Somalis than ever before can have a say in the future
governance of their country and that Somalia’s positive
trajectory can be maintained.
This includes reserving 30 per cent of the seats in
the Upper and Lower Houses of Parliament for women,
as their representation and political participation is
central to our national progress. This is not just rhetoric.
To ensure there is no further delay to the electoral
process, the presidents of the existing and emerging
federal member states will be expected to submit the
names of candidates for the Upper House of the Federal
Parliament by 5 October. While the parliamentary
elections will be held from 23 October to 10 November,
the presidential election will now take place on
30 November.
The election of speakers of both houses of
Parliament will be held on 23 November. The Federal
Indirect Electoral Implementation Team also announced
a breakthrough on the electoral venue for the Hiraan
and Middle Shabelle regions, following negotiations
with traditional elders representing the two regions.
The electoral oversight team also called for the
speedy deployment of the African Union Mission
and the Somalia troops to Galmudug, the capital of
Cadaado, to bolster the security of the electoral process
in that federal member state. The Federal Indirect
Electoral Implementation Team also signalled the need
for an immediate solution to the issue of Somaliland’s
representation in the Upper House in order to ensure its
participation in this electoral process.
The transition from conflict to stability is a longterm endeavour. The electoral process in 2016 is an
essential step in the transition towards a democratic and
stable Somalia, and we are grateful for the support of
our partners and the Security Council in implementing
the process. The Somali people are ready and waiting
16-29970

27/09/2016

The situation in Somalia

for this process to be completed. The Somali leadership
is committed to doing so, and the only game in town
is the electoral process. While it has not happened
as quickly or gone as smoothly as we hoped, it will
happen, and it will happen within the new timeline we
have set out. I ask the Council to continue to support
us; in return, we will uphold our commitments to the

S/PV.7778

timeline in 2016 and forward to universal elections in
2020. We appreciate the Council’s support.
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

16-299709/9
