S/PRST/2011/7

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 April 2011
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6510th meeting of the Security Council, held on 6 April 2011, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The question
concerning Haiti”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong commitment to the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and unity of Haiti, and
emphasizes that the Government and people of Haiti bear the primary
responsibility for the attainment of peace and stability, and for the recovery
efforts in Haiti. The Council acknowledges the contribution the international
community is making to support the stabilization process in Haiti, including
the strengthening of its legislative, judicial and executive institutions.
“The Security Council recognizes the interconnected nature of the
challenges in Haiti, and reaffirms that sustainable progress on security,
institutional capacity building, including rule of law, as well as consolidation
of national government structures, democracy, promotion and protection of
human rights and development, are mutually reinforcing. The Council
appreciates the efforts made by the Haitian Government and the international
community to address these challenges.
“The Security Council welcomes the ongoing electoral process in Haiti
and stresses the importance of its completion in a peaceful, credible and
legitimate way, which will contribute to the consolidation of democracy, allow
for the completion of constitutional reform and provide a strong basis for the
continuing reconstruction efforts. The Council recognizes the important
contribution of MINUSTAH and the OAS and other international, regional and
sub-regional organizations in supporting the political process.
“The Security Council underlines that security and development are
closely interlinked and mutually reinforcing, and reiterates the need for
security to be accompanied by social and economic development. In this
context, the Security Council acknowledges that rapid and tangible progress in
the recovery and reconstruction of Haiti is fundamental to achieving lasting
stability.
“The Security Council recognizes the various challenges in Haiti and
stresses MINUSTAH’s fundamental role in supporting the Haitian authorities
in creating a secure and stable environment conducive to economic recovery

11-29061 (E) 060411

*1129061*

S/PRST/2011/7

including by implementing labour intensive projects, and the provision of
basic services in Haiti.
“The Security Council expresses its concern at the situation of vulnerable
groups, including internally displaced persons, children as victims of
trafficking, and the increase of sexual and gender-based violence. In this
regard, the Security Council encourages MINUSTAH and the United Nations
Country Team to continue assisting the Government of Haiti in providing
adequate protection to the civilian population, with particular attention to the
needs of internally displaced persons and other vulnerable groups, especially
women and children.
“The Security Council stresses that there can be no genuine stability or
sustainable development in Haiti without strengthening its democratic
institutions. In this regard the Council emphasizes the importance of
promoting the rule of law in strengthening the Haitian institutions. The
Council further reaffirms the responsibility of MINUSTAH in supporting the
Haitian State in the fields of rule of law, good governance, extension of State
authority and the promotion and protection of human rights, in accordance
with its mandate.
“The Security Council stresses the crucial importance of strengthening
the Haitian National Police to ensure its ability to maintain law and order and
to tackle violent crime, particularly sexual and gender-based violence, as well
as gang violence and transnational organized crime. In this regard, the Council
welcomes the continued support of the United Nations and the international
community to the Haitian authorities and calls for MINUSTAH continued
support in the vetting, mentoring and training of the Haitian National Police
and corrections personnel and intensification of cooperation to face this
challenge, including assistance in counter-narcotic efforts and training in
human rights.
“The Security Council recognizes Haiti’s long-term recovery challenge
and calls upon the international community to continue to support Haitian
authorities in order to ensure that, the most vulnerable segments of the
population have access to basic social services and justice.
“The Security Council acknowledges the efforts of the donor community
and calls upon them to fulfil without delay all pledges, including those made at
the International Donors’ Conference “Towards a New Future for Haiti” held
on 31 March 2010. The Council welcomes the work of the Interim Haiti
Recovery Commission in focusing donor efforts on the top priority areas for
recovery, and encourages all reconstruction donors, nongovernmental and
international organizations to continue to channel their efforts through the
Commission.
“The Council reiterates the need for Member States and other
stakeholders to continue to support the Haitian authorities in strengthening
Haiti’s core governance structures, implementing the Government of Haiti’s
action plan for National Recovery and Development, as an efficient and
coherent framework.
“While acknowledging the willingness of the international community to
continue to partner with the government of Haiti in establishing future long-

2

11-29061

S/PRST/2011/7

term security and development strategies that are mindful of a cohesive
framework, the Security Council stresses the importance of consistent
coordination and joint efforts among, the Government of Haiti, the United
Nations, the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission and other stakeholders with a
view to producing sustainable results.
“The Security Council welcomes the willingness of regional and sub
regional organizations to contribute to the ongoing process of stabilization,
reconstruction and further consolidation of democracy in Haiti. In this respect,
the Council calls on MINUSTAH to continue to work closely with such
organizations, as well as international financial institutions and other
stakeholders, among them the Organization of the American States (OAS), the
European Union (EU), the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), Union of
South American Nations (UNASUR) and the Inter-American Development
Bank.
“The Security Council expresses its appreciation to the Member States
who support the recovery and stabilization process in Haiti, including the troop
and police contributing countries of MINUSTAH. The Council expresses its
gratitude to the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for Haiti, former United
States President William J. Clinton, and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ambassador Edmond Mulet and the personnel of
MINUSTAH for their dedication and personal involvement in the ongoing
stabilization and recovery efforts in Haiti in accordance with their respective
mandates and in a strong coordination with all United Nations entities and
Member States.”

11-29061

3
