S/2016/931

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 November 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006)
Reporting period from 25 June to 4 November 2016

I. Introduction
1.
The present report provides a comprehensive assessment of the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) since my previous report of 24 June
2016 (S/2016/572).
2.
The situation in the area of operations of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) remained generally calm, including in the context of the tenth
anniversary of the July-August 2006 conflict and related rhetoric on both sides.
Tensions rose among communities in the Shab‘a area during construction works
conducted by the Israel Defense Forces south of the Blue Line in the Shab‘a Farms.
Israeli and Lebanese authorities maintained their commitment to resolution 1701
(2006), the cessation of hostilities and stability along the Blue Line. My Spe cial
Coordinator for Lebanon and UNIFIL continued to engage accordingly. There was
no progress, however, on the parties’ outstanding obligations under the resolution
and towards a permanent ceasefire.
3.
The resilience of Lebanon is increasingly contingent upon and at risk from the
Syrian conflict. The security situation remained relatively calm thanks in large part
to the continuing robust performance of the Lebanese Armed Forces along the
Syrian border and with other security services in counter -terrorism operations
throughout the country. Nonetheless, the threat of terrorist attacks persisted, as
illustrated in the two suicide bombings in Al-Qa‘ah on 27 June and the bombing in
Zahlah on 31 August. The situation in the border areas remained fragile, with the
Lebanese Armed Forces engaged in ongoing operations against the Islamic State of
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Nusrah Front militants.
4.
During the reporting period, there was a breakthrough in the resolution of the
two-and-a-half-year vacancy of the presidency of Lebanon, as a result of which the
Government of Prime Minister Tammam Salam became a caretaker government.
Agreement on a new government and its ministerial statement remains pending,
however, while preparations for the 2017 parliamentary elections are ongoing. In
my meeting with Prime Minister Salam on 20 September, in the margin of the
General Assembly, I expressed my hope for the election of a president of the

16-19322 (E)

091116

*1619322*

S/2016/931

Republic and for a functioning government and parliament for Lebanon. We
discussed the ongoing impact of the Syrian conflict on Lebanon and welcomed the
united international support for the country’s security and stability, including
through assistance to the Lebanese Armed Forces. I also thanked Lebanon for its
generous hospitality to refugees from the Syrian Arab Republic and stressed the
need for the international community to do more to share the responsibility of
assisting their presence in Lebanon.
5.
The number of Syrian refugees registered with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in Lebanon remained stable,
owing to the policy put in place by the Government in 2014 and 2015 to restrict
access to exceptional humanitarian cases only. As at 31 October, 1,033,513 Syrian
refugees were registered with UNHCR, including 47,138 in the UNIFIL area of
operations. At the high-level plenary meeting on addressing large movements of
refugees and migrants, held on 20 September, Prime Minister Salam highlighted the
severe problems posed by the refugee crisis to the country’s stability, security,
economy and public services, emphasizing that Lebanon could not cope with such
an “existential challenge” alone.
6.
The situation in the Palestinian refugee camps remained generally calm,
except in Ein El Helweh camp, where tensions flared following the surrender to the
Lebanese Armed Forces of dozens of Palestinian individuals suspected of
involvement in militant activities since 24 July. On 22 September, on an exceptional
basis, the Lebanese Armed Forces conducted an operation inside Ein El Helweh
camp to arrest a Palestinian national, suspected of being a prominent member of
ISIL, who was planning terrorist attacks in Lebanon. My Special Coordinator
visited that camp to support efforts to keep stability there.

II. Implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
A.

Situation in the area of operations of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon
7.
On 19 August, after tensions had built for some days, approximately 200
individuals, including a number of journalists, gathered in the vicinity of United
Nations position 4-7C, south of Shab‘a village, to protest against works by the Israel
Defense Forces to prepare a driveable track in the disputed Shab‘a Farms area sou th
of the Blue Line, which had commenced on 7 August. Prior to the demonstration,
UNIFIL and Lebanese Armed Forces personnel engaged closely with the local
communities to mitigate tensions and prevent incidents along the Blue Line. During
the gathering, 100 individuals, led by a local member of Parliament, crossed south
of the Blue Line despite warnings by personnel from the Lebanese Armed Forces
and UNIFIL. Lebanese Armed Forces and Israel Defense Forces personnel remained
at some distance from the Blue Line. Demonstrators returned north of the Blue Line
soon after, without any incident. Subsequently, UNIFIL and Lebanese Armed Forces
activities in the area focused on further reducing tensions.
8.
During the reporting period, Blue Line ground violations wer e mainly
committed by shepherds with their flocks in the Shab‘a Farms and Bastrah areas

2/18

16-19322

S/2016/931

(Sector East) and by farmers cultivating their fields in the Rumaysh area (Sector
West), despite warnings from UNIFIL. On 16 July, Israel Defense Forces fired a
warning shot in the air and briefly seized a shepherd’s flock that had crossed south
of the Blue Line in the Shab‘a Farms area. The Israel Defense Forces subsequently
released the flock. Following previously observed seasonal patterns, Lebanese
civilians violated the Blue Line while swimming in the Al Wazzani River. On two
occasions, groups of three and six persons, respectively, crossed south of the Blue
Line while taking photographs in the vicinity of Udaysah, Mays al -Jabal and Hula
(Sector East). Lebanese civilian construction workers crossed south of the Blue Line
on several occasions when installing drainage pipes and paving the access road to a
well in the Blida area (Sector East). On 18 August, UNIFIL observed four members
of the Lebanese Armed Forces intelligence branch crossing approximately 10 metres
south of the Blue Line for about five minutes in the vicinity of Rumaysh.
9.
UNIFIL generally enjoyed freedom of movement throughout the area of
operations. In a few isolated incidents, UNIFIL encountered unfriendly behaviour
and obstruction of movement, predominantly in Sector West. In the most serious
incident, during the night of 28 August, a UNIFIL patrol was blocked by a group of
more than 40 individuals in Bint Jubayl (Sector West), who alleged that the patrol
had taken photographs of the community. A standoff with the crowd developed
during which the patrol was subjected to threatening behaviour, and some of the
vehicles’ tyres were deflated. The situation was resolved with the assistanc e of the
Lebanese Armed Forces.
10. In another incident on 28 September, an Observer Group Lebanon patrol
observed from a distance nine men in civilian dress, carrying cameras and wooden
sticks, violate the Blue Line north-east of Kfar Kila. Subsequently, the men who had
crossed the Blue Line ran towards the Observer Group Lebanon vehicle, surrounded
it, and damaged the car by throwing stones and using their sticks. There were no
injuries to personnel and the patrol was able to leave the scene. Later the same day,
some of the nine men sustained injuries when they hit a mine approximately 2 km
north of United Nations position 9-64 in an area close to the Blue Line.
11. The UNIFIL Head of Mission and Force Commander emphasized to Lebanese
Armed Forces interlocutors that the mandate of UNIFIL requires it to have freedom
of movement throughout its area of operations. The Lebanese Armed Forces strives
to ensure that the local population understands that UNIFIL can and must patrol
unimpeded on its own in the area of operations.
12. UNIFIL continued to observe civilians with unauthorized weapons, mostly for
hunting, in the area of operations. With the onset of the hunting season, the
incidents significantly increased, mainly in the areas of Bastrah, Mays al -Jabal and
Blida (Sector East). On 16 September, the Lebanese Armed Forces called upon
Lebanese citizens to abide by a ban on hunting and to refrain from carrying
weapons of any kind in the area south of the Litani River. On 18 September,
UNIFIL observed two armed hunters in Dibil (Sector West) who were apprehended
by Lebanese Armed Forces personnel. On several occasions, UNIFIL observed the
presence or firing of small arms, including during weddings and funerals. In all
cases, UNIFIL informed the Lebanese Armed Forces of the viol ations.

16-19322

3/18

S/2016/931

13. The Israel Defense Forces continued to allege that Hizbullah continues to
maintain military infrastructure and equipment in southern Lebanon. UNIFIL
monitors the area of operations and the Blue Line and reports all violations of
resolution 1701 (2006) that it observes, including the presence of unauthorized
armed personnel or weapons. In accordance with its mandate, UNIFIL does not
proactively search private property for weapons in the south un less there is credible
evidence of a violation of resolution 1701 (2006), including an imminent threat of
hostile activity from that location. Where specific information is received regarding
the illegal presence of armed personnel, weapons or infrastructure inside its area of
operations, UNIFIL, in cooperation with the Lebanese Armed Forces, remains
determined to act with all means available within its mandate and capabilities. To
date, UNIFIL has neither been provided with, nor found, evidence of the
unauthorized transfer of arms into its area of operations. The Lebanese Armed
Forces command continued to confirm that it would act immediately to put a stop to
any illegal activity in contravention of resolution 1701 (2006) and relevant
Government decisions.
14. Israel continued to violate Lebanese airspace almost daily, mostly with
unmanned aerial vehicles, but also with fixed-wing aircraft, including fighter jets, in
violation of resolution 1701 (2006) and of Lebanese sovereignty. UNIFIL protested
to the Israel Defense Forces about the overflights and called upon the Government
of Israel to stop them immediately. The Government of Lebanon also protested
against the air violations to UNIFIL.
15. The Israeli occupation of northern Ghajar and an adjacent area north of the
Blue Line continued, in violation of resolution 1701 (2006) and of Lebanese
sovereignty. To date, Israel has not responded to the proposal submitted by UNIFIL
to both parties in 2011 concerning security arrangements aimed at facilitating the
withdrawal of the Israel Defense Forces from the occupied area. The Lebanese
Armed Forces informed UNIFIL in July 2011 of their agreement to the proposal.
16. The relations between UNIFIL and the local population remained positive and
the Mission met regularly with its representatives. In addition to hol ding separate
meetings with religious and municipal representatives, UNIFIL continued to
implement quick-impact projects focused on improving access to basic services,
facilitating the economic and social development of the local communities and
promoting the empowerment of women. UNIFIL continued to support capacity building of the Lebanese Civil Defence in firefighting and civil -military cooperation
with the Lebanese Armed Forces. UNIFIL contingents provided medical, dental and
veterinary assistance to the local population.
17. The Lebanese Armed Forces maintained two brigades in the area south of the
Litani River. In the light of the tense security situation along the border with the
Syrian Arab Republic, the Lebanese Armed Forces maintained a reinforce d presence
in the north-eastern part of the UNIFIL area of operations (Shab‘a village and the
Arqub area). During the tensions that occurred in the area of Shab‘a Farms, the
Lebanese Armed Forces temporarily deployed reinforcements. As part of a rotation
of troops in the country, the Lebanese Armed Forces replaced the brigade in Sector
East of the UNIFIL area of operations in October.

4/18

16-19322

S/2016/931

18. UNIFIL conducted an average of 13,337 operational activities each month
throughout the area of operations, including patrols, checkpoints and observation
tasks. The number of operational activities carried out by UNIFIL in close
coordination with the Lebanese Armed Forces was maintained at around 10 per cent.
UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces continued to conduct foot pa trols (“market
walks”) in villages and urban areas, providing opportunities for regular direct
contact between peacekeepers and the local population.
19. In accordance with its mandate, the UNIFIL Maritime Task Force, which
currently comprises two frigates, three corvettes and two fast patrol boats, carried
out maritime interdiction activities and provided training for the Lebanese Armed
Forces Navy. During the reporting period, the Maritime Task Force hailed 2,039
ships. The Lebanese authorities inspected and cleared 516 vessels. UNIFIL
conducted a total of 312 joint exercises, workshops and training courses with the
Lebanese Armed Forces, of which 209 were conducted with their Navy, contributing
to enhancing operational capabilities and effectiveness, incl uding on maritime
interdiction, the use of coastal radar, boarding and medical support, as well as
mutual understanding of operations.
20. The Maritime Task Force maintained a visible presence in the southern part of
the area of maritime operations to prevent tensions between Israel and Lebanon.
UNIFIL does not have a mandate to monitor the line of buoys, which was installed
unilaterally by Israel and is not recognized by the Government of Lebanon or the
United Nations. The Israel Defense Forces continued to carry out frequent
maintenance activities at the buoys, at times with divers. On several occasions,
Israel Defense Forces patrol boats south of the line of buoys fired machine gun
rounds or flares and dropped explosive charges to turn away Lebanese fishi ng boats.

B.

Security and liaison arrangements
21. The UNIFIL Head of Mission and Force Commander was in frequent contact
with Lebanese and Israeli authorities and facilitated two tripartite meetings,
including on ways to explore concrete solutions to local sources of tension and
thereby contribute to building trust between the two sides. In the tripartite forum
and in bilateral meetings with UNIFIL, the parties consistently conveyed and
demonstrated their commitment to the implementation of resoluti on 1701 (2006)
and to respect and maintain stability along and across the Blue Line. Both sides
stated to UNIFIL their keen interest in not letting developments in the Syrian Arab
Republic destabilize the situation in southern Lebanon and northern Israel.
22. Nevertheless, tensions occasionally increased in the vicinity of the Blue Line,
in particular in response to the works carried out by the Israel Defense Forces in the
Shab‘a Farms area, south of the Blue Line. Following the initial communication to
UNIFIL by the Israel Defense Forces that they would commence construction works
on 7 August, UNIFIL immediately requested details on the nature, purpose and
scope of the proposed works, and asked the Israel Defense Forces to allow time for
coordination with the Lebanese Armed Forces. The Lebanese Armed Forces
protested strongly to UNIFIL against the works, which it considered to be located
inside the occupied Lebanese Shab‘a Farms and to affect the nature of the terrain
and change its features. The UNIFIL Head of Mission and Force Commander

16-19322

5/18

S/2016/931

remained in ongoing contact with both sides, with a view to finding an agreed and
coordinated way forward, reducing tensions in the area on the Lebanese side and
preventing incidents. The matter was discussed twice in tripartite meetings on
25 August and 22 September, while the works were ongoing. UNIFIL maintained an
enhanced presence in the area, including with observers from Observer Group
Lebanon, and intensified its monitoring activity. The Lebanese Armed Forces also
monitored the situation, including by deploying reinforcements to the area prior to a
demonstration announced for 21 August, thereby preventing further violations of the
Blue Line and maintaining calm among the population to the extent possible.
23. The parties continued to actively engage in a constructive manner in the
tripartite meetings regularly facilitated by UNIFIL, during which they addressed
violations of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), including ground violations,
Israeli air violations and the continued occupation of northern Ghajar. The parties
also raised activities that had been considered provocations by the other side. A key
objective of the Force’s engagement, through the tripartite mechanism and
bilaterally, was to assist the parties in finding mutually agreeable security
arrangements and confidence-building measures to mitigate the scope for tensions
or incidents in sensitive areas along the Blue Line, including those linked to
seasonal agricultural activities.
24. Throughout the period, UNIFIL encouraged the Lebanese Armed Forces and
the Israel Defense Forces to use more proactively the established liaison mechanism
to share information on planned activities and deployments, in particular in
sensitive areas along the Blue Line. The Lebanese Armed Forces notified UNIFIL of
an exercise in the Arqub area on 15 September well in advance, which allowed
UNIFIL to duly inform the Israel Defense Forces and to be present on both sides of
the Blue Line throughout the exercise.
25. UNIFIL continued its efforts with the parties to mark the Blue Line visibly on
the ground. UNIFIL demining teams supported the marking process by clearing
access lanes through minefields to six marker locations. Construction of 4 markers
were completed, while 20 are under construction; 51 points are in the measuring
phase and 15 points remain to be verified by the parties. In addition, UNIFIL
continued to refurbish markers to ensure that they were intact and could fulfil their
function. As a result, the total figure for Blue Line work progress, as at 17 October
2016, was 325 demined, 273 measured, 255 constructed, 238 verified and 184
refurbished.
26. There continues to be no progress towards the establishment of a UNIFIL
liaison office in Tel Aviv.
27. As part of the strategic dialogue process with the Lebanese Armed Forces,
UNIFIL pursued efforts to promote assistance by international donors to the
Lebanese Armed Forces in the UNIFIL area of operations. Together with the Office
of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon, UNIFIL participated in the
Lebanese Armed Forces Executive Military Commission and consulted with
representatives of international donors in Beirut, with a view to facilitating resource
mobilization for the Lebanese Armed Forces in support of responsibilities under
resolution 1701 (2006).

6/18

16-19322

S/2016/931

28. In its resolution 2305 (2016), the Security Council, bearing in mind the
strategic priorities and recommendations identified in my letter of 12 March 2012
(S/2012/151) as a result of the strategic review of UNIFIL, expressed the need for a
follow-up and update. In addition, the Council requested me, in accordance with
global peacekeeping best practice, to conduct a strategic review of UNIFIL,
examining the structure of its uniformed and civilian components an d related
resources, in an effort to ensure that the Force is configured most appropriately to
fulfil its mandated tasks. In that regard, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
will consult with a number of Member States and troop -contributing countries, as
well as UNIFIL, on the best way forward. The Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, in close coordination with UNIFIL, intends to complete the review by
February 2017. I intend to present its major findings and conclusions to the Council
once the review is finalized.

C.

Disarming armed groups
29. The maintenance of arms by Hizbullah and other groups outside the control of
Lebanon continued to restrict the State’s ability to exercise full sovereignty and
authority over its territory. In a statement to the Security Council on 12 July, the
Permanent Representative of Israel stated that Hizbullah had never stopped its
military build-up and had only enhanced its military arsenal since the adoption of
resolution 1701 (2006), asserting that the group now possessed more than 120,000
rockets and missiles, compared with 7,000 rockets in 2006. He further asserted that
Hizbullah had transformed the villages of southern Lebanon into terror outposts by
placing rocket launchers and storing missiles in civilian areas, and warned that
Israel would defend its citizens in the most vigorous and forceful way possible
against any “miscalculation” by Hizbullah. In a speech on 13 August, the Secretary
General of Hizbullah, Hassan Nasrallah, spoke of the continued mutual deterrence
between Hizbullah and Israel, reiterating that there was not a single point in
occupied Palestine that could not be targeted by the rockets of the resistance in
Lebanon. On 6 October, the head of Hizbullah’s parliamentary bloc, Mohammed
Raad, publicly stated that the resistance was growing in strength, equipment and
hardware, and training on new weapons they had not used before.
30. Since 1 August, the Lebanese Armed Forces and security services were
reported to have arrested 217 individuals suspected of affiliation with extremist
groups or involvement in terrorist activities throughout Lebanon, bringing the total
number of terrorism-related arrests since January to more than 1,700. On
2 September, two Syrian intelligence officers were indicted for their alleged
involvement in the twin suicide bombings against two Sunni mosques in Tripoli in
2013. On 14 October, the Lebanese Armed Forces and the General Security
Directorate reportedly arrested members of 10 terrorist sleeper cells in various parts
of the country suspected of plotting attacks during Ashura, including two would-be
ISIL suicide bombers preparing attacks against religious sites in Beirut’s southern
suburb. The security authorities also reportedly dismantled a terror cell and
identified a weapons warehouse in Bhamdun that supplied ISIL and the Nusrah
Front, confiscating a large cache of arms. On 18 October, the authorities arrested a
senior member of the Nusrah Front in Arsal. On 20 October, the General Security
Directorate announced the arrest of eight Syrian nationals for belonging to terrorist

16-19322

7/18

S/2016/931

groups and for allegedly preparing a series of suicide attacks against UNIFIL patrols
as well as in tourist areas.
31. There was no progress in the dismantling of the military bases maintained by
the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command and Fatah
al-Intifada, which continue to compromise Lebanese sovereignty and impede the
ability of the State to effectively monitor and control parts of the border.
32. On 9 October, the Arab Tawhid Party announced the formation of the “Tawhid
Brigades” to operate in all Lebanese regions alongside the Lebanese Armed Forces
and security services. The announcement came amid reports of localize d initiatives
at self-defence in various localities, including in the aftermath of the attacks in
Al-Qa‘ah.
33. The situation in the Palestinian refugee camp of Ein El Helweh remained tense
in the context of ongoing intelligence efforts by the Lebanese Ar med Forces and
Palestinian factions to curtail the presence of extremist groups. On 26 July, the
Lebanese Armed Forces reportedly thwarted plans by ISIL and the Nusrah Front to
perpetrate terrorist attacks inside and outside the camp, including in Sayda an d
Beirut. From 24 July onward, some 60 individuals, including 10 prominent figures
suspected of affiliation with militant groups, surrendered to the Lebanese Armed
Forces as part of a deal between the Lebanese authorities and Palestinian factions.
The assassination on 19 September of a Palestinian accused of being a Lebanese
Armed Forces informant triggered unrest in the camp that caused institutions
affiliated with the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA) to close for two days. On 22 September, the Lebanese
Armed Forces arrested alleged ISIL “emir” Imad Yassine, a Palestinian national
suspected of staging a bombing campaign across Lebanon on behalf of terrorist
organizations, inside Ein El Helweh camp.
34. On 14 September, the Government of Lebanon, with the support of my Special
Coordinator, launched nationwide consultations to develop a national plan of action
for the prevention of violent extremism. Based on the United Nations prevention of
violent extremism strategy in Lebanon, consultations are expected to involve a
broad range of stakeholders, including civil society, to enable the Lebanese
authorities to adopt practical preventive measures.

D.

Arms embargo and border control
35. Assertions of ongoing arms transfers to Hizbullah continued. In a speech on
24 June, Hizbullah leader Nasrallah stated that the budget of Hizbullah, its salaries,
expenses, weapons and arsenal were all from the Islamic Republic of Iran and that
the money reached Hizbullah just like it received the rockets with which it
threatened Israel, and thanked the Islamic Republic of Iran for its support.
Referencing those statements in a letter addressed to me dated 5 July, the Permanent
Representative of Israel asked me to demand that the Islamic Republic of Iran
comply with resolutions 1701 (2006) and 1559 (2004) and stop transferring
weapons to terrorist organizations. The United Nations takes the allegations
seriously, particularly given the statements by the Secretary General of Hizbullah,
but is not in a position to verify them independently.

8/18

16-19322

S/2016/931

36. Hizbullah remained openly engaged in the conflict in the Syrian Arab
Republic, and others from Lebanon are also reported to have joined armed groups
fighting there. Also in his speech on 24 June, Hassan Nasrallah stated that Hizbullah
would increase its “large” presence in Aleppo and would remain engaged in the
fighting there, noting that it was not possible to separate Lebanon from
developments in the region, particularly in the Syrian Arab Republic and Iraq.
37. There was a further decrease in recorded instances of cross-border fire from
the Syrian Arab Republic into Lebanon, including nine incidents of shooting and
nine incidents of shelling. But the situation along the border remained tense, with
the Lebanese Armed Forces conducting ongoing operations against threats and
infiltration attempts from armed extremists. Clashes with militants, including ISIL
and the Nusrah Front, concentrated around the towns of Arsal, R’as Ba‘albak and
Al-Qa‘ah. On 15 August, a roadside bomb targeted a Lebanese Armed Forces
vehicle outside Arsal, lightly wounding five soldiers. On 16 October, a Lebanese
Armed Forces officer was killed in Arsal by suspected ISIL militants. Hizbullah also
continued to engage in fighting with ISIL and the Nusrah Front in the border area,
and an increased number of clashes took place between militants from ISIL and the
Nusrah Front.
38. The security plans for Tripoli, the Biqa‘ governorate and southern Beirut
continued to be implemented. On 27 June, eight suicide bombers detonated
themselves in the north-eastern border town of Al-Qa‘ah, killing five other people.
There was no claim of responsibility for the attack, the first in a Christian village in
Lebanon since the start of the Syrian conflict. Prime Minister Salam publicly asked
residents to refrain from “chaotic self-defence”. Interior Minister Machnouk stated
that the attackers were not from among the local Syrian refugees, and concerns
regarding retaliatory attacks against refugees did not materialize. On 14 July, three
suspects were charged with involvement in the attack. On 31 August, a roadside
bomb exploded in the nearby town of Zahlah, killing one woman. On 11 October,
the military prosecutor charged Sheikh Bassam Tarras in relation with the bombing
on suspicion of links with ISIL militants. On 19 October, my Special Coordinator
visited the north-eastern border area, including Al-Qa‘ah, Zahlah, Harmal and
Labwah, in support of the moderation shown by local residents following the attacks
and the work of the Lebanese Armed Forces.
39. The Lebanese Armed Forces continued to update their capabilities
development plan to better respond to security challenges. International assistance
to the Lebanese Armed Forces continued, including the delivery of equipment worth
more than $50 million from the United States of America and continued assistance
by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and others to
strengthen the border capacity of the Lebanese Armed Forces. Efforts to complete
the deployment of land border regiments and watchtowers along the entirety of the
border continued to progress. By 30 September, outstanding senior military
appointments were confirmed, including the extension of Lebanese Armed Forces
Commander General Kahwaji for another year.
40. Further to the London Conference on Syria, the Lebanese authorities reviewed
the regulatory framework governing access by Syrian refugees to the labour market.
They replaced the “pledge not to work”, which was to be signed by all refugees,
with a “pledge to abide by Lebanese law” to allow for the legal employment of

16-19322

9/18

S/2016/931

Syrian refugees in authorized sectors. Discussions are ongoing regarding the
temporary waiving of residency fees. UNHCR and the Ministry of Social Affairs are
working on a “certificate of attestation” that would clarify the legal status of
refugees and give them more mobility in Lebanon.
41. Despite the level of international assistance, self-reliance among the refugees
is not achieved and refugees are surviving on the bare minimum, having exhausted
their limited resources. Some 71 per cent of Syrian refugees in Lebanon live below
the poverty line, marked by precarious food intake and nutrition and housing issues.
Some 30 per cent of the Lebanese population also live below the poverty line and
10 per cent live in extreme poverty.
42. As at 30 August, available resources for Lebanon stood at $1.57 billion, with
$1.22 billion already disbursed or committed for 2016. That includes $979 million
provided to United Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations for the
2016 Lebanon Crisis Response Plan, which is now 47 per cent funded. That marks
an increase of 48 per cent in international funding for Lebanon since June. At the
first steering committee meeting of the Concessional Financing Facility in Beirut on
28 July, Lebanon presented three priority projects and requested $293 million in
concessional loan support.
43. The number of Palestine refugees from the Syrian Arab Republic decreased
from 40,000 to 30,000 people. An estimated 65 per cent of Palestine refugees in
Lebanon and 90 per cent of Palestine refugees from the Syrian Arab Republic live in
poverty, and unemployment reaches 23 per cent among the former and 53 per cent
among the latter. On 6 October, the European Union announced a new allocation of
$13 million for the reconstruction of Nahr el-Bared camp.
44. On 5 October, the United Nations strategic framework for Lebanon for 20172020 was formally adopted by the Government of Lebanon. Based on a “whole-ofLebanon” approach, the framework outlines an integrated response by the United
Nations system in Lebanon to help address threats to stability, prevent conflict and
improve socioeconomic prospects.

E.

Landmines and cluster bombs
45. Five manual mine-clearance teams, one explosive ordnance disposal team and
one mechanical mine-clearance team continued to be deployed in the UNIFIL area
of operations. UNIFIL demining teams cleared 1,208 m 2 of land to provide access to
Blue Line points and destroyed 23 items. The United Nations Mine Action Service
conducted 56 quality assurance visits to demining sites and nine safety monitoring
visits to refurbishment sites, as well as five landmine/explosive remnants of war
safety training sessions. The Mine Action Service handed over demining equipment
to the Lebanon Mine Action Centre. In response to the mine incident of
14 September, UNIFIL identified additional measures to mitigate the risk of future
incidents related to landmines and/or explosive remnants of war.

10/18

16-19322

S/2016/931

F.

Delineation of borders
46. No progress was made towards the delineation or demarcation of the
Lebanese-Syrian border during the reporting period, including in areas where it is
uncertain or disputed. There was likewise no progress on the Shab‘a Farms. In a
statement to the Security Council on 12 July, the Permanent Representative of
Lebanon reiterated the country’s readiness to work towards closing the chapter of
the Shab‘a Farms and Kfar Shuba Hills occupation by Israel, recalling that his
Government welcomed the provisional definition of the Shab‘a Farms area proposed
in my report of 30 October 2007 on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
(S/2007/641) as a starting point. However, there has still been no reaction from
Israel or the Syrian Arab Republic to that proposal.

G.

Political and institutional stability
47. Consistent with the statement by the President of the Security Council of
22 July (S/PRST/2016/10), my Special Coordinator conducted intensified contacts
with Lebanese, regional and international parties, including through the
International Support Group for Lebanon in Beirut, with the aim of helping Lebanon
overcome its political and institutional crisis. My Special Coordinator continued to
regularly convene the representatives of the Group in Beirut. Following a joint
meeting with Prime Minister Salam on 15 September, my Special Coordinator and
the representatives of the permanent members of the Security Council in Beirut
called on all Lebanese parties to enable government institutions to function
effectively and to proceed with the election of a president, and welcomed the
intention of the Government to take steps to ensure that the 2017 parliamentary
elections were held on time.
48. As noted by Prime Minister Salam in his address to the General Assembly on
22 September, Lebanon has been undergoing a severe political crisis, the apex of
which was the inability of Parliament to elect a president. He stressed that the crisis
had led to a quasi-paralysis of the legislative authority and to a slowdown of the
work of the executive, and had had negative repercussions on the State’s economic
situation.
49. Systematic political obstruction by some parties, often accompanied by
inflammatory language, has been particularly damaging, as it invites divisions along
sectarian lines. On 25 August, the Free Patriotic Movement announced its boycott of
Cabinet meetings and of the parliamentary dialogue, and threatened to hold mass
street protests. The dialogue between the Future Movement and Hizbullah and the
parliamentary dialogue process continued under the auspices of Speaker Nabih
Berri, but the latter stalled after its most recent session on 5 September. The Cabinet
convened only a dozen meetings, mostly on technical matters, owing to open
disagreement among its members and threats of resignation or suspension of
participation by some Ministers.
50. On 31 October, Parliament elected Free Patriotic Movement founder Michel
Aoun as President of Lebanon, and Future Movement leader Saad Hariri was
designated as Prime Minister on 3 November, following the announcement on
20 October by Mr. Hariri of his endorsement of Mr. Aoun for the preside ncy. Prime

16-19322

11/18

S/2016/931

Minister Salam continued to head the current Cabinet in a caretaker capacity
pending agreement on a new government. Consultations on the formation and
ministerial statement of a new government are ongoing.
51. On 19 October, after more than a year of inactivity, Parliament held a rare
legislative session to pass urgent financial bills as well as a law on the establishment
of the country’s first national human rights institution. Preparations for
parliamentary elections in May 2017 are ongoing.

III. Security and safety of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon
52. UNIFIL continually reviewed its security plans and risk mitigation measures,
particularly following security threat warnings, and closely coordinated them with
the Lebanese authorities. In the Arqub area (Sector East), strict security measures
have remained in place for official movements by United Nations personnel, which
require an armed security escort. Commemorative shooting during gatherings and
funerals continued to pose a risk to UNIFIL personnel and the local population.
During times of heightened tensions in the Ein El Helweh Palestinian refugee camp,
UNIFIL adjusted its movements between the area of operations and Beirut.
53. On 14 September, while reversing, an armoured UNIFIL vehicle carrying five
UNIFIL military personnel hit a mine next to a frequently used dirt road in the
vicinity of Ibil al-Saqi (Sector East). The armoured vehicle protected the personnel,
who were uninjured, but the vehicle suffered significant damage. Lebanese Armed
Forces provided support in securing the site. In response to the incident, all military
and civilian UNIFIL personnel were advised to use only main roads for movement
in the area of operations.
54. UNIFIL continued to monitor ongoing proceedings at the Lebanese Military
Court against individuals suspected of planning or perpetrating serious attacks
against UNIFIL peacekeepers in 2007, 2008, 2011 and 2014.

IV. Deployment of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon
55. As at 16 October, UNIFIL comprised 10,561 military personnel, including 387
women, from 40 troop-contributing countries, and 238 international and 579
national civilian staff, including 72 and 144 women, respectively. In addition, 48
military observers, including 3 women, of the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization were under operational control of UNIFIL.

V. Conduct and discipline
56. UNIFIL and the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon
continued to strengthen existing preventive measures against sexual exploitation and
abuse. The United Nations country team on the prevention of sexual exploitation
and abuse network, which emphasizes accountability and a victim -centred approach

12/18

16-19322

S/2016/931

to implementing the sexual exploitation and abuse zero-tolerance policy, met to
review the current measures and the risk assessment for Lebanon. No allegations of
sexual exploitation and/or abuse have been received by either UNIFIL or the Office
of the Special Coordinator. Pending the development of a suitable complaints
mechanism, the network serves as an effective forum to address any allegation of
misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse, involving all categories of
United Nations personnel.

VI. Observations
57. I welcome the election of a president of the Republic as the result of persistent
efforts among political leaders to arrive at a Lebanese -owned solution, and I
congratulate Michel Aoun on assuming the presidency. The filling of the
presidential vacancy is a long-awaited step in overcoming the country’s political
and institutional crisis. It is my hope that it can now pave the way for broader
political progress, without which Lebanon will remain in a state of paralysis. The
formation of a united and functioning government and the on-time holding of
parliamentary elections are essential for the viability and credibility of any effort to
overcome the current crisis. It is a matter of accountability towards the citizens of
Lebanon and of responsibility towards the country’s international partners. A
government formed and mandated on the basis of respect for the country’s
commitment to the principles and undertakings that have underpinned its stability
and standing will be important to give Lebanon clear direction with the cont inued
support of the international community. The election of a president, the formation of
a functioning and united government and the holding of parliamentary elections by
May 2017 will test the capacity of the Lebanese polity to return Lebanon to the
constitutional and democratic process and to restore confidence, domestically and
internationally, in its stability.
58. In that context, I commend Speaker Berri for his efforts to foster political
dialogue. I also thank Prime Minister Salam for his leadersh ip throughout the
challenging period without a president and for his continued dedication as he steers
the Cabinet through the sensitive caretaker phase. As called for by the Security
Council, I urge Lebanese parties to adhere to the State’s Constitution a nd National
Pact. I appeal to all Lebanese leaders to resort to constructive dialogue, including
through existing mechanisms, in negotiating a compromise agreement to end the
political and institutional crisis. I also urge all parties to refrain from encou raging or
engaging in any discourse that could fuel political or sectarian tensions at this
sensitive time.
59. Building on the continued commitment of Lebanon and Israel to the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), I encourage both parties to consider, with
my Special Coordinator and the UNIFIL Head of Mission and Force Commander,
mutual confidence-building measures and steps that can help sustain the calm and
stability that have prevailed over the last 10 years. In the current violent and
unstable regional context, I urge both Lebanon and Israel not to lose sight of the
central objective of a permanent ceasefire as envisaged in the resolution, which
remains the best guarantee for long-term stability.

16-19322

13/18

S/2016/931

60. I welcome the relative calm that continued to prevail in the UNIFIL area of
operations and across the Blue Line, in large part due to the commitment and efforts
of both Lebanon and Israel and their overall close coordination and cooperation
with UNIFIL. The strategic environment in southern Lebanon that UNIFIL, in close
cooperation with the Lebanese Armed Forces, established following the adoption of
resolution 1701 (2006), has proven its strength and viability over the years in a
vastly changed regional environment.
61. I welcome the engaged participation in the tripartite forum by both parties, but
also call upon them to proactively make use of the UNIFIL liaison and coordination
mechanism to exchange information in real time that may contribute to preventing
misunderstandings and heightened tensions on either side of the Blue Line. I
commend the Lebanese Armed Forces for notifying UNIFIL of a military exercise in
a timely manner, such that it enabled the Mission to liaise effectively with the Israel
Defense Forces and to deploy its personnel in the area. That was all the more
important owing to the heightened tensions in the area resulting from works being
carried out by the Israel Defense Forces south of the Blue Line. I call upon the
Israel Defense Forces to make the utmost use of UNIFIL channels to allow it to
liaise with the Lebanese Armed Forces and do what is necessary to prevent a rise of
tensions in sensitive areas along the Blue Line.
62. I am encouraged by the ongoing cooperation of the parties with UNIFIL on the
visible marking of the Blue Line. I call upon both sides to keep in mind the strategic
importance of the process for maintaining the cessation of hostilities. Full respect
for the Blue Line is a critical factor in maintaining calm and stability in the area and
any deliberate violation of the Blue Line is unacceptable.
63. The occupation by the Israel Defense Forces of northern Ghajar and an
adjacent area north of the Blue Line has continued, in violation of resolution 1701
(2006). I once again remind the Israeli authorities of their obligation, in accordance
with the resolution, to withdraw their armed forces from the area. I urge the m to
engage closely with UNIFIL to that end.
64. I remain seriously concerned that Israel continues to violate Lebanese airspace
on an almost daily basis, in complete disregard of the sovereignty of Lebanon and
the provisions of resolution 1701 (2006). I once again call upon the Government of
Israel to cease all overflights of Lebanese territory and territorial waters.
65. It is the responsibility of the Government of Lebanon, as the host Government,
to ensure the safety and security of UNIFIL personnel. I welcome the overall
positive relationship between UNIFIL and the local population and the coordinated
efforts by the Mission and the Lebanese Armed Forces to reach out to communities
and raise awareness of the Force’s right and need for freedom of movement
throughout the area of operations.
66. The mine that exploded under a UNIFIL vehicle is a stark reminder of the
dangers mines from past conflicts continue to pose for many years. The incident
underlines the importance of troops having adequate equipment at their disposal,
which in this case saved their lives.
67. I reiterate the importance of continued close collaboration between UNIFIL
and the Lebanese Armed Forces in the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006). It

14/18

16-19322

S/2016/931

is a strategic priority to further enhance the capacity of the Lebanese Armed Forces
for tasks mandated under the resolution in the UNIFIL area of operations on land
and at sea.
68. Rhetoric by any party threatening to use force undermines the relative calm
and stability that has been achieved between Lebanon and Israel in the past 10
years, as it only exacerbates the risk of tension or miscalculation that could lead to
conflict. It also hinders the need to move past the current precarious status quo.
Hizbullah’s open acknowledgement of being in possession of a growing arsenal of
sophisticated weapons, which it claims is supplied by the Islamic Republic of Iran
and serves as a deterrent to potential Israeli aggression, contravenes resolution 1701
(2006) and remains of serious concern. It will be vital to ensure that the national
defence strategy and other outstanding elements of the resolution be addressed in
the framework of the national dialogue. The implementation of earlier decisions of
the national dialogue is also overdue, specifically those relating to the disarmament
of non-Lebanese groups and the dismantling of the bases of the Popular Front for
the Liberation of Palestine-General Command and Fatah al-Intifada.
69. The reaching of the 10-year mark since the adoption of resolution 1701 (2006)
and the continued threat of terrorism underscore the need to bolster the Lebanese
Armed Forces with effective assistance. At a time when armed non -State actors
across the region are contesting the foundations of regional stability, the Lebanese
Armed Forces remain a pillar of the country’s stability and a key agent of the
extension of State authority throughout Lebanon. I therefore welcome the consensus
across the Lebanese political spectrum in support of the role of the army and
security services. The capabilities of the Lebanese Armed Forces, however, continue
to be stretched. I welcome the assistance delivered bilaterally to the Lebanese
Armed Forces as a sign of confidence in its role, and I encourage international
partners to sustain their investment through continued support to the capabilities
development plan of the Lebanese Armed Forces, including the strengthening of its
presence in the south of Lebanon, as spelled out by the strategic dialogue, as well as
in the areas of civil-military cooperation and human rights.
70. I remain concerned about the continuing presence of unauthorized weapons in
the area between the Litani River and the Blue Line, in breach of resolution 1701
(2006). The presence or firing of small arms in the area of operations, including
during commemorative events, is not only in violation of resolution 1701 (2006) but
also poses a risk to the population and UNIFIL personnel. I call upon the
Government of Lebanon, which holds primary responsibility, to take all actions
necessary to ensure that there are no unauthorized armed personnel, assets or
weapons in the UNIFIL area of operations.
71. I welcome the legislation on the establishment of a national human rights
institution that incorporates a national preventive mechanism against torture. It is an
important step towards achieving increased accountability, transparency and
compliance with human rights standards. Given the known li nk between human
rights violations and the risk of radicalization, I encourage the Lebanese Armed
Forces and Lebanese authorities to ensure that counter -terrorism and other security
measures are consistent with the State’s obligations, including under the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or Punishment.

16-19322

15/18

S/2016/931

72. I condemn the participation of Lebanese citizens in the Syrian conflict in
breach of the policy of disassociation that was agreed by all Lebanese political
parties. The external military involvement of Hizbullah and other Lebanese
elements exposes Lebanon to serious danger at a time when all efforts should focus
on shielding it from the impact of regional crises. I therefore reiterate my call upon
Hizbullah and all Lebanese parties to cease any involvement in the Syrian conflict.
Adherence to the country’s policy of disassociation pursuant to the Baabda
Declaration remains the only viable course for Lebanon in the current regional
environment.
73. I condemn the movement of fighters and war materiel across the LebaneseSyrian border in breach of resolution 1701 (2006) and shelling and shooting into
Lebanese border areas from the Syrian Arab Republic. The lack of a d elineated,
demarcated Lebanese-Syrian border is no justification for violations of Lebanese
sovereignty by any party. I call upon all concerned to cease violations of the border
and to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon.
74. I am seriously concerned about the dangerous implications of the deteriorating
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic for the future stability of Lebanon. The
stability of Lebanon cannot be taken for granted. The uncertainty of the direction of
the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic puts Lebanon at risk of becoming collateral
damage in this regional crisis and makes it all the more urgent to shield Lebanon
from its impact.
75. The risk of radicalization among segments of the Lebanese and refugee
populations, combined with the availability of arms outside the control of Lebanon,
present risks to the country’s stability. Illegally held firearms pose a threat to the
security of the citizens of Lebanon and undermine the rule of law. I remind Member
States of their obligations under resolution 1701 (2006) to prevent the sale or supply
of unauthorized arms or related materiel to entities or individuals in Lebanon.
76. I welcome the Government’s decision to work in collaboration with the United
Nations to develop a national plan of action for the prevention of violent extremism
in Lebanon. Consistent with my Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism, my
Special Coordinator and the United Nations family in Lebanon will continue to
engage in that initiative, which I encourage national and international stakeholders
to support as an investment in conflict prevention.
77. Following the successful municipal elections last May, I am encouraged by the
Government’s initial readiness to take steps to ensure that the 2017 parliamentary
elections are held on time, in accordance with the Constitution. After two
consecutive deferments, the people of Lebanon deserve to exercise their democratic
right to elect their representatives. I strongly encourage strengthened women’s
participation and effective representation with the highest turnout possible. The
United Nations remains ready to provide any technical assistance as may be
requested by the Lebanese Government.
78. The political and economic stability of Lebanon is a matter of regional and
international interest that requires continued collective attention. I welcome the
unity which the Security Council has consistently demonstrated to insulate Lebanon
from regional crises. I welcome the continued country-level engagement of the
International Support Group for Lebanon in Beirut and urge the Group to remain

16/18

16-19322

S/2016/931

mobilized in support of Lebanon. I further encourage regional partners, including
Saudi Arabia and the Islamic Republic of Iran, to use their influence constructively
in order to help protect Lebanon from the spillover of regional conflicts.
79. Following my exchange of letters with Prime Minister Salam concerning the
country’s request for my good offices in assisting with t he delineation of the
exclusive economic zone between Lebanon and Israel, my Special Coordinator is in
contact with all parties concerned. I encourage both Lebanon and Israel to look at
the issue as an opportunity for establishing a mutually beneficial way to exploit
offshore oil and gas resources and as an important confidence -building measure
between the two countries.
80. I welcome the continued high level of donor support to Lebanon in response to
the impact of the Syrian crisis, but stress that sustained support remains essential.
Lebanon is at the front line of a conflict that will have long -term consequences for
its economy, infrastructure and demography. Much more needs to be done,
commensurate with the pledges made thus far. While host communities h ave been
remarkable providers of assistance to refugees, the responsibility to address that
crisis is collective. As world leaders came together at the General Assembly to
discuss the urgent issue of refugees and migrants, I call upon all Member States,
including from the region, to reinforce their assistance to help Lebanon cope with
the impact of the crisis.
81. I remain highly concerned about the hardening of the discourse towards the
refugee presence in Lebanon, including by some Government representati ves
regarding the return of Syrian refugees to their country. The position of the United
Nations remains that Syrian refugees should return to the Syrian Arab Republic
when conditions are conducive, or that they should be resettled in a third country.
Host countries should not be expected to permanently settle refugees. When
conditions allow, the United Nations will mobilize support for those returning to
their home country. I urge the Government to publicly denounce xenophobic
reactions that frame refugees as a threat.
82. I welcome the decision by the Government to review the regulatory framework
governing access by Syrian refugees to the labour market. Concerted efforts are
needed to facilitate the creation of employment opportunities for the Lebanese
people and for Syrians. I urge the Government of Lebanon to waive, on a temporary
basis, the residency fees for Syrians as outlined in its Statement of Intent. Progress
in that matter will be crucial for the successful implementation of the London
commitments.
83. I welcome the ongoing cooperation between the Lebanese authorities and
Palestinian camp factions to ensure continued security in the camps. The need to
improve the living conditions of Palestine refugees in Lebanon, without prejudice to
the resolution of the refugee question in the context of a comprehensive and just
peace settlement, is ever more urgent. The structural deficit of the finances of
UNRWA remains a serious concern. I reiterate my call to donors for greater support
to UNRWA to enable the Agency to assist Palestine refugees in Lebanon effectively.
84. The international community owes Lebanon a debt of gratitude for the
exceptional generosity with which the Lebanese people and Government are hosting
an unprecedented number of refugees fleeing the war in the Syrian Arab Republic.

16-19322

17/18

S/2016/931

Both as a host country for refugees and as a model of pluralism, coexistence and
democracy in a region torn by sectarian strife, Lebanon is widely recognized as a
common good. But the country’s model suffers from political weaknesses and
vulnerability to outside shocks. The dangerous conflict dynamics in the Syrian Arab
Republic make it imperative for the international community to actively help
consolidate the security and stability of Lebanon. Likewise, resolution 1701 (2006)
requires us, collectively, to seek to move forward with its implementation. Having
achieved 10 years of relative calm along the Blue Line, Lebanon and Israel have a
mutual interest and obligation to now take steps for moving past the fragile status
quo of mutual deterrence. Both sides stand to gain more from fully implementing
the resolution than from maintaining an active military frontier for another 10 years.
Progress on the implementation of relevant Security Council resolutions will be
central to ending conflict in the region and to a just and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East.
85. I wish to extend my continued appreciation to all countries contributing troops
and equipment to UNIFIL and Observer Group Lebanon. I welcome the recently
arrived UNIFIL Head of Mission and Force Commander, Major General Michael
Beary of Ireland, and wish him success, and commend the work of the military and
civilian personnel of UNIFIL. I thank my Special Coordinator, Sigrid Kaag, and the
staff of her office for their efforts.

18/18

16-19322
