A/RES/73/197

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
3 January 2019

Seventy-third session
Agenda item 80

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 20 December 2018
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/73/496)]

73/197.

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fifty-first session
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it
established the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law with a
mandate to further the progressive harmonization and unification of the law of
international trade and in that respect to bear in mind the interests of all peoples, in
particular those of developing countries, in the extensive development of international
trade,
Reaffirming its belief that the progressive modernization and harmonization of
international trade law, in reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of
international trade, especially those affecting developing countries, would contribute
significantly to universal economic cooperation among all States on a basis of
equality, equity, common interest and respect for the rule of law, to the elimination of
discrimination in international trade and, thereby, to peace, stability and the well being of all peoples,
Having considered the report of the Commission, 1
Reiterating its concern that activities undertaken by other bodies in the field of
international trade law without adequate coordination with the Commission might
lead to undesirable duplication of efforts and would not be in keeping with the aim of
promoting efficiency, consistency and coherence in the unification and harmonization
of international trade law,
Reaffirming the mandate of the Commission, as the core legal body within the
United Nations system in the field of international trade law, to coordinate legal
activities in this field, in particular to avoid duplication of efforts, including among
organizations formulating rules of international trade, and to promote efficiency,

__________________
1

18-22459 (E)

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/73/17).

070119

*1822459*

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its fifty-first session

A/RES/73/197

consistency and coherence in the modernization and harmonization of international
trade law, and to continue, through its secretariat, to maintain close cooperation with
other international organs and organizations, including regional organizations, active
in the field of international trade law,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law; 1
2.
Commends the Commission for the finalization of the draft convention on
international settlement agreements resulting from mediation; 2
3.
Also commends the Commission for the finalization and adoption of the
Model Law on International Commercial Mediation and International Settlement
Agreements Resulting from Mediation, 3 the Legislative Guide on Key Principles of a
Business Registry 4 and the Model Law on Recognition and Enforcement of
Insolvency-Related Judgments and its Guide to Enactment; 5
4.
Notes with appreciation the event held to mark the sixtieth anniversary of
the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards (the
New York Convention of 1958), 6 at which it was acknowledged that the Convention,
with its almost universal acceptance, brings legal certainty to business operations
worldwide, thereby contributing to decreasing the level of risk and transactional costs
associated with international trade, furthering the Sustainable Development Goals 7
and, by establishing a fundamental legal framework for the use of arbitration and its
effectiveness, strengthens respect for binding commitments, inspires confidence in
the rule of law and ensures fair treatment in the resolution of disputes arising over
contractual rights and obligations; 8
5.
Notes with satisfaction the contributions from the Fund for International
Development of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and from the
European Commission, which allow the operation of the repository of published
information under the Rules on Transparency in Treaty-based Investor-State
Arbitration 9 and that the Commission reiterated its strong and unanimous opinion that
the secretariat of the Commission should continue to operate the transparency
repository, which constitutes a central feature both of the Rules on Transparency and
of the United Nations Convention on Transparency in Treaty-based Investor-State
Arbitration (Mauritius Convention on Transparency); 10
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to operate, through the
secretariat of the Commission, the repository of published information in accordance
with article 8 of the Rules on Transparency, as a pilot project until the end of 2020,
to be funded entirely by voluntary contributions, and to keep the General Assembly
informed of developments regarding the funding and budgetary situation of the
transparency repository based on its pilot operation;
7.
Takes note with interest of the decisions taken by the Commission as
regards its future work and the progress made by the Commission in its work in the
areas of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises, dispute settlement, investor-State
__________________

Ibid., chap. III, sect. B, and annex I.
Ibid., chap. III, sect. C, and annex II.
4
Ibid., chap. IV, sects. B and C.
5
Ibid., chap. V, sect. A, and annex III.
6
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 330, No. 4739.
7
See resolution 70/1.
8
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 17
(A/73/17), chap. X.
9
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/68/17), annex I.
10
Resolution 69/116, annex.
2
3

2/7

18-22459

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its fifty-first session

A/RES/73/197

dispute settlement reform, electronic commerce, insolvency law and security interests
and privately financed infrastructure projects, 11 as well as the decisions to take up
work on expedited arbitration and, as its next priority, the judicial sale of ships, to
conduct exploratory and preparatory work on warehouse re ceipts, to compile
information on legal issues related to the digital economy aimed at enabling the
commercial use of new technologies and methods and assisting developing economies
in bridging the digital gap, and to undertake exploratory work on contract ual networks
and the civil law aspects of asset tracing and recovery, 12 and encourages the
Commission to continue to move forward efficiently to achieve tangible work
outcomes in those areas;
8.
Welcomes the decision by the Commission to give Working Group IV a
more specific mandate to conduct work on legal issues in the area of identity
management and trust services with a view to facilitating cross -border recognition of
identity management and trust services on the basis of the principles and issues
identified by the Working Group at its fifty-sixth session, 13 and takes note of the
decision of the Commission to request the Secretariat to prepare, within existing
resources, a pilot online tool containing the draft notes on the main issues of cloud
computing contracts, for consideration at its next session, in 2019; 14
9.
Endorses the efforts and initiatives of the Commission, as the core legal
body within the United Nations system in the field of international trade law, aimed
at increasing coordination of and cooperation on legal activities of international and
regional organizations active in the field of international trade law and at promoting
the rule of law at the national and international levels in this field, and in this regard
appeals to relevant international and regional organizations to coordinate their
activities with those of the Commission, to avoid duplication of efforts and to promote
efficiency, consistency and coherence in the modernization and harmonization of
international trade law;
10. Reaffirms the importance, in particular for developing countries, of the
work of the Commission concerned with technical cooperation and assistance in the
field of international trade law reform and development, and in this connection:
(a) Welcomes the initiatives of the Commission towards expanding, through
its secretariat, its technical cooperation and assistance programme, in that respect
encourages the Secretary-General to seek partnerships with State and non-State actors
to increase awareness about the work of the Commission and facilitate the effective
implementation of legal standards resulting from its work, and notes in that regard
the round table on technical assistance held during the fifty-first session of the
Commission, which brought together governmental and intergovernmental
organizations active in international development assistance to explore synergies and
discuss ways to further cooperate with the secretariat of the Commission in
implementing sound reforms of international trade law;
(b) Expresses its appreciation to the Commission for carrying out technical
cooperation and assistance activities and for providing assistance with legislative
drafting in the field of international trade law, and draws the attention of the
Secretary-General to the limited resources that are made available in this field;
(c) Expresses its appreciation to the Governments whose contributions
enabled the technical cooperation and assistance activities to take place, and appeals
__________________

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 17
(A/73/17), chaps. IV–IX.
12
Ibid., chap. XVII, sects. A and B.
13
Ibid., chap. VIII, para. 159.
14
Ibid., para. 155.
11

18-22459

3/7

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its fifty-first session

A/RES/73/197

to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system, organizations,
institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law trust fund for symposia and, where
appropriate, for the financing of special projects and otherwise to assist the secretariat
of the Commission in carrying out technical cooperation and assistance activities, in
particular in developing countries;
(d) Reiterates its appeal to the United Nations Development Programme and
other bodies responsible for development assistance, such as the World Bank and
regional development banks, as well as to Governments in their bilateral aid
programmes, to support the technical cooperation and assistance programme of the
Commission and to cooperate with the Commission and coordinate their activities
with those of the Commission in the light of the relevance and importance of the work
and programmes of the Commission for the promotion of the rule of law at the
national and international levels and for the impleme ntation of the international
development agenda, including the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development; 7
(e) Recalls its resolutions stressing the need to strengthen support to Member
States, upon their request, in the domestic implementation of their respective
international obligations through enhanced technical assistance and capacity building, and welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General to ensure greater
coordination and coherence among United Nations entities and with donors and
recipients;
11. Recalls the importance of adherence to the rules of procedure and methods
of work of the Commission, including transparent and inclusive delibe rations, taking
into account the summary of conclusions as reproduced in annex III to the report on
the work of its forty-third session, 15 requests the Secretariat to issue, prior to meetings
of the Commission and of its working groups, a reminder of those rules of procedure
and methods of work with a view to ensuring the high quality of the work of the
Commission and encouraging the assessment of its instruments, recalls in this regard
its previous resolutions related to this matter, and notes that the Comm ission, during
its fifty-first session, welcomed a joint comprehensive proposal submitted by Member
States on its methods of work, including to use information-only documents on
matters not requiring in-depth discussions, to apply a flexible approach to the
allocation of meeting days with the goal of finalizing instruments and subsequently
making decisions on future work in consecutive sessions of the Commission, to
conduct a more efficient discussion of the topic of the role of the Commission in the
promotion of the rule of law and to explore the possibility of reducing the duration of
Commission sessions to two weeks, when possible and subject to the need for
finalization of ongoing projects by the Commission, all aimed at enhancing the
efficiency of the Commission’s work as well as reducing the burden on delegations,
and to streamline and focus the Commission’s agenda and preparation for the session,
and notes in that respect that the Secretariat was requested to plan and prepare for the
fifty-second session of the Commission, in 2019, on the basis of that proposal; 16
12. Welcomes the activities of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law Regional Centre for Asia and the Pacific, in the Republic of
Korea, towards providing capacity-building and technical assistance services to
States in the Asia-Pacific region, including to international and regional
organizations, expresses its appreciation to the Republic of Korea and China, whose
contributions enabled continuing operation of the Regional Centre, notes that the
continuation of the regional presence relies entirely on extrabudgetary resources,
__________________
15
16

4/7

Ibid., Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/65/17).
Ibid., Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/73/17), chap. XVIII, sect. A.
18-22459

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its fifty-first session

A/RES/73/197

including but not limited to voluntary contributions from States, welcomes
expressions of interest from other States in hosting regional centres of th e
Commission, and requests the Secretary-General to keep the General Assembly
informed of developments regarding the establishment of regional centres, in
particular their funding and budgetary situation;
13. Notes that, further to the offer of the Government of Cameroon in 2017,
approved by the Commission, to establish, subject to the relevant rules and
regulations of the United Nations and the internal approval process of the Office of
Legal Affairs of the Secretariat, a regional centre for Africa in Cameroon, 17 the
Government of Cameroon is continuing to examine the financial implications and the
feasibility of establishing that regional centre, and encourages the secretariat of the
Commission to continue its consultations and consider carefully the level of human
resources that it would need for the efficient management of any new regional centre
and for ensuring adequate supervision by, and coordination with, Vienna -based
secretariat staff, 18 and requests the Commission, in its annual report, to keep the
General Assembly informed of developments regarding the project, in particular its
funding and budgetary situation;
14. Appeals to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system,
organizations, institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions to the trust
fund established to provide travel assistance to developing countries that are members
of the Commission, at their request and in consultation with the Secretary -General,
in order to enable renewal of the provision of that assistance and to increase expert
representation from developing countries at sessions of the Commission and its
working groups, necessary to build local expertise and capacities in those countries
to put in place a regulatory and enabling environment for business, trade and
investment;
15. Decides, in order to ensure full participation of all Member States in the
sessions of the Commission and its working groups, to continue, in the competent
Main Committee during the seventy-third session of the General Assembly, its
consideration of granting travel assistance to the least developed countries that are
members of the Commission, at their request and in consultation with the Secretary General, and notes the contributions from the European Union and the Swiss Agency
for Development and Cooperation to the trust fund, which would facilitate the
participation of representatives of developing States in the deliberations of Working
Group III;
16. Endorses the conviction of the Commission that the implementation and
effective use of modern private law standards in international trade are essential for
advancing good governance, sustained economic development and the eradication of
poverty and hunger and that the promotion of the rule of law in commercial relations
should be an integral part of the broader agenda of the United Nations to promote the
rule of law at the national and international levels, including through the Rule of Law
Coordination and Resource Group, supported by the Rule of Law Unit in the
Executive Office of the Secretary-General;
17. Notes the role of the Commission in promoting the rule of law, respective
activity in the Commission at its fifty-first session 19 and the comments transmitted by
the Commission, pursuant to paragraph 25 of General Assembly resolution 72/119 of
7 December 2017, highlighting the role in the promotion of the rule of law of the texts
adopted or approved by the Commission and of its ongoing work, in particular
__________________

Ibid., Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/72/17), para. 293.
Ibid., Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/73/17), para. 200.
19
Ibid., paras. 230–231.
17
18

18-22459

5/7

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its fifty-first session

A/RES/73/197

through wide dissemination of international commercial law, including across the
United Nations system; 20
18. Notes with satisfaction that, in paragraph 8 of the declaration of the highlevel meeting of the General Assembly on the rule of law at the national and
international levels, adopted by consensus as resolution 67/1 of 24 September 2012,
Member States recognized the importance of fair, stable and predictable legal
frameworks for generating inclusive, sustainable and equitable development,
economic growth and employment, generating investment and facilitating
entrepreneurship and, in this regard, commended the work of the Commission in
modernizing and harmonizing international trade law and that, in paragraph 7 of the
declaration, Member States expressed their conviction that the rule of law and
development were strongly interrelated and mutually reinforcing;
19. Also notes with satisfaction that, in paragraph 89 of the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development,
adopted by the General Assembly by consensus as resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015,
States endorsed the efforts and initiatives of the Commission, as the core legal body
within the United Nations system in the field of international trade law, aimed at
increasing coordination of and cooperation on legal activities of international and
regional organizations active in the field of international trade law and at promoting
the rule of law at the national and international levels in this field;
20. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, in conformity with
resolutions of the General Assembly on documentation-related matters, 21 which, in
particular, emphasize that any invitation to limit, where appropriate, the length of
documents should not adversely affect either the quality of the presentation or the
substance of the documents, to bear in mind the particular characteristics of th e
mandate and functions of the Commission in the progressive development and
codification of international trade law when implementing page limits with respect to
the documentation of the Commission; 22
21. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the publication of Commission
standards and the provision of summary records of the meetings of the Commission,
including committees of the whole established by the Commission for the duration of
its annual session, relating to the formulation of normative tex ts, and takes note of
the decision of the Commission to continue the trial use of digital recordings, in
parallel with summary records where applicable, with a view to assessing the
experience of using digital recordings and, on the basis of that assessmen t, taking a
decision at a future session regarding the possible replacement of summary records
by digital recordings; 23
22. Recalls paragraph 48 of its resolution 66/246 of 24 December 2011
regarding the rotation scheme of meetings between Vienna and New York;
23. Stresses the importance of promoting the use of texts emanating from the
work of the Commission for the global unification and harmonization of international
trade law, and to this end urges States that have not yet done so to consider signing,
ratifying or acceding to conventions, enacting model laws and encouraging the use of
other relevant texts;
__________________

Ibid., chap. XV.
Resolutions 52/214, sect. B, 57/283 B, sect. III, and 58/250, sect. III.
22
See resolutions 59/39, para. 9, and 65/21, para. 18; see also Official Records of the General
Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/59/17), paras. 124–128.
23
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/69/17),
para. 276.
20
21

6/7

18-22459

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its fifty-first session

A/RES/73/197

24. Notes with appreciation the work of the Secretariat on the system for the
collection and dissemination of case law on Commission texts in the six official
languages of the United Nations (the CLOUT system), notes the resource -intensive
nature of the system, acknowledges the need for further resources to sustain and
expand it, and in this regard welcomes efforts by the Secretariat towards building
partnerships with interested institutions, and appeals to Governments, the relevant
bodies of the United Nations system, organizations, institutions and individuals to
assist the secretariat of the Commission in raising awareness as to the availability and
usefulness of the CLOUT system in professional, academic and judiciary circles and
in securing the funding required for the coordination and expansion of the system and
the establishment, within the secretariat of the Commission, of a pillar focused on the
promotion of ways and means of interpreting Commission texts in a uniform manner;
25. Welcomes the continuing work of the Secretariat on digests of case law
related to Commission texts, including their wide dissemination, as well as the
continuing increase in the number of abstracts available through the CLOUT system,
in view of the role of the digests and the CLOUT system as important tools for the
promotion of the uniform interpretation of international trade law, in particular by
building local capacity of judges, arbitrators and other legal practitioners to interpret
those standards in the light of their international character and the need to promote
uniformity in their application and the observance of good faith in international trade,
and notes the satisfaction of the Commission with the performance of the New York
Convention website 24 and the successful coordination between that website and the
CLOUT system;
26. Recalls its resolutions affirming the importance of high-quality, userfriendly and cost-effective United Nations websites and the need for their multilingual
development, maintenance and enrichment, 25 commends the fact that the website of
the Commission is published simultaneously in the six official languages of the
United Nations, and welcomes the continuous efforts of the Commission to maintain
and improve its website, including by developing its latest updated version, and to
enhance the visibility of its work by utilizing social media features in accordance with
the applicable guidelines. 26
62nd plenary meeting
20 December 2018

__________________

www.newyorkconvention1958.org.
Resolutions 52/214, sect. C, para. 3; 55/222, sect. III, para. 12; 56/64 B, sect. X; 57/130 B,
sect. X; 58/101 B, sect. V, paras. 61–76; 59/126 B, sect. V, paras. 76–95; 60/109 B, sect. IV,
paras. 66–80; and 61/121 B, sect. IV, paras. 65–77.
26
See resolution 63/120, para. 20.
24
25

18-22459

7/7
