VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Mindful of the significant contribution to international
co-operation in the humanitarian field made by organizations and agencies of the United Nations system,
Recognizing the positive role played by the lndependent
Commission on International Humanitarian Issues,
Recognizing, in this connection, the 1mportance of the
contribution of governmental and non-governmental organizations, including the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the League of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies,
Recognizing the significance of the existing workable
system to promote, facilitate and co-ordinate
humanitarian activities carried out by Governments, the
United Nations system and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations,
Mindful of the importance of promoting universal respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and of
international co-operation in the humanitarian field for
improving relations among States and peoples,
Stressing the need for the international community to
continue its efforts in the field of humanitarian activities
and to provide the resources to develop further activities
in the humanitarian field,
Conscious that people want to live in a better, ~afer and
more just world,
1. Encourages the international community to develop
further its co-operation in the field of international
humanitarian activities;
2. Calls upan ali States to co-operate for the protection
of human rights and fundamental freedoms and to work
together to promote international co-operation in order to
solve existing humanitarian problem-; of international
concern;
3. Encourages the international community to contribute substantially and regularly to international
humanitarian activities;
4. Considers that international co-operation in the
humanitarian field will facilitate better understanding,
mutual respect, confidence and tolerance among States
and peoples, thus contributing to a more just and nonviolent world;
5. Invites Governments, the United Nations system
and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to develop international co-operation in the
humanitarian field on the basis of relevan! international
instruments;
6. Decides to consider the question of international cooperation in the humanitarian field under the item entitled
"New international humanitarian order"
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/122.

United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims
of Torture

The General Assembly,
Recalling article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 2 which states that no one shall be subjected to
torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment,
Recalling also the Declaration on the Protection of Ali
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,137
13 7 Resolution 3452 (XXX), annex.

219

Noting with satisfaction the entry into force on 26 June
1987 of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,
Recalling its resolution 36/151 of 16 December 1981, in
which it noted with deep concern that acts of torture took
place m various countries, recognized the need to provide
assistance to the victims of torture in a purely
humanitarian spirit and established the United Nations
Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture,
Convinced that the struggle to eliminate torture includes
the provision of assistance in a humanitarian spirit to the
victims and members of their families,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 138
1. Expresses its gratitude and appreciation to the Governments, organizations and individuals that have already
contributed to the United Nations Voluntary Fund for
Victims of Torture;
2. Calls upan ali Governments, organizations and individuals in a position to do so to respond favourably to requests for initial as well as further contributions to the
Fund;
3. invites Governments to make contributions to the
Fund, if possible on a regular basis, in order to enable the
Fund to provide continuous support to projects that depend on recurrent grants;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the Board ofTrustees of
the Fund for the work it has carried out;
5. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the support given to the Board ofTrustees ofthe Fund;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to make use of ali
existing possibilities, including the preparation, production and dissemination of information materials, to assist
the Board ofTrustees ofthe Fund in its efforts to make the
Fund and its humanitarian work better known and in its
appeal for contributions.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/123.

Status of the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment

The General Assembly,
Recalling article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 2 and article 7 of the International Covenant
on Civil and Política! Rights, 13 both of which provide that
no one shall be subjected to torture orto cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment,
Recalling also the Declaration on the Protection of Ali
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,
adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution
3452 (XXX) of 9 December 1975,
Recalling further its resolution 39/46 of 10 December
1984, by which it adopted and opened for signature, ratifi.cation and accession the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and called upon all Governments to consider
signing and ratifying the Convention as a matter of priority, as well as its resolutions 40/128 of 13 December
1985 and 41/134 of 4 December 1986,

I.IM

A/42/701.

220

(;encral Assemhl)-Forty-second Session

Mindful of the relevance, for the eradication of torture
and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, ofthe Code ofConduct for Law Enforccment Officials 139 and of the Principies of Medica! Ethics relevant
to the role of health personnel, particularly physicians, in
the protection of prisoners and detainees against torture
and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, 80
Convinced of the desirability of early finalization ami
subsequent adoption ofthe draft Body of Principies for the
Protection of Ali Persons under Any Form of Detention
or Imprisonment, 140
Seriously concerned about the alarming number of reported cases of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment taking place in various
parts of the world,
Determined to promote the full implementation of the
prohibition, under international and national law, of the
practice of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment,
Welcoming the decision of the Commission on Human
Rights, in its resolution 1987/29 of 10 March 1987, 26 to
extend for one year the mandate ofthe Special Rapporteur
to examine questions relevant to torture and taking note of
other important provisions ofthe Commission in the same
resolution, including those relating to practica] measures
recommended by the Special Rapporteur to deal with th1s
abhorrent phenomenon,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on the status of the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment; 141
2. Welcornes with deep satisfaction the entry into force
on 26 June 1987 ofthe Convention as a major step in international efforts to promote universal respect for and ohservance of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
3. Recognizes the importance of the establishment by
States parties to the Convention of appropriate administrative and financial arrangements to enable the Committee against Torture to carry out in an effective and efficient
manner the functions entrusted to it under the Convention, and to ensure the long-term viability ofthe Committee as an essential mechanism for overseeing the effectin·
implementation of the provisions of the Convention;
4. Also recognizes the need for the Committee against
Torture to give early attention to the development of an effective reporting system on implementation by States parties to the Convention, taking due account of the draft
guidelines of the Secretary-General on reporting and the
activities of the Human Rights Committee, as well as of
the other human rights treaty bodies, established under
the relevant international instruments in the field of human rights;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the provision of appropriate staff and facilities for the effective performance of the functions of the Cornmittee against Torture;
6. Again requests ali States to become parties to the
Convention as a matter of priority;
7. Once again invites ali States, upon ratification of or
accession to the Convention, or subsequently, to consider
the possibility of making the declarations provided for in
articles 21 and 22 thereof;

8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Commission on Human Rights at its forty-fourth session
and to the General Assembly at its forty-third session a report on the status of the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Pun1shment;
9. Decides to consider the report of the SecretaryGeneral at its forty-third session under the item entitled
"Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment".
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/124.

Torture and inhuman treatment of children in
detention in South Africa

The General Assernbly,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the Declaration on
the Protection of Ali Persons from Being Subjected to
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, 137 the Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment 142 and the Declaration on the Rights of the
Child, 90
Welcorning the holding of the International Conference
on Children, Repression and the Law in Apartheid South
Africa at Harare, from 24 to 27 September 1987,
Appal/ed at evidence that children in South Africa are
subjected to detention, torture and inhuman treatment,
l. Expresses its profound outrage at reports of detention, torture and inhuman treatment of children in South
Africa;
2. Ca lis upon the South African authorities urgently to
release children held in detention in that country;
3. Cal/s for the immediate dismantlement of the socalled •·rehabilitation camps" or "re-education centres":
4. Requests ali relevant United Nations bodies and
specialized agencies to draw attention to, monitor and expose these inhuman practices;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to make available to
the Commission on Human Rights the final documents of
the International Conference on Children, Repression ami
the Law in Apartheid South Africa, for action by the Special Rapporteur on Torture.
93rd plenary meeting
7 Decernber 1987

42/125.

Interregional Consultation on Developmental
Social Welfare Policies and Programmes

The General Asscmbly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions
1985/26 of 29 May 1985 and 1987 /48 of 28 May 1987
concerning preparations for an Interregional Consultation
on Developmental Social Welfare Policies and Programmes,
Conscious of the considerable contribution made to the
preparations for the Interregional Consultation on
Developmental Social Welfare Policies and Programmes
by the regional conferences of the ministers responsible for
social welfare and the Commission for Social Develop-

139 Resolution 34/169, annex
140 A/34/146, annex.
14 1 A/42/451.

141 R,·s,,lution

19/46. annex.
