S/2019/711

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 September 2019
Original: English

Implementation of resolution 2437 (2018)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 3 of Security Council
resolution 2437 (2018), in which the Council renewed its request to me to report on
the implementation of resolution 2240 (2015), in particular the implementation of
paragraphs 7 to 10 of that resolution.
2.
The report covers developments since my previous report of 31 August 2018
(S/2018/807) until 31 August 2019. The information and observations herein are
based on submissions by Member States, relevant international and regional bodies
and United Nations entities.

II. Smuggling of migrants and trafficking in persons in the
Mediterranean Sea off the coast of Libya
3.
Since the issuance of my previous report, the world continues to face the grim
reality that the Mediterranean Sea remains a high-volume thoroughfare for the
smuggling of and trafficking in refugees and migrants. In 2019, thousands have again
perished or gone missing en route or have been returned to situations of grave harm
and uncertainty. In the period from 1 September 2018 to 31 July 2019, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) recorded a total of 82,236 arrivals of refugees and
migrants by sea in Europe, a 26 per cent decrease from the same period in 2018, when
approximately 111,200 individuals were recorded to have arrived in Europe by sea.
For the period from September 2018 to July 2019, 1,485 refugees and migrants were
recorded to have died or gone missing at sea on all the Mediterranean routes,
including 736 on the so-called central Mediterranean route from North Africa to Italy
and Malta. This represents a decrease in recorded numbers compared with the
previous reporting period, when 2,080 individuals were record ed as having died or
gone missing in the Mediterranean Sea, including 1,556 on the central Mediterranean
route. Those numbers do not account for deaths or missing persons recorded by the
Libyan coastguard, however.
4.
Despite the decrease in numbers, there is considerable evidence that conditions
for those embarking on the journey have worsened. With 2,130 arrivals and 333
deaths on the route from Libya to Europe recorded in the first half of 2019, one person

19-14593 (E)

060919

*1914593*

S/2019/711

died in the central Mediterranean Sea for every six people who reached European
shores after departing from Libya. By comparison, in 2018, 1 person died for every
14 people who arrived by sea in Europe from Libya, with 15,537 arrivals and 1,132
deaths recorded, meaning that the death rate in the first half of 2019 was more than
double that in the previous year. In 2017, at least one death for every 38 arrivals was
recorded, with 108,255 arrivals and 2,851 deaths.
5.
The European Union military operation in the Southern Central Mediterranean,
EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA, estimates that, from 1 September 2018 to
2 August 2019, roughly 10,137 persons were rescued in 153 operations by various
vessels in the central Mediterranean Sea, compared with 41,961 individuals in 543
operations in the same period in 2018. According to the operation, the rescue
operations and interceptions were largely executed by the Libyan coastguard and
navy, which conducted a total of 72 such operations. 1 Vessels of non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and merchant vessels are still reported to be conducting search
and rescue operations on the high seas off the coast of western Libya, but in reduced
numbers compared with previous reporting periods, owing in particular to
administrative and legal restrictions imposed by European St ates. In the first six
months of 2019, NGOs rescued close to 400 migrants and refugees off the coast of
Libya, compared with 5,200 individuals in the same period in 2018. In the first half
of 2019, merchant vessels rescued only one group of about 100 indiv iduals off the
Libyan coast and brought them to safety in Europe, compared with over 1,300 people
rescued in the first six months of 2018.
6.
There was a steep increase in figures for the eastern and western Mediterranean
routes in 2018, when 811 people died or went missing on the western route and 187
on the eastern route, compared with 209 and 56, respectively, the previous year. The
western Mediterranean route from Morocco to Spain currently represents the main
point of entry into Europe. While arrivals in Europe from Libya decreased by 86 per
cent in 2018, constituting only 11 per cent of the total number of arrivals in 2018
compared with 59 per cent in 2017, there is currently no evidence to suggest that
migrants have shifted routes while travelling to Europe, in particular as the
nationalities of refugees and migrants travelling along the western and eastern routes
differ from those of refugees and migrants using the central Mediterranean route. In
Libya, more than half of the departures of migrants during the reporting period have
been from the Khums and Sabratah regions. There was also a high probability of
departures from, in descending order of activity, the regions of Misratah, Zawiyah
and Zuwarah.
7.
During the reporting period, EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA continued
efforts to contribute to the implementation of resolution 2240 (2015) and subsequent
resolutions. It has undertaken direct operational activities, provided training for and
monitoring of the Libyan coastguard and navy and cooperated with a large number of
actors. The European Union reported that, in spite of the reduction in migrant flows
along the central Mediterranean route, challenges remained, and that the migrant
smuggling business model continued to evolve as smugglers adapted their tactics,
techniques and procedures in an environment that the renewed instability in Libya
was making increasingly challenging. The European Union also observed that the
decrease in individuals being smuggled from Libya to Europe might be related to the
engagement of those previously involved in migrant smuggling and human trafficking
in activities related to the current active conflict.
__________________
1

2/15

Other operations were conducted by the Italian coastguard, navy, Guardia di Finanza and
Carabinieri (21), the armed forces of Malta (18), vessels of non-governmental organizations (17),
merchant vessels (13), the armed forces of Tunisia (9) and fishing vessels (3). Source:
EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA.
19-14593

S/2019/711

8.
The European Union, through EUNAVFOR MED operation SOP HIA, reported
that migrant smugglers and human traffickers continued primarily to use rubber boats
in departures from Libya (62.5 per cent as at July 2019). Migrant smuggling groups
in the eastern launching area, from Tripoli to Misratah, are also reported to use
fibreglass boats occasionally, while groups in the western launching region, from
Tripoli to Abu Kammash, employ wooden boats. The operation has found that the
individual fare for travel by inflatable boat ranges from €500 to €1,400, and by
wooden boat from €800 to €1,500, a decrease from the price reported in 2017, when
fares for travel by wooden boat were assessed as ranging from €1,500 to €3,000. With
each rubber boat capable of accommodating up to approximately 120 refugees and
migrants, smugglers can recoup up to €168,000 per boat. For wooden boats, which
typically hold some 400 people, the figure could be as high as €600,000 per boat.
9.
In terms of tactics, the European Union reports that the majority of boats
observed to be smuggling migrants along the central Mediterranean route are filled
with insufficient fuel to reach European shores, but enough to reach waters beyond
the 12-nautical-mile limit of the territorial sea of Libya. In the reporting period,
migrant smugglers appeared to have adapted their tactics to avoid being apprehended
by either EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA naval assets, before their temporary
suspension in March 2019, or the Libyan coastguard, by leaving refugees and
migrants to travel alone, instructing them how to naviga te the sea using a Global
Positioning System or to head towards oil rigs in the territorial sea of Libya. They
then instructed them to use a satellite phone and, upon reaching a certain point outside
the territorial sea of Libya, to make a phone call to the Maritime Rescue Coordination
Centre in Rome and await rescue.
10. The European Union, through EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA, notes that
a tactic reported to be used by smugglers to get refugees and migrants to reach Europe,
especially on the route from Zuwarah to Lampedusa, is to involve fishing vessels.
Once outside the territorial sea of Libya, people who embarked in wooden boats on
Libyan shores are transferred onto a fishing vessel and the wooden boat is
subsequently towed until approximately 40 nautical miles shy of the territorial seas
of European States. There, the refugees and migrants are transferred back onto the
wooden boat, which then continues onward to Europe, while the fishing vessel returns
to Libya.
11. According to IOM and UNHCR, from 1 September 2018 to 24 July 2019, the
Libyan coastguard, Libyan coastal security and Libyan fishermen rescued or
intercepted 6,069 refugees and migrants, a substantial reduction from the previous
reporting period (1 January to 1 August 2018), during which 1 2,945 were rescued or
intercepted. UNHCR noted an increase in the number of disembarkations in Libya
during May and June 2019 compared with previous months, with 2,560 refugees and
migrants rescued or intercepted at sea, consistent with the uptick in depar tures in the
spring and summer months in previous years. In comparison with the same period in
2018, however, disembarkations substantially decreased. A total of 5,209 individuals
disembarked in Libya in May and June 2018, and 4,656 individuals disembarked in
the same months in 2017. UNHCR, in cooperation with the International Medical
Corps, continues to provide medical assistance and core relief items to those
disembarked in Libya before they are transferred to a detention centre by Libyan
authorities. UNHCR reports that those rescued or intercepted at sea by the Libyan
coastguard included, in descending order, individuals from the Sudan (37 per cent),
Mali (8 per cent), Côte d’Ivoire (7 per cent), Bangladesh (5 per cent) and Somalia
(5 per cent). On the basis of available data, adult men represented 78 per cent of the
total population rescued or intercepted, while women accounted for 12 per cent and
children for 10 per cent.

19-14593

3/15

S/2019/711

12. Organized transnational criminal networks continued to exploit the adverse
security situation in Libya to conduct migrant smuggling and human trafficking
operations, further fuelling instability and undermining Libyan governance
structures. Additionally, the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
continued to receive credible information of involvement by State and local officials
in smuggling and trafficking networks. In its most recent report to the Security
Council (S/2018/812 and S/2018/812/Corr.1), the Panel of Experts on Libya reported
that Libyan armed groups generated significant revenues by exacting passage taxes
and by providing protection services to the smugglers’ convoys against payment. The
Panel expressed concern at the attempts of various armed groups to gain legitimacy
by ostensibly supporting efforts to combat irregular migration, with the aim of
receiving technical and material assistance from foreign actors. It also expressed
concern about the impunity in Libya of those who systematically violated the human
rights of migrants, notably on account of weak law enforcement and security
vacuums.
13. The six individuals listed on 7 June 2018 by the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya for involvement in
the smuggling of migrants continue to be subject to the travel ban and asset freeze
imposed by the Council in that resolution. 2 Meanwhile, the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017) concerning Mali reported
the involvement of armed groups in northern Mali in the smuggling of migrants to
Algeria, possibly en route to Libya (see S/2019/137). On 20 December 2018, the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017) listed,
among others, one individual as subject to travel ban measures under the Mali
sanctions regime, on the basis of his involvement in the smuggling and abuse of
migrants, including sexual abuse. 3

III. Inspection and seizure of vessels off the coast of Libya and
related efforts
14. As part of the efforts to prevent and combat the smuggling of migrants and
trafficking in persons off the coast of Libya, Member States have continued to inspect
and seize vessels under applicable international law and in the exercise of the specific
authority provided by the Security Council in its resolution 2437 (2018).
15. In March 2019, the Council of the European Union decided to extend the
mandate of EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA until 30 September 2019 but to
suspend, temporarily, the deployment of its naval assets. Since the operation began in
June 2015, it has reportedly disposed of 551 boats and apprehended 151 migrant
smugglers. Moreover, it has rescued 49,000 people on the central Mediterranean Sea
since its launch. Over the reporting period, supported by all States members of the
European Union, with the exception of Denmark, which has opted out of participation
in all Common Security and Defence Policy missions and operations by default, the
operation employed surface, subsurface and aerial assets in support of its core
mandate to disrupt the business model of migrant smugglers and hu man traffickers in
the southern central Mediterranean. It also continued to train the Libyan coastguard
and navy, conduct surveillance activities and gather information on illegal trafficking
of oil exports from Libya.

__________________
2
3

4/15

See: www.un.org/press/en/2018/sc13371.doc.htm.
See: www.un.org/press/en/2018/sc13639.doc.htm.
19-14593

S/2019/711

16. Since the decision taken in March 2019 to temporarily suspend surface naval
assets, EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA has relied on air assets 4 for the
implementation of its mandate. Three warships remain ready to take to the sea at short
notice, if so decided by States members of the European Union. When observing
vessels in distress in the central Mediterranean Sea, the operation ’s air assets have
played a critical role in reporting incidents to relevant Maritime Rescue Coordination
Centres so that they can initiate a search and rescue resp onse. UNHCR notes that
many of the vessels in distress observed by the operation were disembarked in Libya,
in contradiction with its advisory on the matter.
17. Over the reporting period, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) has
continued to support, as required and if necessary, the efforts of the European Union
in implementing Security Council resolution 2357 (2017), extended by resolutions
2420 (2018) and 2473 (2019), with regard to vessels suspected of breaking the arms
embargo on Libya. The support is provided by NATO within the framework of its
Operation Sea Guardian.

IV. Support to Libya and related efforts to combat migrant
smuggling and human trafficking
18. Measures to counter migrant smuggling and human trafficking off the coast of
Libya have included the strengthening of Libyan border control agencies, including
the Libyan coastguard and the Directorate for Combating Illegal Migration, through
capacity-building and training, along with the targeted deployment of naval assets
and operations in the Mediterranean Sea and the implementation of targeted sanctions
against six human traffickers in Libya. Nevertheless, it remains difficult to ascertain
the combined impact of those measures, in particular in relation to the safe ty of those
on the move.
19. Since 2004, Libya has been a State party to the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children, supplementing
the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, and the
Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, supplementing the
United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. To create
conditions for the Libyan coastguard and navy to progressively take ownership of the
implementation of those Protocols within the territorial seas of Libya, EUNAVFOR
MED operation SOPHIA, from June 2017 onward, gradually assumed a second -line
posture, centred on capacity-building efforts introduced into the operation’s mandate
in August 2016, and supported by the provision of equipment. The operation reports
that the Libyan coastguard and navy have since become increasingly active in
exercising all coastguard functions in the territorial sea of Libya.
20. As at July 2019, EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA had trained 417 Libyan
coastguard and navy officers since signing the memorandum of understanding with
the coastguard and navy in 2016. It foresees the training of up to 200 additional
Libyan personnel in Croatia, Greece and Italy by the end of 2019. The operation notes
that it vets all participants, in cooperation with the European Union Agency for Law
Enforcement Cooperation (Europol), the International Criminal Court, the
International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) National Central Bure au in
Rome, the European Border and Coast Guard Agency (FRONTEX) and State security
agencies, to ensure that they meet the training requirements, including the absence of
a criminal record and suspicions of illegal activities. The courses include lectures on
__________________
4

19-14593

The air assets currently supporting the mission are a CASA 235 (Spain), a Merlin IV and Merlin III
(Luxembourg), an Antonov An-28 B1R (Poland), a P72A (Italy) and a Falcon 50 (France).
5/15

S/2019/711

human rights, gender, refugee protection, asylum procedures, migrant smuggling and
trafficking in persons, and law enforcement operations conducted at sea, and are
provided in partnership with IOM, UNHCR and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC). Following the recommendation by the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) to provide training on the Convention of the Rights of the
Child (see S/2018/807, para. 22), specific attention to the Convention has been
included in the human rights lecture since June 2019. IOM has also provided four
training courses for officials of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Justice
and the Ministry of Social Affairs of Libya on countering trafficki ng in persons,
focused on the international legal framework and victim protection and assistance.
21. In addition to training, EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA notes that the
monitoring of the Libyan coastguard and navy remains a key element of its capacity building programme. The monitoring mechanism foreseen in the memorandum of
understanding with the Libyan coastguard and navy is based on daily information
provided by the Libyan coastguard and navy operations room, remote monitoring by
the operation’s air assets and periodic meetings between the operation and Libyan
coastguard and navy representatives. The intended deployment of operation personnel
ashore to allow for monitoring visits of up to four days each, twice per month, has
not been possible to date owing to the volatile security situation in Libya.
22. EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA reports that, in the first six months of
2019, the Libyan coastguard performed 51 per cent of the rescue operations within
the country’s territorial sea. Since 1 April, notwithstanding the deteriorating security
situation in Libya, the Libyan coastguard and navy have continued their operational
capabilities at sea, performing routine sorties and search and rescue operations.
23. EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA notes that the Maritime Rescue
Coordination Centre of Libya, the establishment of which was described in my
previous report (see S/2018/807, para. 12), is expected to reach full operational
capability in 2020. With the enhancement of the Centre, the European Union reports
that search and rescue operations within the 74-nautical-mile-wide maritime search
and rescue zone announced by Libya in August 2017 will be fully coordinated by
Libya, utilizing internal and external assets for search and rescue activities up to the
parallel along 34° 20’ north. During the reporting period, Libyan authorities
successfully entered their search and rescue-related information in the Global
Integrated Shipping Information System of the Interna tional Maritime Organization
as standard practice, in the framework of the global search and rescue plan established
under the 1979 International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue. The
European Union continues to support the establishment of the Mar itime Rescue
Coordination Centre through the €46.3 million project supporting integrated border
and migration management in Libya as part of its Emergency Trust Fund for stability
and addressing root causes of irregular migration and displaced persons in A frica.
24. In support of the implementation of its mandate, EUNAVFOR MED operation
SOPHIA has also worked to strengthen ties, including through information -sharing
and coordination, with several European Union agencies, such as Europol, Eurojust
and Frontex, as well as national, international and regional organizations, such as the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the “Mare Sicuro”
operation and the Office of the National Anti-Mafia and Counter-Terrorism
Prosecutor of Italy, the International Criminal Court, IOM, INTERPOL, NATO,
UNHCR, UNODC and UNSMIL. On 22 February 2019, a procedural agreement for
information-sharing was signed between the operation and the Panel of Experts on
Libya.
25. To further enhance its internal-external security nexus, the Council of the
European Union decided in May 2018 to establish a pilot crime information cell in
6/15

19-14593

S/2019/711

the operation. Over the reporting period, the cell has contributed to information sharing on criminal activities in the central Mediterranean Sea between the European
Union justice and home affairs network, States members of the European Union,
Europol and Frontex. On 23 and 24 January 2019 in Rome, the operation hosted the
seventh edition of the Shared Awareness and Deconfliction in the Med iterranean
(SHADE MED) forum, in which the European Union Integrated Border Management
Assistance Mission in Libya, Europol, Eurojust, IOM, UNHCR, UNSMIL and the
International Chamber of Shipping shared lessons learned and opportunities to further
deconflict and coordinate anti-smuggling efforts.
26. The European Observatory on migrant smuggling and human trafficking,
launched by the National Anti-Mafia and Counter-Terrorism Prosecutor of Italy and
the Commander of EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA in July 2017, has continued
to further understanding of the smuggling of migrants and trafficking in persons. The
aim of the Observatory is to identify and prosecute individuals suspected of
smuggling of migrants and trafficking in persons, and organizations suspected of
being involved in such activities. Since its establishment, the Observatory has
matched information collected by the operation with more than 700 records collected
by Italian prosecutors. On the basis of data included in the Observatory ’s second
report, covering the period from 1 October 2017 to 31 December 2018, 20 of the 151
suspected migrant smugglers and human traffickers apprehended by EUNAVFOR
MED operation SOPHIA have been reported by the operation to the Italian judicial
authorities. Legal proceedings against those 20 individuals are ongoing.
27. On 17 December 2018, the European Council amended and extended the
mandate of the European Union Integrated Border Management Assistance Mission
in Libya from 1 January 2019 until 30 June 2020, with a €61.6 million budget, to
assist the Libyan authorities in the building of State security structures in the country.
The Mission is focusing support in the areas of border management, law enforcement
and criminal justice with a view to contributing to efforts to disrupt organized
criminal networks involved, notably, in the smuggling of migrants, human trafficking
and terrorism in Libya and the central Mediterranean region. The Mission notes that
the promotion and protection of fundamental human rights lies at the centre of its
mandate, which is also to provide gender-responsive and inclusive support.
28. The European Union Integrated Border Management Assistance Mission in
Libya and the Libyan National Team for Security and Border Management have
initiated the drafting of a white paper on border security and reform in the country
and have invited UNSMIL, together with other international partners, to contribute to
it. The paper contains proposals for an overarching structure with a single
coordination agency for land, air and sea in charge of border checks and surveillance,
as well as an immigration agency and a customs agency. The proposed reform process
is aimed at supporting Libya in gaining full control of its borders and at disrupting
organized criminal networks involved in illicit activities, including the smuggling of
migrants and human trafficking. A European Union maritime sub -working group on
Libya remains active under the Border Management Working Group to assist in the
drafting of a maritime strategy in order to define the areas of responsibility and overall
coordination. UNSMIL works closely with the Mission in its role as the coordinator
of key international players in its areas of engagement to identify training and other
capacity-building needs, including by assisting the Government of Libya to achieve
international standards at key airports. The latter activity has included regular training
on falsified and counterfeit documents by the armed forces of the Netherlands. To
complement European Union training efforts for the Libyan coastguard, the Mission,
together with FRONTEX and the Ministry of the Interior of Italy, have carried out
pilot training for the Libyan coastal police, including in crime scene investigation,
communication, reporting, interviews, fundamental human rights and protection.
19-14593

7/15

S/2019/711

29. The European Union reports that the creation by the Mission of the Organized
Crime Coordination Panel in February 2018, through which the activities of the
Criminal Investigation Department, the Anti-Narcotics General Administration and
the INTERPOL office are better coordinated, including in capacity-building efforts,
has shown positive results in improving coordination by Libyan authorities in fighting
organized crime. The initiative included study visits to the Austrian police, the Dutch
police and Europol in the reporting period. The Mission also continued to support the
Libyan judicial system, in particular the Prosecution Office, in improving its
investigation and prosecution capacity to fight organized crime. Through the newly
established Criminal Justice Improvement Working Group set up under the
memorandum of understanding between the Mission and the Ministry of Justice of
Libya, capacity-building in the field of migrant smuggling and human trafficki ng is
being discussed, to complement support already provided in related areas, such as
international legal cooperation, counter-terrorism and financial crimes.
30. In January 2019, at the initiative of the Emir of Qatar, Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad
Al Thani, a memorandum of understanding was signed between Qatar and the African
Union for the establishment of a fund to support efforts by the African Union and its
member States to safely reintegrate repatriated migrants in their countries of origin.
The agreement is aimed at promoting regional cooperation and partnership to address
the drivers of irregular migration in the Sahel region. Through the Qatar Fund for
Development, the African Union and Qatar also intend to establish partnerships with
financial institutions in the targeted countries to design and implement programmes
in support of the economic reintegration of repatriated returnees.
31. UNHCR reports that, as at July 2019, there were 52,900 registered refugees and
asylum seekers living in Libya, primarily from the Syrian Arab Republic (43 per
cent), the Sudan (21 per cent) and Eritrea (13 per cent). In 2019 alone, UNHCR has
registered over 5,300 individuals, including over 2,200 registered in detention
centres. As reported earlier, the vast majority of refugees and asylum seekers face the
risk of arbitrary detention and arrest in Libya. UNHCR is engaged in the provision of
humanitarian assistance within the framework of the human rights due diligence
policy in detention centres, with the aim of securing access to persons of concern for
the purpose of identification and registration, meeting basic needs and undertaking
advocacy for their release from detention or the use of alternatives to detention.
Engagement by United Nations agencies with Libyan authorities while providing
humanitarian assistance is undertaken alongside a number of risk assessment and
mitigation measures, to ensure that the assistance provided does not increase or
prolong the risk of detention or otherwise increase risks of exposure to h uman rights
violations, within the framework set out in the human rights due diligence policy on
United Nations support to non-United Nations security forces.
32. UNHCR only undertakes visits to official detention centres under the
administration of the Directorate for Combating Illegal Migration, where access
remains restricted. Since 1 September 2018, in cooperation with the International
Medical Corps and the Libyan Humanitarian Relief Agency, UNHCR has conducted
over 1,200 monitoring visits to centres throughout Libya. It estimates that 4,700
refugees and migrants are currently detained in the country, including some 3,300
persons of concern to UNHCR. In addition, Libyan authorities estimate that thousands
of refugees and migrants continue to be held in captivity by migrant smugglers in
undetermined locations, to which UNHCR has no access. During the reporting period,
IOM, UNHCR and UNICEF provided primary health care and psychosocial support
to detained refugees and migrants who had faced physical, sexua l and gender-based
violence, including in a shooting by an armed group at the Qasr Bin Ghashir detention
centre on 23 April, which left more than a dozen detainees injured. UNHCR and

8/15

19-14593

S/2019/711

partners also continued to advocate the release from detention of refugee s and
migrants and an end to such detention.
33. In April, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs allocated
$2 million from the Central Emergency Response Fund to provide life -saving
assistance to the affected population in Libya, including support for the safe
relocation of vulnerable migrants and refugees from detention centres in areas where
air strikes are reported. The objective of the 2019 humanitarian response plan for
Libya is to protect migrants, refugees and internally displaced p ersons through the
provision of safe and dignified access to essential goods and critical public services,
as well as the enhancement of protection. Humanitarian actors are also strengthening
capacity-building efforts to reinforce the skills and technical capabilities and
competences of Libyan institutions and authorities to respond to the humanitarian and
wider needs of migrants and refugees in Libya, including migration governance and
management.
34. In its concluding observations on Libya dated 16 April 2019, the Committee on
the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families
shared its concerns about the human rights violations routinely suffered by migrants
in Libya. In 2004, the country acceded to the International Conve ntion on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families. The
Committee called upon the Libyan authorities to decriminalize irregular migration
and to investigate and prosecute persons or groups that exploit migrant worker s.
35. UNHCR continues to work towards finding solutions outside Libya for those
who have international protection needs, especially the most vulnerable, including
through resettlement. With regard to such solutions, departures are conducted in
coordination with the authorities and according to the security situation. In November
2017, UNHCR established the emergency transit mechanism in the Niger to facilitate
evacuations out of detention for vulnerable persons of concern while solutions are
identified in the Niger. UNHCR also supported refugees and asylum seekers for
family reunification or counselled those willing to return to their country of origin.
Since November 2017, UNHCR has supported the evacuation and resettlement of
4,403 refugees out of Libya (2,912 to the emergency transit mechanism in the Niger,
710 to Italy, 398 to the emergency transit centre in Romania and 383 to other
countries). The majority of those who have departed so far in 2019 are families,
followed by unaccompanied children, single women and female-headed households.
In 2019, UNHCR concluded an agreement with the Government of Rwanda to
establish an emergency transit centre. While the increase in the number of States
committed to resettling refugees evacuated from Libya has enabled UNHCR to bring
more people to safety, it is encouraging States to be more consistent with their
selection criteria and procedures to avoid undue delays and prolonged detention.
Since November 2017, IOM has provided financial and logistical support for 31,9 46
migrants to return to 39 countries of origin, through its voluntary humanitarian return
programme and within the framework of the joint African Union, European Union
and United Nations task force on migration. Of these, 30,629 returned to countries of
the African Union, in particular in the Sahel region.
36. The European Union has continued to encourage its member States to intensify
efforts as well as to accelerate humanitarian evacuations and the resettlement of
refugees from Libya and the Niger, including through a joint letter of the High
Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Federica
Mogherini, and the European Union Commissioner for Migration, Home Affairs and
Citizenship, Dimitris Avramopoulos. States members of the European Union have
also been invited by the European Commission to pursue resettlement efforts in the
context of the European Union resettlement scheme for 2020. On 20 June 2019,
leaders of the States members of the European Union confirmed, through the a doption
19-14593

9/15

S/2019/711

of a new strategic agenda for the period 2019–2024, that they were determined to
further develop a fully functioning comprehensive migration policy; that they would
continue and deepen cooperation with countries of origin and transit to fight illeg al
migration and human trafficking and to ensure effective returns; and that they would
work towards consensus on the Dublin III Regulation to reform it based on a balance
of responsibility and solidarity, taking into account the persons disembarked
following search and rescue operations.
37. In December 2018, UNHCR opened the first gathering and departure facility in
Tripoli. The facility is intended to host vulnerable refugees in a safer environment
while solutions, including resettlement, family reunific ation, voluntary repatriation
or evacuation to other emergency facilities, are identified. UNICEF has been working
to enhance child protection programmes at the facility, which is managed by UNHCR,
the Libyan Humanitarian Relief Agency and the Ministry of the Interior. The facility
is one of a range of measures to achieve viable alternatives to detention, aimed at
ensuring freedom of movement for those in need of international protection. Since
December 2018, 2,127 refugees have passed through the facility, including over 1,900
in 2019. UNHCR in Libya also assists refugees and asylum seekers with counselling,
medical assistance and cash-based interventions through the community day centre
in Tripoli. It is strengthening outreach to urban communities, includi ng to increase
awareness concerning migrant smuggling and human trafficking.
38. With regard to migrant children, UNICEF has continued efforts to develop
alternatives to detention, provide life-saving assistance to children in detention and
ensure that best-interest mechanisms are in place to allow for the identification of
long-term solutions for the most vulnerable children. During 2018, UNICEF worked
with IOM, UNHCR, local authorities and other key child protection service providers
to develop common action plans to support children on the move with protection
services. UNICEF also continues its advocacy with the Libyan authorities to provide
non-custodial, community-based alternatives to detention for migrant children and
their families, as a temporary solution until a durable solution is found, in accordance
with the best interests of the child. It is working with Libyan authorities and partners
to establish temporary centres for children as an alternative to detention through the
provision of services to vulnerable children. In addition, it has continued to provide
critical child protection and psychosocial support services to children on the move,
in order to enhance their psychosocial well-being and resilience.
39. Libya being a State party to the 1979 International Convention on Maritime
Search and Rescue, UNSMIL has provided support for implementation of the
Convention by drafting standard operating procedures on aspects related to access
and humanitarian assistance to refugees and migrants in the context of rescue at sea.
The draft procedures are currently under review.

V. International efforts to combat migrant smuggling and
human trafficking
40. The United Nations continues to support and coordinate international efforts to
counter the smuggling of migrants and trafficking of persons. In the New York
Declaration for Refugees and Migrants, adopted by the General Assembly on
19 September 2016, Member States pledged their commitment to fully protect the
human rights of all refugees and migrants, regardless of status, and to develop a global
compact on refugees and a global compact for safe, orderly and regular migration by
2018. The Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration was endorsed
and the Global Compact on Refugees was affirmed by the General Assembly in
December 2018. In both compacts, reference is made to efforts to combat migrant
10/15

19-14593

S/2019/711

smuggling and human trafficking. The Global Compact on Refugees reflects the
commitment of Member States to provide resources and expertise to strengthen
international efforts to combat trafficking in persons and the smuggling of migrants.
The Global Compact on Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration reflects a commitment
to establish coordinated international efforts on search and rescue, as well as on
ending the impunity of trafficking networks and protection from prosecution for
victims of smuggling.
41. In its resolution 2388 (2017), the Security Council condemned, in the strongest
terms, human trafficking in areas affected by armed conflict. It reiterated the
connection between trafficking in persons, sexual and gender-based violence and
terrorism and other organized criminal activities, which could prolong and exacerbate
conflict and instability or intensify its impact on civilian populations.
42. In 2018, UNODC released a thematic paper on countering trafficking in persons
in conflict situations and the Global Report on Trafficking in Persons, which is
focused on the interlinkages between trafficking and conflict situations. Furthermore,
in 2018, UNODC published the first Global Study on the Smuggling of Migrants,
which provides a comprehensive overview of migrant smuggling and its impact across
the world. Regarding the Mediterranean Sea, the Niger is considered to be a key
transit country for smuggling routes from West Africa to North Africa, notably Libya,
for the onward journey to Europe. To address that, UNODC continues to support
capacity-building workshops in the Sahel region, in partnership with the Network of
West African Central Authorities and Prosecutors against Organized Crime.
43. UNHCR supported the information campaign entitled “Telling the real story”,
which facilitates intracommunity dialogue in East Africa to help to co unter
misinformation on irregular journeys and provide useful alternatives. The initiative
has closely monitored the changing narratives used by smugglers and has adjusted its
message while targeting those most at risk. For instance, in Somalia, thanks to the
counter-narrative and engagement of parents and neighbours, migrant smugglers
faced difficulties in pitching their promises of a brighter future to children. Smugglers
consequently moved to target children and young people directly, and the platform is
now seeking to address this by informing children about education and employment
prospects.
44. The United Nations system continues to coordinate interventions to prevent and
combat trafficking in persons and to protect and support victims of trafficking ,
including through the Inter-Agency Coordination Group against Trafficking in
Persons, which comprises 23 United Nations entities and other relevant international
and regional organizations and bodies. Since 2018, UNODC, as the Group ’s
coordinator, has hosted its secretariat at its premises. In 2019, the Group is jointly
chaired by the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women (UN-Women) and OSCE, which are working to ensure a system-wide,
survivor-centred and gender-responsive approach to prevent and combat human
trafficking, grounded in a human rights-based approach. In January 2019, UNODC,
in cooperation with the Department of Peace Operations, developed a training module
on trafficking in persons and the smuggling of migrant s for the in-mission training of
police personnel deployed in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). The module is to be used to deliver a
training-of-trainers session to MINUSMA police officers, who will subsequently roll
out the training to their peers.

19-14593

11/15

S/2019/711

VI. Key issues
45. As noted in my previous report, Libya is still not party to the 1951 Convention
relating to the Status of Refugees. It is, however, signatory to the 1969 Organization
of African Unity Convention Governing the Specific Aspects of Refugee Problems in
Africa. Meanwhile, it has not yet adopted asylum legislation or established asylum
procedures. It is of concern that, under Libyan law, all irregular entries, stays or
departures continue to be criminalized and that Libyan authorities do not fully
recognize the mandate of UNHCR in providing and overseeing the application of
international protection.
46. There is deep concern about the systematic and arbitrary detention of refugees
and migrants who disembark in Libya. Notably, an estimated 3,500 refugees and
migrants reside in centres located in areas of clashes or where clashes may be
imminent. On 2 July 2019, two missiles struck the Tajura ’ detention centre, leaving
53 detained migrants dead and at least 130 injured, including women and children.
I reiterate that I condemn this horrendous incident in the strongest terms. Both the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and UNSMIL noted that the
incident might amount to a war crime, and I, supported by IOM and UNHCR, have
called for an independent investigation of the incident to be conducted and for those
responsible to be held to account. On 1 August, the Minister of the Interior of Libya,
Fathi Bashagha, announced the closure of three detention centres in Tajura ’, Misratah
and Khums. UNHCR welcomed the announcement and, together with partners, is
monitoring any possible transfer or release of refugees and migrants. A contingency
plan is in preparation for the potential release of all refugees and migrants from
detention into urban areas. At the time of reporting, however, the detention centres
remain operational.
47. UNSMIL reports that there continue to be credible allegations of refugees and
migrants detained close to military facilities, of weapons and munitions stored inside
detention centres and of refugees and migrants forced to provide logistical support to
armed groups that control detention centres. Detention centres, including Khoms, Suq
al-Khamis and Zawiyah, are reported to have become havens for illicit trafficking in
persons, smuggling of migrants and possible enforced disappearance. Since the start
of the offensive in Libya on 4 April 2019, hundreds of people intercepted by the
Libyan coastguard have reportedly been sent to detention centres managed by the
Directorate for Combating Illegal Migration, as well as to unofficial centres
controlled by militias. Others have disappeared following their disembarkation,
including from an unofficial detention centre in Khoms. Requests to locate these
people have not been answered by the Government of National Accord. There is
particular concern that the systematic detention by Libyan authorities of refugees and
migrants makes no exception for minors. UNICEF notes that the detention of children
on the basis of their migration status, or that of their pare nts or guardians, is strictly
prohibited in the Convention on the Rights of the Child, as it can never be considered
in the best interest of the child.
48. UNSMIL and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) note that refugees and migrants en route to the coast of Libya, their
point of departure for Europe, report being systematically held captive in abusive
conditions, including being subjected to starvation, severe beatings, burning with hot
metals, electric shocks, sexual and gender-based violence and the exploitation of
women and girls as well as men and boys, often with the aim of extorting money from
their families. UNICEF observed that nearly half of all migrant women and children
had reported sexual violence in transit to or while in Libya and found that women and
girls from Eritrea, Ethiopia and Somalia who passed through the Sudan often took
emergency contraception with them on their way to Libya in fearful anticipation of
12/15

19-14593

S/2019/711

sexual and gender-based violence. UNSMIL and OHCHR also found that refugees
and migrants were frequently sold from one criminal group to another and required
to pay ransoms several times before being set free or taken to coastal areas to await
the Mediterranean Sea crossing. IOM reports an apparent increase in kidnappings in
that regard. Moreover, UNSMIL and OHCHR note that, during the journey from their
country of origin across the Sahel, countless refugees and migrants have lost their
lives in captivity after being shot, tortured to death or left to die from starvation or
medical neglect.
49. The risk of sexual and gender-based violence facing refugee and migrant women
and girls, as well as men and boys, in detention centres in Libya is reported to be
extremely high. Sexual violence, such as rape, which is used as a form of torture and
in some cases results in death, including by guards of the Directorate for Combating
Illegal Migration and armed groups, has been recorded as a routine method for
controlling and humiliating migrants in these centre s. Such methods continue to be
perpetrated with impunity. Women are routinely held in facilities without female
guards and strip-searched by, or in front of, male guards, and there is a systematic
disregard for their privacy in water and sanitation facilities. Women and girls lack
access to sexual and reproductive health services, including menstrual hygiene
products and provisions for pregnant or nursing women. Women in detention were
also found to have become pregnant while they were held captive in detention centres.

VII. Observations
50. In my previous reports on the implementation of Security Council resolution
2240 (2015) and subsequent resolutions (S/2018/807, S/2017/761 and S/2016/766),
I began my observations by first commending the brave men and women con ducting
search and rescue operations in the Mediterranean Sea. I would like to reiterate my
compliments and salute those who continue to save lives at sea, at considerable risk.
At the same time, in the present reporting period, the number of search and re scue
operations in the Mediterranean Sea has fallen dramatically. EUNAVFOR MED
operation SOPHIA naval assets have been temporarily suspended since March 2019.
Search and rescue activities by NGO vessels have also been severely curtailed, in
particular as a result of administrative and legal restrictions imposed on such vessels
and constraints on the disembarkation of refugees and migrants in Europe.
51. The current absence of naval assets de facto means that it has not been possible
to inspect and seize vessels in international waters off the coast of Libya, on suspicion
of smuggling either migrants or arms, in connection with the arms embargo imposed
on Libya and pursuant to resolutions 2437 (2018) and 2473 (2019), respectively. This
is of concern, in particular amid the ongoing conflict in Libya.
52. While the central Mediterranean route has become deadlier over the reporting
period, more people have also died on both the eastern and western Mediterranean
routes in 2019 compared with previous years, highlighting the ongoing peril on those
routes, exacerbated by diminished search and rescue capacity. I wish to emphasize
that the life of every human being is precious and that the lives of those stranded at
sea are equally so. This is reflected in the firm requirement under international law
that they be rescued and in the requirement that they be brought to a place of safety,
which are contained in the relevant provisions of the International Convention for the
Safety of Life at Sea, of 1974, and the International Convention on Maritime Search
and Rescue, of 1979. I appeal to all Member States to carry out, support and facilitate
search and rescue operations in the Mediterranean, including by non-governmental
and merchant vessels. No one should be hindered, criminalized or stigmatized for
saving lives at sea. It is my strong hope that a credible and predictable arrangement

19-14593

13/15

S/2019/711

for the rapid and safe disembarkation of those rescued at sea can be agreed upon,
guided by an urgently needed sense of solidarity and responsibility, and grounded in
a process that prioritizes people’s rights, well-being and safety, in accordance with
international law. I am encouraged by initial conversations among European States to
agree on a solidarity mechanism and urge their prompt, successful conclusion. The
United Nations continues to stand ready to support the development of such a
common approach.
53. I remind all Member States of their obligations under the International
Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea and the 1979 International Convention on
Maritime Search and Rescue that persons rescued at sea be delivered to a place of
safety and in conditions that uphold their human rights, including adherence to the
principle of non-refoulement. Since the offensive of April 2019 in the Libyan conflict,
the security situation in the country has only deteriorated. I am appalled by refugees
and migrants being trapped in detention centres, where they are at risk of being
affected by ongoing clashes. Moreover, I am concerned about the reduced
humanitarian space in the country, hindering access to information about and
protection efforts aimed at refugees and migrants there. In t he light of the volatile
security situation in Libya and the particular protection risks in the country, including
detention, Libya does not meet the criteria for being designated as a place of safety
or as a safe third country for the purpose of disembarkation.
54. Over the reporting period, as it gradually assumed more responsibilities, the
Libyan coastguard rescued or intercepted the majority of refugees and migrants
attempting to cross the Mediterranean Sea through the central Mediterranean route.
Libyan authorities have shown a commitment to save those in danger at sea, even in
very challenging circumstances. I welcome the efforts of Member States to support
and train the Libyan authorities, including on human rights and protection matters.
55. I remain deeply concerned, however, about the situation in which those rescued
or intercepted are disembarked and systematically detained. The consistency of such
a situation with international law is questionable. The situation is intolerable. I appeal
to the Libyan authorities to fulfil their relevant obligations under international law
and, in doing so, to consider, as a matter of priority, alternatives to detention. I
welcome the decision by the Ministry of the Interior of Libya to close three detention
centres in Misratah, Tajura’ and Khoms, as well as efforts by the Libyan authorities
to close down the remaining centres. I encourage prompt implementation of such
closures, in close coordination with relevant United Nations entities. In the meantime,
I hope that the Libyan authorities will grant United Nations entities unhindered access
to detention centres in Libya. More needs to be done to ensure the registration of
refugees and migrants at all disembarkation points in Libya, as well as to ensure that
their human rights are upheld throughout their stay in the country, in accordance with
international human rights standards.
56. My deep concerns extend to the many thousands of refugees and migrants
residing outside formal detention centres, about which little in formation is available
and access is limited. The high level of sexual and gender-based violence that women
and girls especially, but also men and boys, face during their journey through Libya,
including while in detention, is unacceptable. This needs to b e addressed as a matter
of urgency. I support the call by IOM, OHCHR and UNHCR for the international
community to work towards establishing humanitarian corridors for refugees and
migrants so that they can be evacuated to places of safety in accordance wit h
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, including through
relocation to third countries. The United Nations will continue to support the safe
transport and evacuation of migrants and refugees out of Libya. I call upon the Libyan
authorities, as well as the international community, to intensify efforts in that regard.

14/15

19-14593

S/2019/711

57. Traffickers in persons and smugglers of migrants through Libya rely on
networks of people who facilitate the logistics and other arrangements for movements
to neighbouring countries and the wider region. There is a need for improved
information-sharing between relevant international organizations and entities, as well
as Governments, to enhance preventive capacity and further disrupt business models
used by migrant smugglers and human traffickers. I therefore recommend increased
sharing of information between the Panel of Experts on Libya, the Panel of Experts
on Mali, INTERPOL and relevant institutions of the European Union, including
FRONTEX, EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA and the European Union
Integrated Border Management Assistance Mission in Libya. At the same time, I am
deeply concerned about the impunity with which the smuggling of migrants and
trafficking in persons off the coast of Libya continue, and I call upon the relevant
authorities to ensure that those who have fallen victim to abuse at the hands of
smugglers, traffickers and their enablers have access to justice and that those
responsible are held to account.
58. Migrant smuggling and human trafficking into, through and from Libyan
territory and off the coast of Libya contribute to undermining the process of achieving
peace and stability in the country. Bringing about an end to the fighting and finding
lasting, sustainable solutions with the full support of a cohesive international
community remains the overarching goal. I call upon all Member States to support
efforts by the United Nations and use any leverage to bring the parties to cease
hostilities without preconditions and in good faith, as well as to re turn to the political
process.
59. It is clear that conflict, insecurity, inequality, poverty and poor governance,
exacerbated by environmental degradation and climate change, create the volatile
socioeconomic conditions that cause displacement towards the Mediterranean. We
collectively need to redouble our efforts to turn our reactive approach towards migrant
smuggling and human trafficking into one that is more holistic and human -centred.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, as well as the Global Compact on
Refugees and Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, offer
important guidance in that regard. The United Nations will continue to make every
effort to support States in addressing the causes of forced displacement and drivers
of irregular migration, while assisting origin, transit and destination countries in their
practical implementation of the Compacts and the Sustainable Development Goals.

19-14593

15/15
