United Nations

S/PV.4655

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-seventh year

4655

th meeting
Wednesday, 4 December 2002, 3.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Valdivieso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Colombia)

Members:

Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Tafrov
Mr. Tidjani
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. De la Sablière
Mr. Traoré
Mr. Corr
Mr. Jingree
Mr. Pujalte
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Konuzin
Ms. Lee
Mr. Mekdad
Mr. Harrison
Mr. Williamson

Agenda
The situation in Burundi

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

02-72233 (E)

*0272233*

S/PV.4655

The meeting was called to order at 3.45 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 37 of its provisional rules of
procedure to the Deputy President of South Africa, His
Excellency Mr. Jacob Zuma.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
Mr. Jacob Zuma, Deputy President of South
Africa, was escorted to a seat at the Council
table.
The President (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to the Deputy
President of South Africa.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from the representative of Burundi, in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nteturuye
(Burundi) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
I give the floor to the Deputy President of South
Africa, His Excellency Mr. Jacob Zuma.
Mr. Zuma (South Africa): Thank you,
Mr. President, for affording me the opportunity to
address the Security Council today. It is indeed an
honour and a privilege.

2

I find it important and prudent to brief the
Security Council in pursuance of the common objective
of security, peace and stability on the African continent
in general, and in Burundi in particular. The efforts to
find peace in Burundi are being made within the
context of our overall objective of creating a climate of
peace, order, stability and sustainable development on
the African continent. We are fully aware that the
United Nations shares that vision and that mission.
Today’s meeting is a follow-up to the visit by a
Security Council delegation to South Africa in April of
this year. I had indicated to the delegation that I would
come to New York to brief the Security Council on
progress in the ceasefire negotiations. That intention
was endorsed by the Nineteenth Great Lakes regional
Summit on Burundi, which was held a few days ago,
on 1 and 2 December. The heads of State attending the
meeting believed that it was important that we should
keep the Security Council informed and actively
involved in the process of cementing peace in the
region.
It has been more than two years since former
President Nelson Mandela, the chief mediator in the
Burundi conflict, asked me to facilitate ceasefire
negotiations between the belligerent parties in Burundi.
There were two armed groups at the time, the National
Council for the Defence of Democracy-Forces for the
Defence of Democracy (CNDD-FDD) and the
Palipehutu
Forces
for
National
Liberation
(PALIPEHUTU-FNL). Due to infighting, they later
split, resulting in four armed movements with the same
names but with different leaders. Last year, the
facilitation responsibility was expanded, when former
President Mandela asked President Omar Bongo of
Gabon to assist, in order to widen expertise and
capacity. Later on, we also requested Tanzania to help,
particularly with regard to relations with the CNDDFDD of Pierre Nkurunziza.
When we last met with the Security Council
delegation in South Africa, earlier this year, there was
every reason to have mixed feelings about the Burundi
peace process. The armed movements and the
Transitional Government were far from finding
common ground. Interaction with the armed
movements was characterized by the issuing of
preconditions and demands, many of which had already
been addressed, or were being addressed, through the
Arusha Agreement of 2000. Many of them were indeed
also being implemented by the Government of

S/PV.4655

Burundi. There was also a sense from the armed groups
of not accepting the Arusha Agreement and of seeking
to negotiate a new type of agreement outside of
Arusha. There was also an impression on the part of the
armed groups that the international community
supported their reluctance to negotiate and conclude a
ceasefire. The unequivocal support of the Security
Council delegation for the peace process and the
message it gave to the armed groups directing them to
enter into negotiations immediately and without
conditions eliminated the wrong impression of
sympathy held by the armed movements. The
leadership provided by the Security Council in that
regard was indeed invaluable.
Given the difficulties we have faced in the past, it
is therefore pleasing and encouraging that we are today
meeting with the Security Council in a climate of
optimism and hope. Only two days ago, President
Pierre Buyoya signed a ceasefire agreement with Pierre
Nkurunziza of the CNDD-FDD at Arusha, Tanzania.
On 7 October 2002, the CNDD-FDD of Jean-Bosco
Ndayikengurukiye and the PALIPEHUTU-FNL of
Alain Mugabarabona signed a ceasefire agreement with
the Transitional Government. Indeed, these are positive
developments, as the delay in securing a ceasefire had
led to continued suffering by ordinary innocent people
in Burundi.
When the Arusha Agreement was signed, on 28
August 2000, all the signatories and stakeholders
understood that it would remain incomplete until a
ceasefire agreement was concluded. That meant that
the resources that were pledged by the international
community for the implementation of the Arusha
Agreement were kept in abeyance until that
requirement was fulfilled. The Council will recall that,
at the request of former President Mandela at Paris in
2000, international donors pledged $440 million in aid
to war-weary Burundi, subject to the conclusion of a
ceasefire agreement. The serious and challenging work
of implementing the agreements has now begun.
The signatories of the 7 October document —
President
Buyoya,
Alain
Mugabarabona
of
PALIPEHUTU-FNL
and
Jean-Bosco
Ndayikengurukiye of CNDD-FDD — have already
held three meetings, in Pretoria and Dar-es-Salam, to
unpack the details on various implementation issues.
Those include the return to Burundi of former fighters
and leaders, the participation of former armed
movements in the transitional institutions of the State

and Parliament, and issues relating to disarmament and
demobilization and to the building of a new, inclusive
security apparatus in the country.
With regard to the CNDD-FDD of Pierre
Nkurunziza, the agreement will come into force on 30
December 2002. The first 14 days after the date of
signature have been designated as a period to allow the
belligerents to communicate to their rank and file the
decision to stop fighting. Under the agreement, the
truce or the cessation of fighting is to enter into force
with 72 hours of signing. By 30 December, the
combatants should have commenced their movement
towards the assembly areas. Within thirty days the
parties are to discuss the establishment of
implementation structures, such as the joint monitoring
commission and joint liaison teams. The agreement
also provides for the establishment of an African
mission that will be responsible for the verification and
control of the ceasefire. The mission is to set up the
organs and machinery required for the control and
verification of the ceasefire.
The Nineteenth Summit Meeting on Burundi
mandated us to assist the parties to work out the
implementation details. Another key pending task is
the facilitation of the discussion of outstanding
political issues that could not be finalized during
negotiations. Those issues, among others, include the
return to constitutional legitimacy, issues relating to
post-war management, the transitional period and its
leaders, the welfare of the combatants after the
ceasefire, the location of the combatants, issues such as
good governance and the reconciliation and
reconstruction of the country. Those issues are part of
the annex to the agreement. Under the agreement
signed, negotiations on those issues will not constitute
preconditions for the implementation of the ceasefire.
The implementation process is a difficult and
involved one that requires the strong support of the
international community, especially the United
Nations. We are aware of the stringent prescripts of the
United Nations, including the difficulties of deploying
peacekeeping forces where there is not a total
ceasefire, as in Burundi. We say not total because of
the PALIPEHUTU-FNL. But we believe that creativity
and innovation in looking at the situation would make
it possible for the United Nations to become involved.
The nineteenth summit of heads of State directed the
PALIPEHUTU-FNL to enter into negotiations
immediately and conclude a ceasefire agreement by 30

3

S/PV.4655

December, or face robust sanctions. We will be
interacting with the movement shortly to arrange
negotiations, because the Summit Meeting again felt it
was necessary to give PALIPEHUTU-FNL another
chance.
In addition, the uniqueness of the Burundi
agreement has necessitated the provision that
combatants should move to assembly areas armed.
Weapons will be taken away from them and stored in
an armoury to which they will have access, should the
need arise. Again, that is a provision unique to
Burundi, allowed in order to allay fears. One of the
critical tasks of the African mission will be to monitor
the movements of the belligerents to the assembly
areas with their arms.
I also wish to add that that was considered
because, as you know, Mr. President, in the Great
Lakes region the conflict has tended to involve mass
killings, massacres and genocide. Therefore, the fears
by the CNDD that, if they were unarmed or had no
arms near them while the army was armed, that could
prejudice them, and we could therefore end up with a
situation of that nature. That is why that arrangement
was necessary.
We trust that the less-than-perfect nature of the
Burundi ceasefire will not stand in the way of United
Nations support, especially given the fact that there
have been precedents for such ceasefire arrangements.
We have in mind Mozambique and Zimbabwe in our
region, although the situations might not be identical.
We believe that, when the Security Council considers
the matter, it will take this into account. We appeal for
understanding of the Burundian problem. Given the
nature of the conflict, we are never going to have a
straightforward and classical ceasefire agreement. We
made this point when the Security Council visited
South Africa. That was precisely the reason why we
thought it would be important to come to the Security
Council as we have done. The process has been
complicated by the fact that there are more than one
belligerent party, all with divergent demands, which
had to be engaged separately and differently. The
Security Council delegation that visited South Africa in
April had some experience with the problem when the
CNDD-FDD of Pierre Nkurunziza refused to meet the
Council delegation in the same room as the CNDDFDD of Jean-Bosco Ndayikengurukiye.

4

We believe that support of such a unique situation
is possible under Chapter VIII of the Charter, which
supports the establishment of regional initiatives for
the resolution of conflicts, provided such arrangements
are consistent with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations, as well as Chapter VI, which provides
for the use of regional initiatives for the resolution of
disputes without the active, direct involvement of but
with the full support of the United Nations.
We consider the introduction of the African
mission as a bridging instrument, opening the situation
for the United Nations to come in when we have
perfected the conditions. The African mission and
other structures to be set up will require the support of
the United Nations apparatus to ensure success. Other
areas of United Nations support that we will soon be
asking for include training, integration support and
other humanitarian assistance, particularly for returning
combatants, especially those who cannot be integrated
into the security forces. We will certainly be discussing
more issues in that regard, because we believe that the
role of the United Nations will be very critical in
making this mission a success.
Allow me at this juncture to sincerely thank
Secretary-General Kofi Annan and the Security
Council for this unwavering support provided while we
have been involved in this process. We are here today
because we know we can count on your unique and
continued support.
I am sure it will interest the Council to know that
as we discussed the ceasefire, all parties kept on
mentioning the United Nations. This indicates their
confidence that the Organization’s participation boosts
confidence and makes people implement what would
be difficult to implement without that participation in
one form or the other.
We must also record our gratitude for United
Nations assistance in providing military experts, who
worked with South African and Tanzanian military
experts in drafting the ceasefire agreement as a basis
for discussion, discussed and lent their assistance, up to
the signing of the agreement among the belligerent
parties.
The contribution of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Burundi, Ambassador
Berhanu Dinka, is also extremely valuable to all of us.
We are grateful for this contribution. It has brought

S/PV.4655

confidence and hope to the Burundians and to those
who participated in these processes.

peace and ensure that we eliminate conflict, once and
for all, in Burundi.

I must also use this opportunity to thank the
heads of State of the Great Lakes region for their
continued support to the process. I also wish to single
out President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda, the
Chairperson of the Regional Initiative on Burundi, for
his unwavering support of the facilitation team. On the
first and the second, he sat with us throughout the day
and night as we negotiated the process.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Deputy President of South Africa, Mr. Jacob Zuma, for
his very comprehensive briefing, which included some
very good news and recounted some positive
developments.

Since its launching, the African Union (AU) has
also played a critical role in the Burundi peace process,
alongside the United Nations. As I have indicated,
Ambassador Bah, who represented the AU, was always
together with Ambassador Dinka. The AU participates
actively through the special representative of the
Secretary General of the AU. In addition, the
Chairperson of the AU, President Thabo Mbeki of
South Africa, has taken a hands-on approach to conflict
resolution in the Great Lakes region, and we value his
contribution to the process, not least by allowing his
Deputy to spend so much time on Burundi matters.
Once again, Mr. President, thank you for allowing
me the honour of interacting with you today. We have
come a long way with the Burundi peace process, and
we know that we cannot achieve the results we seek if
we work alone. We need the wholehearted support of
the United Nations and the international community.
We are convinced that peace will be sustained, for
we have experience in this regard. Many people
initially thought the Pretoria Agreement between
Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
would be impossible to implement; yet, within the
deadline Rwanda left the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It is therefore possible that with initiatives by
Africans, and with the commitment shown by Africans,
we can move and address the conflicts in the continent.
Again, many thought that the Arusha Agreement
would not be concluded in 2000, and it was. They
thought there would never be a transitional government
in Burundi, yet it was installed on 1 November 2001.
This shows that regional solutions work if people are
determined to succeed. All they need is support from
this body.
Burundi is now poised for peace. We hope we can
count on the international community to invest in this

Since we do not have a list of speakers, I would
invite Council members who wish to take the floor to
indicate their intention to the Secretariat now.
The first speaker will be Mr. Jean-Marc de la
Sablière, Permanent Representative of France, whom I
would like to welcome very warmly. This is his first
official meeting with the Security Council, and if he
wishes to speak he may do so even in Spanish.
Mr. De la Sablière (France) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, thank you for your words of welcome. It
is a pleasure to be here in the Council once again and
to work with you and the other members of the Council
and with the Secretary-General and his representatives.
I assure you that you can always count on my full
cooperation and that of the French delegation.
(spoke in French)
The agreement signed on 2 December in Arusha
is an indispensable link in the Burundi peace process.
At a time when the Council has so often called for a
cessation of hostilities, the principal rebel movement
and the Government have finally signed a ceasefire
agreement. It should bring about an end to hostilities
between the Forces for the Defence of Democracy
(FDD) and the Government by tomorrow. We can only
be delighted with this agreement. Barely 10 days ago
the FDD was still bombing Bujumbura.
We wish to pay tribute to the Burundian
negotiators, in particular President Buyoya and
Mr. Nkurunziza. We also wish to pay tribute to the
heads of State of the region, in particular Deputy
President Zuma. It was his tenacity and his
determination to move ahead in the negotiations and
his personal commitment that made the signing of the
agreement finally possible. I am sure all the members
of the Council are very grateful to him for his efforts.
Nevertheless, a great deal still remains to be
done. The first priority is to make sure that the
cessation of hostilities and the ceasefire to follow will
become universal. This implies the National Liberation

5

S/PV.4655

Forces (FNL), the other rebel group, joining the peace
process launched by the Arusha Agreement of 28
August 2000. France will support the efforts of the
Transitional Government of Burundi and those of the
States of the Regional Initiative to bring the FNL into
the current political process. We must also convince the
remaining rebels that there will be benefits from the
complete cessation of hostilities for the entire
Burundian population: the economy will revive, taxes
levied to finance the war will decline, and displaced
people and refugees will be able to return to their
homes. It will be up to the signatories — the
Government and the FDD — to implement their
commitments and make the necessary reforms, in
particular as regards the army, that will help Burundi to
return to the path of peace and stability, as dictated by
the Arusha Agreement in August 2000.
The international community will also have a
primary role to play. The donors must respect the
commitments that they undertook last week in Geneva
to support the Burundian peace processes. France, of
course, will make its contribution, because we are well
aware that a peace process has no chance to succeed if
it lacks the means necessary for implementation.
Undoubtedly, the Security Council also has a part
to play. The United Nations is already committed to the
region and to facilitating the implementation of the
Arusha process. In that regard, we must pay tribute to
the
efforts
of
Ambassador
Dinka,
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, who will
assist with the terms of the agreement of 2 December
in defining certain ceasefire modalities. Furthermore,
the Council will have to reflect on the support that it
can provide to a possible African force or to whatever
formula that the Secretary-General can recommend in
support of the peace process, once all the parties have
agreed to a ceasefire in Burundi.
In conclusion, I should like to recall that the
situation in Burundi must clearly be considered within
its regional context. The transitional authorities in
Bujumbura must be encouraged to continue to work
with their neighbours to make the borders secure. In
particular, we must encourage the work under way
between Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo aimed at normalizing their relations, and they
must be invited to define the appropriate mechanisms
for military cooperation along their border.

6

The signing of the agreement of 2 December
constitutes a new element that favours an international
conference in the Great Lakes region, which has been
requested by an increasing number of regional heads of
State. That would enable us to make further progress
on political issues and on the restoration of the rule of
law, democracy and development in the region.
Mr. Strømmen (Norway): Let me begin by
wishing Vice-President Zuma a very warm welcome to
New York. We are very grateful for his briefing this
afternoon. I should like to add that we are also very
thankful to Deputy President Zuma for the way in
which he has consistently maintained a relationship
with the Security Council on this issue. I recall his very
warm hospitality when we visited him in Pretoria in
April. I should also like to welcome Ambassador JeanMarc de la Sablière to the Security Council.
The Government of Norway recognizes that the
peace process in Burundi is at heart a regional
initiative, but the Security Council is a partner and
plays a vital role, and we, as the Council, must do our
part. We, of course, welcome the ceasefire agreement
between the Government and the Forces for the
Defence of Democracy (FDD). That is a significant
step, but it is far from sufficient to achieve peace in
Burundi. We feel that, in many ways, it is important
that the agreement now be followed through in all its
aspects, including with regard to the FDD’s
participation in the transitional arrangements, the army
reform and the reintegration of demobilized soldiers.
Nevertheless, it is necessary to express concern
over the potentially escalating tension, the situation on
the ground in Burundi and the fact that the National
Liberation Forces (FNL) remains outside the peace
process, with no ceasefire agreement in place. It is very
worrisome that progress may not be achieved with
regard to that point in the near future.
The international community must do its utmost
to contribute urgently to a solution with regard to the
remaining challenges in the peace process in Burundi.
In that spirit, we look forward to the Council
consultations scheduled for this Friday. We will bear in
mind what Vice-President Zuma has told us. Given the
nature of the situation, no feasible measure must be left
untried by the Council.
Mr. Harrison (United Kingdom): Through you,
Mr. President, I should like to thank Deputy President
Zuma for his extremely informative and helpful

S/PV.4655

presentation. I should like to pay tribute to him and to
his country for their efforts in Burundi and elsewhere
on the African continent. On behalf of my delegation,
let me also welcome Ambassador de la Sablière to the
Council. My delegation very much agrees with the
points that he made and also with the points made by
Ambassador Strømmen.
We very much welcome the ceasefire agreement;
it is a positive step forward. But it will also be
important to follow it up, to implement it and to
continue the negotiations, particularly with the aim of
including the National Liberation Forces (FNL).
Through you, Mr. President, I should like to ask
the Vice-President three quick questions. The first is
how the integration of Forces for the Defence of
Democracy (FDD) into the political process will work
in practice and how it will fit in with plans to integrate
the other two factions that have already signed up —
Jean-Bosco Ndayikengurukiye’s National Council for
the Defence of Democracy-Forces for the Defence of
Democracy (CNDD-FDD) and the FNL faction led by
Alain Mugabarabona — and how that will affect the
hand-over to the Transitional National Government’s
second phase next May. Secondly, given that it is
highly unlikely that the Burundi armed forces will be
able to return to their barracks and carry out normal
duties while the FNL is still operating, how is it
envisaged that that will be handled? Thirdly, how is it
envisaged that the FDD forces operating outside
Burundi will be included in the process?
Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
We should like to thank Deputy President Zuma for
coming to New York and for his detailed and
comprehensive briefing to the Council. We should also
like to welcome our new colleague from France,
Ambassador de la Sablière, to the Council. We believe
that the French delegation will continue to play a
positive and active role in the Security Council, as it
has in the past. China also supports and highly
appreciates the South African Government, especially
Deputy President Zuma, for its efforts to achieve peace
and stability in Burundi.
In Burundi’s peace process, the ceasefire
agreement is the key. We are very much pleased that
the agreement has made important progress, but there
are certain problems. As Deputy President Zuma
pointed out, this is a very complicated question. The
Nineteenth Summit Meeting of Heads of State and

Government will continue to pursue efforts in that
regard.
I should like to raise only one question. Under
these circumstances, what does the Deputy President
think the Security Council should do to advance the
peace process in Burundi, especially the signing of the
agreement, and what can the Council do to cooperate
with him in his efforts?
Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic is
pleased to welcome very warmly Mr. Jacob Zuma,
Deputy President of the Republic of South Africa. We
should like to thank him for the sincere message of
peace that he brought to the Council. We should also
like to express our great appreciation for his successful
efforts that led to the signing of the agreement on 2
December in Arusha to put an end to the conflict in
Burundi and to achieve peace in that country, which
has suffered greatly and now deserves to live in peace
so that its friendly people can have the opportunity to
build a new and developed Burundi.
I should also like to welcome Ambassador de la
Sablière, the new Permanent Representative of France
to the United Nations, and to reaffirm our full
cooperation with him in the coming phase of the
Council’s work.
I should also like to pay tribute to President
Mbeki of South Africa, which holds the current
presidency of the African Union and of the NonAligned Movement, for his constructive efforts to bring
about peace in Burundi and in other parts of the
African continent. We would also like to welcome the
signing of the peace agreement between the
Government of Burundi and the Forces for the Defence
of Democracy, and we look forward to the forthcoming
Council consultations, during which we will be
discussing the new developments in Burundi.
We listened attentively to Mr. Zuma’s very
important statement, and we took note of all the
proposals and opinions therein. We noted in particular
the opinions he expressed and the role he assigns to the
international community, especially the Security
Council, to implement, fully and successfully, the
agreement that has been signed on Burundi. The
delegation of Syria would like to reaffirm its support
for the proposals that Mr. Zuma submitted with regard
to the role of the Security Council. I would like to
reiterate the important role to be played by the donor

7

S/PV.4655

countries in making the agreement that has been signed
a great success.
Mr. Corr (Ireland): I, too, would like, on behalf
of my delegation, to thank Deputy President Zuma for
his very comprehensive briefing and for travelling to
New York to brief the Council today. I would also like
to express strong support and appreciation for the
Deputy President’s efforts in helping to resolve one of
the most complex challenges to peace in Africa, and
for the leading role played by South Africa, including
by former President Mandela, in this process. This
reflects well on the African Union’s attempt to find
African solutions to the problems of the region. It is
also important today to express strong support and
appreciation for the efforts of the regional initiative.
Like other speakers, I would like to welcome our
new colleague from France, Ambassador de la
Sablière, to the Council.
As Deputy President Zuma said, this is good
news for Burundi, for Africa and for peace. It is
important now for both sides to follow up their words
and signatures with deeds and actions, and to fully
observe the ceasefire. It is also important to keep up
the momentum and to keep pressure on the parties to
reach early agreement on how to bring the Forces for
the Defence of Democracy into the power-sharing
arrangements. Clearly, it is crucial that the sides
implement agreements on the reform of the security
sector and the structure of the army. The transition
clock continues to tick, with the handover of power in
Burundi due to take place in May. Any slippage could
be damaging for the process and for the progress that
has been achieved. As my colleagues emphasized this
afternoon, it is also important to keep pressure on the
National Liberation Forces to join the process.
Nonetheless — and this point came out strongly
in the Deputy President’s statement — after nine years
of conflict and close to 300,000 deaths, the agreement
is a major breakthrough. It offers a way forward to
allow a divided country to come together. It builds on
Arusha and the establishment of the Transitional
Government last November. Of course, there are
challenges and problems involved that have to be
faced. But the hope far outweighs them.
The breakthrough is also important in view of the
deterioration in an already appalling humanitarian
situation. The increase in the number of internally
displaced persons, the threat posed to civilians by

8

armed groups and the food security situation are all of
deep concern. This breakthrough will have important
implications for access to populations in need and will
begin at last to put Burundi on the road to recovery and
development.
It is now important for donors to honour the
pledges made, including those made at the donor
conference this week. The budgetary position in
Burundi is appalling, and major social programmes are
needed. It is one of the very poorest countries in the
world, and the peace that has now been achieved
deserves a chance.
Deputy President Zuma spoke of the wider goal
of creating a climate of peace, order, stability and
sustainable development on the African continent. The
developments in Burundi this week are an important
contribution to this. It is now important for the Security
Council and the international community to support, in
every way possible, the agreement and the wider peace
process.
Ms. Lee (Singapore): I, too, would like to thank
Deputy President Zuma for his very interesting and
useful briefing today. We were already viewing the 2
December agreement as a significant step forward, and
Deputy President Zuma’s detailed briefing has
confirmed our optimism about the developments of the
situation in Burundi.
I have just one question to ask, and it is very
similar to the question already asked by the
representative of China. I wanted to ask what more the
Security Council could do to help; that just goes to
show that Security Council members are of a similar
mind with regard to our commitment to try to do our
best to help Burundi. I will still ask my question,
because it is focused on the issue of the transfer of the
presidency, which is less than six months away. Deputy
President Zuma mentioned that the United Nations, and
in particular the Security Council, needs to continue to
play a role in Burundi. I would like to ask whether he
has any specific suggestions about how the Security
Council can help to bring about the transfer
successfully and on schedule.
Mr. Traoré (Guinea) (spoke in French): I would
like to warmly welcome Deputy President Zuma and to
thank him for his important statement. I would also
like, on behalf of my country, to thank the South
African Government for the very commendable efforts
that they have been making to restore peace and

S/PV.4655

stability to the Great Lakes region, and to Burundi in
particular. I would also like to thank the other
facilitators for their valuable contributions to the
resolution of the conflict in the region.

provide ongoing assistance to Burundi in the
implementation of the agreement that was just
concluded, with a view to the restoration of peace and
stability to Burundi.

My delegation welcomes the recent signing in
Arusha of a ceasefire agreement between the
Transitional Government of Burundi and the Forces for
the Defence of Democracy — the main opposition
party. We believe that that represents an important step
forward towards a comprehensive ceasefire among all
the Burundian parties. In that connection, we appeal to
those movements that have not yet done so to return to
the negotiating table, to work for peace and put an end
to the terrible suffering of the people of Burundi. We
also appeal to the signatories of the ceasefire
agreement to abide by their commitments and to
translate into reality the fervent aspirations of the
people of Burundi, who truly desire to live in peace
and to benefit from peace.

The Deputy President stressed one very important
point which is a challenge to the Security Council in
many respects. He spoke of the trust that all of the
combatants have in the United Nations and in its vision
of a just and lasting peace. Do we have the right to
dash such hopes? Of course we cannot.

We also appeal to the donors to continue their
financial support for the peace process, so that there
can be a lasting and definitive peace in Burundi.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my
delegation’s full support for the third parties in their
ongoing efforts to resolve the crisis in Burundi.
Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): I,
too, would like warmly to welcome Deputy President
Jacob Zuma and to thank him for his excellent
statement, which was particularly useful to us. I should
also like, on behalf of my delegation, to welcome
Ambassador de la Sablière.
My delegation would like to express its
appreciation for the information provided by Deputy
President Zuma on the positive developments that have
taken place recently in Burundi, in particular the
agreement just signed between the Transitional
Government and the National Council for the Defence
of Democracy-Forces for the Defence of Democracy
(CNDD-FDD).
My delegation would pay tribute to all those who
have contributed to these developments, in particular
the Burundian negotiators and the heads of State of the
region. We warmly welcome the commendable efforts
made by Deputy President Jacob Zuma as well as his
important contribution to the negotiations aimed at
achieving a ceasefire in Burundi. We would like also to
endorse his appeal to the international community to

The statement made by the Deputy President also
highlighted the capacity of regional organizations to
contribute positively to the maintenance of peace and
security. In that connection, he stressed the support
expected from the international community in respect
of the implementation of the ceasefire agreement.
Lastly, my delegation would like to ask two
questions. First, what is the likelihood of bringing the
Party for the Liberation of the Hutu People-National
Liberation Forces (PALIPEHUTU-FNL), which
remains on the margins of the peace process, into that
process, with a view to concluding a ceasefire
agreement, as the heads of State of the region have
urged?
I think that some other speakers may have already
asked my second question, which relates to the role
that the Burundian parties expect the United Nations
and the international community to play in the effective
implementation of the ceasefire agreement.
Mr. Jingree (Mauritius): We, too, welcome
Deputy President Zuma to this Chamber today and
thank him for coming all the way to New York to brief
us on the Burundi peace process. At the same time, we
also welcome the new Permanent Representative of
France.
My delegation would like to congratulate the
Government of South Africa for its very constructive
role in the quest for peace, not only in Burundi but in
the whole Great Lakes region. We would like to
commend Deputy President Zuma for the personal
efforts he deployed in trying to encourage the
Burundian parties to reach a ceasefire agreement. We
also are grateful to President Mandela for his
contribution to the Burundi peace process.
Like other delegations, we welcome the ceasefire
agreement that was signed between the National
Council for the Defence of Democracy-Forces for the

9

S/PV.4655

Defence of Democracy (CNDD-FDD) and the
Transitional Government this week. This leads us to
believe that there is no justification for the National
Liberation Forces (FNL) to remain outside the peace
process. In this respect, we hope that the FNL joins the
peace process before the end of the year, and we should
therefore keep the pressure on them.
In spite of the efforts being deployed by the
Transitional Government, the serious economic
constraints faced by Burundi is creating a difficult
situation in which the Burundian population is not
seeing a real dividend of peace. We recognize that
some of the funds pledged by international donors have
been disbursed to help the Transitional Government. In
the same vein, we would appeal to the international
community to assist Burundi in alleviating this
situation, so that its people can see the dividends of
peace.
Finally, my delegation fully shares the optimism
expressed by Deputy President Zuma and would like to
assure him of our full support.
Mr. Williamson (United States): We believe that
the 3 December signing of a ceasefire agreement
between the Forces for the Defence of Democracy
(FDD) faction, led by Pierre Nkurunziza, and the
Government of Burundi is a significant step towards
achieving peace in that country. We would like to
express our sincere and deep appreciation for the
facilitation efforts led by South African Deputy
President Zuma and conducted with the assistance of
President Bongo of Gabon and President Mkapa of
Tanzania.
In addition, we would like to express our
appreciation to the Regional Initiative and to its
Chairman, President Museveni of Uganda, for their
contributions to the peace process.
While we do not intend to diminish the
achievements of the Facilitation or the contributions of
the Regional Initiative, we believe that, despite the
ceasefire agreement, the situation in Burundi still
warrants close monitoring by the Security Council.
Specifically, the Council should seek to encourage all
parties to observe the provisions of the ceasefire
agreement, while remaining alert to any indicators that
the situation is devolving towards a mass killing
scenario.

10

In addition, we remain concerned that the FNL,
led by Agathon Rwasa, continues its campaign of
violence, refuses to sign a ceasefire agreement and
remains outside of the Arusha process. We believe that
the leaders of those armed groups that have remained
outside of the process must face consequences. We
support the call by President Museveni for regionally
imposed sanctions.
Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French):
Bulgaria, like other delegations, welcomed the
Ceasefire Agreement signed in Arusha on 3 December
last between the Government of Burundi and the main
armed group, the Forces for the Defence of Democracy
(FDD). That was an extremely positive development.
I should like to commend South Africa and the
Facilitator, Deputy President Zuma, for their tireless
efforts in support of peace in Burundi. Deputy
President Zuma has been extremely persistent and
resolute in his work, and we pay tribute to him for his
efforts.
However, nothing has yet been definitively
achieved, because not all of the people of Burundi have
chosen peace. Achieving a comprehensive ceasefire is
crucial. It is crucial that the National Liberation Forces
(FNL) of Agathon Rwasa rejoin the peace negotiations
and that progress be made in the talks with two other,
smaller groups — Jean-Bosco Ndayikengurukiye’s
National Council for the Defence of Democracy-Forces
for the Defence of Democracy (CNDD-FDD) and Alain
Mugarabona’s National Liberation Forces (FNL).
I have one question for Deputy President Zuma:
what does he think the chances are that those groups
will end up joining the ceasefire agreement?
The President (spoke in Spanish): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Colombia.
I would especially like to express that it is an
honour for us to meet with Deputy President Zuma, the
Facilitator of the peace process in Burundi. I must
especially thank him, on behalf of my country, for his
briefing and his very valuable information. To him, and
through him to the Government of President Mbeki, I
would like to acknowledge everything they are doing to
contribute to peace in Africa in the chairmanship of the
African Union. That contribution is enhanced by the
facilitating management of President Nelson Mandela

S/PV.4655

and the agreement
Government.

reached

on

a

transitional

In the case of Burundi, we share in the
satisfaction of other delegations that a ceasefire
agreement has been reached between the Government
of President Pierre Buyoya and the rebel group of the
Forces for the Defence of Democracy (FDD) led by
Mr. Nkurunziza. We feel that an important obstacle to
reconciliation among the people of Burundi has been
overcome, although we know that there are still many
others in the arduous path towards peace.
After two years on the Council and two visits to
the country, we have seen first-hand the stamina for
peace. We therefore believe that there is considerable
room for action by the international community,
African countries in particular. There are promises of
international assistance for the socio-economic
reconstruction of the country. There is the possibility of
imposing international sanctions on the National
Liberation Forces (FNL). An agreement has been
reached establishing an African mission to verify and
monitor the ceasefire.
My delegation would like to ask Deputy President
Zuma for more detailed information on that African
mission, particularly on its composition. Would it be
comprised exclusively of African countries, or might it
perhaps include personnel from elsewhere? What
would be its relationship to a possible United Nations
peacekeeping mission? I would also like to hear his
opinion on the FNL’s attitude towards the ceasefire and
about what kind of sanctions might be envisaged, to be
imposed by countries members of the Regional
Initiative — if that sort of details has been considered.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to Deputy President Jacob
Zuma to respond to the observations that have been
made and to make any final comments he has.
Mr. Zuma (South Africa): I thank the Council for
the comments made and the questions asked. I will try
to respond.
One of the questions that many members have
asked is how will the National Council for the Defence
of Democracy-Forces for the Defence of Democracy
(CNDD-FDD) and others be integrated into the
Transitional Government. All parties signed the Arusha
Agreement, but the Burundi Government has passed an

act stating that the parties that come in will have to
sign that act, committing themselves to participating.
Having done that, they have to come in.
The issue has been raised with the Burundi
Government, because if those parties were not there at
the installation of the Transitional Government, it
means that they are not party to the Government at the
moment. You have the Government and all the existing
institutions such as the Parliament. The question is:
how will those groups come in? I do not think that they
have any alternative to coming in; they have to come
in. First, if groups are party to an agreement, you
cannot envisage a situation in which, when some of the
provisions of the agreement are implemented, those
groups are not party to the decision-making or are not
part of the implementation of that decision. So, of
necessity, they have got to be part of the institutions.
There is no difficulty about it. They have got to
participate at the executive level, as well as in the
Parliament. And they have also made the point about
civil servants.
However, that raises a new challenge, because the
Transitional Government is, by nature, bigger than the
Government that has always existed in Burundi. It had
to accommodate all 19 parties. The inclusion of the
parties that have signed the agreement will mean
further expansion of that Government. The question is,
how can we support that? It will need resources as
well. You cannot have them sign the agreement and not
participate in planning and taking decisions on how the
Government will work. That is the challenge. There is
no difficulty having all sides agree that they are going
to participate. What is left is working out the details:
how it will be done and what percentage of the new
parties coming in will participate?
I would imagine that the support we are talking
about will certainly include that process of integration,
because for peace we do need the parties coming in to
participate. In fact, it might be more important for
those who came late to be shown the benefits of
signing and therefore of participating. I am also
optimistic that it will not be difficult for the
international community, the United Nations, to help in
this. Because of the three-year period that has been
allowed for this process in Burundi, there are actually
two years left. So, any financial support for this year
has a very definite time period within which you might
have to take action. I would imagine that, after
discussion among the parties, they will be able to come

11

S/PV.4655

up with very specific requirements on the material
support that they will need. But there is no problem in
everyone agreeing that this should happen.
One of the questions was how will the army
operate, given the FNL factor. I think that quite a
number of questions have arisen on that issue. It was
taken into account when the two parties were reaching
an agreement. That is why, on the question of the army,
while the army will take a clear, defensive posture and
will also have heavy armaments that were meant to
attack and deal with the armed groups, it will have to
be limited.
But the point is taken that, while FNL is there,
one will expect certain elements of the army to be
specifically charged with the task of dealing with that
issue. As to the details, they will be worked out, first,
by the army and, secondly, by the Joint Commission. In
fact, both parties agreed that they will collaborate and
work together to ensure that they are able to deal with
the issue of FNL.
The other question has been: How will the
CNDD-FDD forces that are outside the country come
back? Certainly, those are the details that are going to
be worked out together by the Joint Commission.
Those who are inside will move in a particular way to
the assembly points, as the Agreement stipulates, but
those who are outside will also have to be transported
back into the country. A mechanism will be worked
out, but, again, bringing those forces from outside is
one element that will need support. Of course, one
would imagine, whatever the forces may be — since
these are the two forces that signed before — that this
will cover all of them.
The other question is: What are the possibilities
of FNL coming into the process? I believe that the
possibilities are there. The call was made by the
summit very deliberately that FNL should come and
quickly conclude the agreement before 30 December
and that if did not do so — as this was the second
chance that was given to FNL — appropriate action
would be taken. I think there is a determination by the
region that we cannot have a situation in which the
peace process is undermined by one party, when about
22 parties have signed the Agreement. They all
committed to peace and this party that defines itself as
outside peace will be defining itself as anti-peace.
Therefore, decisions will be taken. Whether there
will be a summit or not I do not know, but it did not

12

seem that the heads of State wanted to call a summit on
this issue alone. I think they have, in a sense, a position
they would like to take, but they have felt it necessary
to persuade FNL to come into the process and have
instructed me to try my level best to persuade it to do
so. I have started communicating with FNL. I have a
hope that it will come in, because when we last met it
stipulated its preconditions. But the bulk of those
preconditions are actually the issues that are being
addressed already within Bujumbura. One example is
the issue of political prisoners, on which there has been
a lot of work done with the participation of the United
Nations.
So I believe that, now that the CNDD-FDD has
taken a decision to be part of this Agreement, that in
itself is going to impact positively on the FNL. We will
see in the course of December how that one goes. I do
not think one can give a categorical answer as to
whether it is going to come in or not, but since I have
engaged with FNL over two years, it has never said
that it was not committed to peace. All it has been
putting across is certain conditions, and I believe,
given the situation — and I think that, as a movement,
it must also be analysing the situation — that with the
signing by the CNDD-FDD, FNL has no other group to
stand with and refuse to sign. So I am hopeful that it
will sign and come into the process. It has been
reported that FNL has publicly welcomed this
Agreement and that in itself seems to me to be a
positive indication on its part.
The other question that has been asked by a
number of members is: What do we think the Security
Council or the United Nations could do to help? Well, I
think that this body is more experienced in matters of
this nature and will certainly know what it is that needs
to be done to help such a situation. But of course, I
think it would be fair to say that we are expecting a
number of things that we believe the United Nations
could do.
This agreement, as we explained, is not like a
classic kind of agreement that is reached, particularly
because we still have the FNL factor and the
combatants of the CNDD-FDD coming into the
assembly points. Only there are their arms taken from
them and stored within. That is precisely the reason
why the heads of State thought it was important to
come in with the African mission so that we could deal
with that situation and not ask the impossible from the
Security Council, given the rules that are in effect.

S/PV.4655

If we were to do that, however, we would
certainly need support, while understanding, as the
heads of State understand it, that this is a bridging
mechanism to open and clear the way so that we have a
perfect situation for the United Nations to come into. It
is going to need support because, as members know,
the African countries do not have all the resources.
Here, they are going to put the commitment into action,
but they are going to need support from the Security
Council to bolster that effort. One specific action might
be, for example, to airlift those forces, wherever they
are. That help will be necessary so that they are able to
arrive on time. Of course, that will mean not
necessarily that the Security Council will have to
commit troops, but that there will be that kind of
support.
There is also going to be the need for support to
feed the combatants who are going to be at the
assembly points. One member asked about the strength
of the CNDD-FDD. It is always difficult to give the
accurate strength of a movement of that nature, but
they are counted in the thousands. Some people talk
about 10,000 or more people who are going to emerge.
Certainly, the United Nations will have to support
them.
I think there will be other things to be supported.
One is something that I talked about — the process of
integration into the Transitional Government
institutions of the new people who are coming in and
assistance in strengthening those institutions as well.
But there are also the issues of technical support. As
members can see, the time frames are not long. The
African Union has not elaborated the manner in which
these things should be done in terms of how to deal
with peacekeeping if it has to do so from the
beginning. While the Constitutive Act of the African
Union says that this is what the continent must do, it is
still developing that capacity, so we will certainly
benefit from the expertise of the United Nations in the
process of planning and discussing the implementation.
We believe that this is among the things on which the
United Nations could help.
The United Nations could also call upon the
international community — particularly the donors
who have been holding the funds, since there has been
no ceasefire — to release those funds now that the
biggest group has signed the ceasefire Agreement.
They will be very helpful in terms of making the

country able to deal with the processes in which it is
involved.
Those are some of the areas that will need
support from the Security Council. We believe that it
should not be difficult for the Security Council to be
able to provide it. I take it that some of the questions
that have been asked were, in a sense, repeated and
that, in answering the few that I have answered, they
have actually dealt with that issue, including the
question on how the FNL sees itself, the agreement and
the process.
I think, at the end, I must express our gratitude
for the support that the Security Council has shown in
this matter. This is more than pleasing, more than
encouraging, particularly as we are dealing with a
number of problems in the continent. Take it from us;
we are very committed to dealing with those problems.
As I have indicated, the Constitutive Act of the African
Union specifically addresses the problems in the
continent. As you know, in the NEPAD we have also
identified the problems of conflict as the main obstacle.
Therefore, we are in the process of dealing with this.
Your support for this agreement is really
welcome, and in any case, this is what we expected
from this Organization, because it is in keeping with
the beliefs and, indeed, with the mission of the United
Nations. Thank you very much for the support. I am
convinced that from here on we will be in a better
position to work with confidence and understanding
that there is support by this body for what we are
doing. With the Council’s support I am sure that we
will do more than we have.
The other possible thing that might be done to the
FNL — and the heads of State have talked about
this — is the possible sanctions. Of course, I must also
say that the FNL is not as big as the CNDD-FDD. It
operates more in rural areas of Bujumbura and has
been confined in one place most of the time, unlike the
CNDD-FDD.
So we believe that what is happening — and
particularly with the Council’s support here, and the
call upon the FNL to come into the process — must
have an impact.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Deputy President of South Africa, Mr. Jacob Zuma, for
participating in this meeting, for having been willing to
report directly to the Council on progress in

13

S/PV.4655

negotiations and for the new information he has given
us and his responses to the concerns voiced by various
members of the Council.

14

The Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.
