General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Se11eion

8

Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
relating to the quesll:ion of publicity for the work of the
United Nations in the field of decolonization;
2. Reaffirms the vital importance of urgently effecting the widest possible dissemination of information
on ,the evils and dangers of colonialism, in particular
the continuing struggle for liberation being waged by
the peoples in the colonial Territories in Africa, as well
as the efforts being made by the international community to assist in the elimination of the remaining
vestiges of colonialism in all its forms;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, having regard
to the suggestions of the Special Committee, to co1;1tinue to take concrete measures ,through all the media
at his disposal, including publications, radio and television, to give widespread and continuous publicity to
the work of the United Nations in the field of decolonization, to the situation in the colonial Territories
and to the continuing struggle for liberation being waged
by the colonial peoples and, inter alia:
(a) To intensify the activities of all information
centres, particularly those located in western Europe,
and also to establish additional information centres
where appropriate, especially in southern Africa;
(b) To maintain a close working relationship with
the Organization of African Unity by holding periodic
consultations and by systematically exchanging relevant
information with that organization;
( c) To enlist, from the non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and
Social Council and from those non-governmental organizations having a special interest in the field of decolonization, support in the dissemination of the relevant information;
(d) To publish, in consultation with the Special
Committee, the periodical Objective: Justice and the
bulletin "United Nations and Southern Africa" in other
languages besides English and French, as appropriate;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General, having
regard to the relevant provisions of the programme of
action adopted by the International Conference of Experts for the Support of Victims of Colonialism and
Apartheid in Southern Africa, 18 to establish a Unit on
Decolonization within the Department of Political AffaiTS, Trusteeship and Decolonization which will, in
consultation with the Special Committee and with the
Office of Public Information, collect, prepare and disseminate, on a continuous basis, basic material, studies
and articles relating to the problems of decolonization,
and, to that end, to make provision for the necessary
personnel and facilities;
5. Requests Member States, in particular the administering Powers, ,to co-operate full~, w:th the Secretary-General in the discharge of the tasks entrusted to
him under paragraphs 3 and 4 above;
6. Invites all States, the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
and non-governmental organizations in consultative
status with the Economic and Social Council, as well
as other non-governmental organizations having a special interest in the field of decolonization, to undertake
or intensify, in co-operation with the Secretary-General
and within their respective spheres of competence, the
large-scale dissemination of the information referred
to in paragraph 2 above;
18/bid., para. 49 (86).

7. Welcomes the decision of rthe non-governmental
organizations concerned with decolonization and apartheid to hold at Geneva, in 1974, a conference on
colonialism and apartheid in southern Africa and to
invite the participation of the United Nations organs
concerned, and requests the Secretary-General to provide conference facilities for that purpose;
8. Requests the Secretary-General ,to report to the
Special Committee on the implementation of the present resolution;
9. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek suitable means for the effective dissemination of
information on decolonization and, in particular, to hold
consultations, as appropriate, with the Organization of
African Unity and the national liberation movements
concerned, as well as with the non-governmental organizations having a special interest in the field of
decolonization;
10. Further requests the Special Committee to follow the implementation of the present resolution and
report thereon to the General Assembly at its twentyninth session.
2202nd plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3165 (XXVIII). International Conference of Experts for the Support of Victims of Colonialism ancl Apartheid in Southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2910 (XXVII) of 2 November 1972,
Recognizing the need for concerted international
efforts to hasten the eradication of the scourge of colonialism and apartheid, thereby promoting international peace and se·curity,
1. Again reiterates the firm intention of the United
Nations, acting in co-operation with the Organization
of African Unity, to intensify its efforts to find a solution to the present grave situation in southern Africa;
2. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General19 on the International Conference of Experts for
the Support of Victims of Colonialism and Apartheid
in Southern Africa, held at Oslo from 9 to 14 April
1973, in pursuance of resolution 2910 (XXVII);
3. Commends the proposals for a programme of
action highlighted by the Conference 17 to the attention
of United Nations organs, the organizations within the
United Nations system and the Organization of African
Unity, as well as to the attention of Governments, non-governmental organizations and the public.
2202nd plenary meeting
14 December 1973
3181 (XXVIII). Credentials of representatives to
the twenty-eighth session of the General
Assemhly 20

The General Assembly

I
Approves the credentials of the representatives of
Portugal, on the clear understanding that they represent
111 A/9061.
20 See also

"Other decisions", p. 10.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Portugal as it exists within its frontiers in Europe and
that they do not represent the Portuguese-dominated
Territories of Angola and Mozambique nor could they
represent Guinea-Bissau, which is an independent State;

3187 (XXVIll). Restitution of works of art to
countries ~-it'tims of expropriation

The General Assembly,
Aware of the paramount aims of the United Nations
and particularly of its faith in fundamental human
rights and in the dignity and worth of the human person,
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,211
Considering the conclusions of the Fourth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at Algiers from 5 to 9 September 1973,
particularly paragraph 18 of the Political Declaration,28
Noting with interest the work of the third Congress
of the International Association of Art Critics held at
Kinshasa-N'Sele, Zaire, from 14 to 17 September 1973,
Recalling the Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property, adopted by the
General Conference of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization at its sixteenth
session, on 14 November 1970,
Stressing that the cultural heritage of a people conditions the present and future flowering of its artistic
values and its over-all development,
Convinced that the promotion of national culture
can enhance a people's ability to understand the culture
and civilization of other peoples and thus can have a
favourable impact on international co-operation,
Deploring the wholesale removal, virtually without
payment, of objets d'art from one country to another,
frequently as a result of colonial or foreign occupation,
Convinced that the restitution of such works would
make good the serious damage suffered by countries
as a result of such removal,
l. Affirms that the prompt restitution to a country
of its objets d'art, monuments, museum pieces, manuscripts and documents by another country. without
charge, is calculated to strengthen international cooperation inasmuch as it constitutes just reparation for
damage done;
2. Recognizes the special obligations in this connexion of those countries which had access to such
valuable objects only as a result of colonial or foreign
occupation;
3. Calls upon all the States concerned to prohibit
the expropriation of works of art from Territories still
under colonial or alien domination;
4. Invites the Secretary-General, in con,ultation
with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization and Member St:1tci,. to submit
a report to the General Assembly at its thirtieth session on the progress achieved.
2206th plenary mcctinr:
18 December I 973

II
Approves the second report of the Credentials
Committee. 21
2204th plenary meeting
17 December 1973

3186 (XXVIII). Report of the Security Council
The General Assembly,
Having received the report of the Security Council
covering the period from 16 June 1972 to 15 June
1973, 22 submitted in accordance with Article 24, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolution 2991 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972,
Having received the report of the Secretary-Genoral14
submitted in accordance with resolution 2991
(XXVII),
Noting the views and suggestions submitted by Member States as contained in annex II to the SecretaryGeneral's report,
1. Takes note of the report of the Security Council
covering the period from 16 June 1972 to 15 June
1973;
2. Takes ,wte of the report of the Secretary-General
submitted in accordance with General Assembly resolution 2991 (XXVII);

3. Draws the attention of the Security Council,
when considering steps to enhance its effectiveness in
accordance with the principles and provisions of the
Charter of rthe United Nations, to the views and suggestions submitted by Member States in response to
General Assembly resolutions 2864 (XXVI) of
20 December 1971 and 2991 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972, as contained in the annexes to the SecretaryGeneral's reports submitted in accordance with these
resolutions ;24
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Security Council any further views and suggestions
which might be submitted by Member States in response to resolutions 2864 (XXVI) and 2991
(XXVII).
2205th plenary meeting
18 December 1973
21 Official Records of the General Assembiy, Twenty-eir:rhth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 3, document A/9179/ Add. t.
'.!. 2 Ibid., Twenty-eighth Session, Supplement ll/o. 2 (A/9O02).
2 :i A/9143.
2 4 A/8847, annex, A/8847 /Add.I and A/9143, annex II.

*

9

25 Resolution 1514 (XV).
26 A/9330 and Corr.I, p. 9 .

•

*
