th
MEETING:

29 JULY

1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
. . . . . . . . .,. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Complaint by Zambia against South Africa:
Letter dated 19 July 1976 from the Chargb d’affaires, a.i., of the Permanent
Mission of Zambia to the United Nations addressed to the President ,of
the Security Council (S/12147) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l946)

S/PV. 1946

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly S~lpplements
of the Officinl Records of ihe Security Corwil.
The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutiom
cm/
Dc~cisions of’ the Security
Co~r~~cil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1946th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 29 July 1976, at 3 p.m.
President:

Mr. Piero VINCI

(Italy).

Present: The representatives
of the following
States: Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan,
Libyan Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania and United States of
America.
Provisional

tgenda (S/Agenda/l946)

1.

Adoption of the agenda

2,

Complaint by Zambia against South Africa:
Letter dated 19 July 1976 from the Chargk d’affaires, a.i., of the Permanent Mission of Zambia
to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/12147)
TITe meeting ws ctrlled to order at 4.05 pm.
Adoption of the agenda

Ncltiom Council for NomiDicr) nutl the other members
of the delegntiorl of that Council tool; plrrres ut the
Secusity Courzcil table; crlltl MI*. Bothn (South A*fi.ico),
Mr. Acosfn (Culm), Mr. Ahmetl (Egypt), Mr. Ilwnhim
(Ethiopia), Mrs. Brooks-Rntldolph
(Liberia), Mr. Rnsolondrnibe (Mndrrgascar), Mr. El Hnsserr (Mrrrlritnnirr),
Mr. M,llangaglrhlrngtr
(Ugrr~ltln) rrnti Mr. UnlOn di
Lrttete (Zaire) tOoli tllc pierces r.csen*fitl fov them fit the
side of the Council chnnllx~r.
3. The PRESIDENT:
In addition, I have received
letters from the representatives of Botswana, Mozambique, Qatar, Sierra Leone and Yugoslavia, in which
they also request to be invited to participate in the
debate. I therefore propose that the Council agree, in
accordance with the usual practice, to invite the
representatives I have just mentioned to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote.
4. I invite those representatives to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber,
on the usual understanding that they will be invited to
take a place at the Council table when they wish to
address the Council.

Complaint by Zambia against South Africa:
Letter dated 19 July 1976 from the Chargb d’affaires,
a.i., of the Permanent Mission of Zambia to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/12147)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the
decisions taken at previous meetings [I944th rr&
I945th nweting.s] I shall now, with the consent of the
Council, invite the representatives’of
Zambia, South
Africa, Cuba, Egypt, Ethiopia, Liberia, Madagascar,
Mauritania,
Uganda and Zaire to participate in the
Council’s discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the provisions of Article 31 of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.
2. In accordance with the Council’s further decision, I shall renew the Council’s invitation, under
rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure, to
the Acting President of the United Nations Council
for Namibia and the other members of the delegation
of that Council.

5. The PRESIDENT:
Before we hear the first
speaker, I should like to draw the attention of members of the Council to the letter dated 29 July from
the representative of South Africa to the President of
the Security Council [S/ I2 1.571.
6. The first speaker is the Acting
United Nations Council for Namibia,
call.

President of the
on whom I now

7. Mr. JAIPAL
(Acting President of the United
Nations Council for Namibia): On behalf of the Council
for Namibia 1 should like to make a brief observation
on the document that has just been circulated.
8. The question of a fact-finding mission was raised
yesterday [194&h nwetirl,q] by the representative of
Liberia, and today we have before us in document
S/12157 a letter from the representative of the South
African Government in which that Government claims
to have consulted the authorities of the areasconcerned

and that they have indicated their willingness to
co-operate fully. Who these authorities are is not clear.
Thereupon, the South African Government has agreed
also to give its full co-operation.

failed to condemn many previous violations committed by the Zionist racist State, Israel, against
several Arab and African nations.
16. On 11 July 1976, the town of Sialola in Zambia
was subjected to an attack by air and land committed
by South African military forces which resulted in the
slaying of 24 people and the injuring of more than
40 others. It is obvious that the aprzrtheid rkgime in
South Africa is determined to continue the policy of
aggression against its neighbours and its own deprived
black population.
The latest murderous attack on
Zambia was preceded by 13 other provocative acts in
1976 alone. Very recently, thenpartlzeid forces invaded
neighbouring Angola and tried to prevent the birth of
the new Angolan nation. In addition to those acts of
aggression against sovereign neighbouring
States,
South Africa has continued its illegal occupation of
Namibia
and the suppression of the nationalist
movements seeking self-determination
in the region.
The utter disregard by the South African r6gime of
black African nations and peoples and its cruelty in
dealing with them is best demonstrated by the harsh
and inhuman treatment of the black majority of South
Africa itself.

9. The Council for Namibia desires me to inform
the Security Council that the only co-operation the
United Nations and its organs expect from the South
African Government is that it quit the international
Territory of Namibia. That Government’s presence in
Namibia is a continuing affront to the United Nations.
10.

Fur.thermore,

there can be no question of seeking
of the South African Government
in I-egard to any inquiry into an attack that took
place 30 kilometres inside Zambia. The Government
of Zambia has all the evidence that is needed to
establish that the attack was made by South African
forces. The Security Council may, if it chooses to do
so, seek additional information from the Government
of Zambia-that
is, if the Council is not satisfied with
the facts set out by the Foreign Minister of Zambia
the co-operation

[1944rh mwi/7,g].

I I.

So far as the Council for Namibia

is concerned,

it is opposed to any action that would seek to confer

any sort of legitimacy on the South African Government in relation to its presence or activities in Namibia.
The sending of a fact-finding mission to Namibia with
the co-operation of the South African Government
would be such an act.

17. 1.t was only a few weeks ago that the South
Africans fired into a peaceful demonstration
of
unarmed students in Soweto and provoked the confrontations which took the lives of hundreds of blacks
in one of the worst massacres since that at Sharpeville,
In the view of my delegation, those inhumane and
cruel policies, applied internally and externally, are
but a consistent expression of the opurtheid philosophy. This racial segregation and discrimination
is
deeply rooted in the foundations of the white minorit
racist rCgime of South Africa and is clearly manifested
by the totality of laws governing citizenship rights’,
land ownership, civil rights and personal status, and
other laws which exclude the indigenous black majority of the population from the enjoyment of theit
most elementary rights in their homeland. The success;
of the national liberation movements in achieving theil
independence will undoubtedly encourage the South
African black majority to strive for their own independence with self-confidence. Therefore, South Africa isi
expected to crush and national liberatibn movements
and the newly-formed independent nations surrounding
it, as demonstrated by its aggression against Zambia.

12. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Qatar. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
13. Mr. AL-OBAIDLY
(Qatar): In my capacity as
Chairman of the Arab Group for the month of July,
I wish to take this opportunity to extend to you,
Mr. President, my profound and sincere congratulations on your assumption of the high office of President of the Security Council for this month. Similarly,
I wish to express my delegation’s appreciation to the
Council for allowing me to participate
in these
deliberations.
14. I wish also, on behalf of the Arab Group, to
express rng deep and sincere condolences and
sympathy to the representative of the People’s
Republic of China on the loss of lives in China this
week as a result of an earthquake. I request the
Chinese representative to convey to his Government
and to the families of the deceased our sincere
sympathy.

18. As more and more countries realize the danger
to world peace and stability of the South African,
racist and expansionist
policies,
those countries.
practising such policies are.getting more isolated and
have to rely on each other-to
the extent that A
Pretoria-Salisbury-Tel
Aviv axis has been formed.

15. Once again the Council has before it a complaint
against a racist rkgime, namely South Africa, which has
infringed the sovereignty and terriforial integrity of
another independent State, namely, the Republic of
Zambia. My delegation strongly believes that the
Council. bears a good deal of responsibility for South
Africa’s unprovoked aggression on Zambia by having

19. When, in the early 196Os, Israel was seeking
acceptance from the world community, it had to phY
a hypocritical role by showing sympathy to African
States and criticizing the c/ptrrt/leitI
policy in South
Africa, while at the same time maintaining strong
2

economic and trade ties with the racist rkgime in
Pretoria. Soon’ after the Israeli occupation of Arab
territories in June 1967, the international community
condemned such occupation.
At this point, Israel
started toeturn its back on world opinion by ignoring
the demands for immediate
withdrawal from the
occupied territories.
It was in this context that,
according to the Israeli daily Hu’arc~rz:, of 1 December 1967, General Chaim Herzog, the chief representative of the Zionist settler-State, questioned Israel’s
then negative stand towards South Africa and
expressed his hopes for better military co-operation
between the Zionist settler-State and South Africa by
saying:
“Why should Israel adopt this stand towards
South Africa for fear of losing support among African
States when others continue to supply tanks and
planes to Pretoria
without
endangering
their
influence in black Africa’?”
Also in this context, the Prime Minister of the white
minority rCgime of South Africa stated, according to
The NLJIV Yo/% 7i’nles of 30 April 1970, that
“Israel, like South Africa, is confronted with
its Arab inhabitants. Both South Africa and Israel
are in a sense intruder States.. . We view Israel’s
position and problems with understanding
and
sympathy.”
20. With this I wish, on behalf of the Arab Group,
to express our full support for the legitimate struggle
being waged by the majority of southern African
peoples against the policy of crpwtheid and racial discrimination. We denounce the apcrrthid rkgime’s acts
of aggression against the Republic of Zambia. This
flagrant attitude of belligerency has been condemned
and deplored in numerous United Nations resolutions,
in particular Security Council resolution 300 (1971),
in which the Council called upon “South Africa to
respect fully the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of [the Republic of] Zambia;“.
We also denounce the
policy
of “bantustanization”
of the indigenous
population of South Africa. It is indeed the responsibility of the United Nations and, above all, the
Security Council to condemn the apartheid rGgime of
South Africa for its racist and expansionist designs,
which constitute a serious threat to world peace and
security.
2 1, The Council must undertake the necessary action
now
to put an end to the evil forces in South Africa
which are~implementing
an inhuman and barbaric law
and repressive measures against the peoples who have
risen against injustice.

assumption of the presidency of the Council and to
say what a great personal pleasure it is for me to be
here under your leadership.
23. 1 join you and 6thers who have spoken before
me in expressing, on behalf of my delegation, deep
shock and grief to our colleague from China at the
loss of human life and the destruction caused by the
earthquakes on 27 and 28 July in the north-east of
his country. I would request him to convey to the
victims of the disaster the deepest and most sincere
sympathy of the people and the Government
of my
country.
24. In our meeting of 27 July [ihid.], the Foreign
Minister of Zambia explained in detail, and with great
moderation,
his country’s complaint
against South
Africa. The facts, as narrated by him, point to the
planning and execution by South Africa of a military
action against a transit camp of the Namibians 30 kiIometres inside Zambian territory. That the/number of
the dead, injured and missing totals almost 100 is an
indication of the dimensions and gravity of the attack.
Furthermore,
as the Foreign Minister
of Zambia
has explained, this was only the latest in a series of
acts of provocation, intrusion and aggression committed by South Africa against his country.
25. The representative of South Africa did not deny
the occurrence of this military action against Zambia.
He stated that the South African Government had no
knowledge of the attack on a Zambian village and that
it had at no time authorized such an attack. Such
transparent equivocations can deceive no one. Tire
facts speak for themselves. An attack did occur at
Sialola in Zambia on 11 July, and this fact is not
disputed by anyone. The attackers could only have
been trained South Africans operating from bases in
Namibia.
26. In examining this question, some basic considerations must be taken into account.
27. In the first place, this is not the first time that
the Security Council has considered the violation of
Zambia’s sovereignty by South Africa. In its resolution 300 (1971), after examining
a complaint
by
Zambia, the Security Council called upon “South
Africa to respect fully the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Zambia”. In the same resolution
the
Council also decided to consider any further attacks
with the seriousness they deserved.
28. Secondly, we must take cognizance of the fact
that the attack of 11 July cannot have been other than
a premeditated and planned military action by the
South African armed forces.

22. Mr. AKHUND
(Pakistan):
Mr. President,
although my delegation has had the opportunity to do
29. Thirdly, military action by South Africa against
SO on a previous
occasion, I should like, as this is
its neighbours, including the attack of 11 July which
the first time I have spoken in the Council this month,
we are now considering, has been mounted from the
t0 offer you my most sincere congratulations
on your
Territory of Namibia-a
Territory which is the direct
:
3

I
/
I

responsibility of the United Nations and where South
Africa’s continued presence constitutes an internationally wrongful act and a breach of international
obligations in conformity with resolution 301 (1971)
and the advisory opinion on the same subject given
by the International Court of Justice on 21 June 1971. l
All ‘indications are that, instead of withdrawing from
Namibia as called for by the Council, the South
African regime is busy devising ways of retaining its
stranglehold
on the Territory and is meanwhile
strengthening its military presence there.

which stand in the way of a peaceful evolution
situation in southern Africa.

of the

34. The political arrangements currently prevailing
in southern Africa are based on gross injustice and,
as long .as they remain basically unaltered, tension
and conflict will continue to mount in the region and
the Security Council will remain perpetually seized of
these issues. It would, of course, be ideal if this
state of affairs could be changed by the voluntary
action of those who are responsible for it. We noted
that the South African representative, in his statement
here, recognized that:

30. Nor can we ignore, in considering the present
case, the fact that South Africa has taken illegal
measures to define its area of action and influence as
extending to the whole .of Africa south of the Sahara,
and has arrogated to itself the right to take military
action in any of the countries situated there.

“what the area needs is a solution wider in scope
than the issues of shooting incidents and aggravations, a solution which promises hope of stabiliby,
of permanence, not only for one boundary or locality
but also for the whole of southern Africa.”

3 1. In the light of these considerations, we share the
general view expressed by the participants
in this
debate that South Africa should be condemned for
its violation of Zambian sovereignty on 11 July. The
Security Council must call upon South Africa to desist
from such acts in the future, and to observe scrupulously the principles of the Charter relating to
respect for sovereignty of States, and non-interference
by Member countries in one another’s affairs.

6‘. . .
“What was anathema yesterday can becomle
acceptable tomorrow-but
not in an atmosphere of
tension and terror and not under threat.” [I/>ic/.,
prrras.

63 nw

65.1

We agree with those sentiments, but find them quit.e
at variance with the policies of his Government.

32. Furthermore, the Council cannot but take note
of the fact that the military attack of 11 July was
mounted from bases in Namibia. In this connexion, it
is pertinent to note that Council resolution 301 (1971)
and the advisory opinion of the International
Court of
Justice place Member States under the obligation to
recognize the illegality of South Africa’s presence in
Namibia. Furthermore, Council resoIution 269 (1969)
recognized the legitimacy of the struggle of the people
of Namibia against the illegal presence of the South
African authorities in the Territory, and enjoined all
States to increase their moral and material assistance
to the people of Namibia in their struggle against’
foreign occupation. The Council, therefore, in any
decision it takes on the Zambian complaint,
cannot
ignore South Africa’s military occupation of Namibia.

35. The Pretoria regime remains inflexible in pursuing
its racist policy: it continues to defy world public
opinion, both as regards apartheid and as regards South
Africa’s illegal occupation of ,Namibia, where it has
strengthened and increased its military presence. It
is building up a military capability which is bound
to be alarming to its neighbours and, as has been
mentioned,
has openly declared its intention,
in
pursuit of self-proclaimed security interests, to operate
at will in all of the area south of the Sahara, thereby
disregarding the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of other States and violating the Charter. South
Africa continues to commit acts of intervention and
aggression against its neighbours, such as the one
the Council is considering at present. While paying
lip-service to the idea of dialogue and detente, the
Pretoria regime is, we are told, financing, organizing
and encouraging subversive elements in Zambia and
other neighbouring African States.

33. Like all the members of the Council and Members
of the United Nations, Pakistan wishes to see conditions of real peaceand harmony established in southern
Africa. We have to recognize the fact that prevailing
conditions in southern Africa are not conducive to the
establishment of a lasting peace in that area. This is
due to three factors: first, the continued and illegal
occupation of Namibia by South Africa; secondly,
the policy of upurtheid
and racial discrimination
followed by South Africa in its own territory as well
as in Namibia; thirdly, the continued domination
of
Southern Rhodesia by the illegal Smith regime. These
three factors are ‘repugnant to the principles
and
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and
contrary to the resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council. They are the obstacles

36. The violence, the threats, the provocations thus
come from South Africa itself, and their targets are the
oppressed people of South Africa, the occupied Terdtory of Namibiaand South Africa’s African neighbours.
37. These actions controvert the assertions made b:~
South Africa’s spokesman and friends that Soutlh
African policy is slowly but steadily evolving and that
time and patience will bring about a transformation of
the situation. Such considerations cannot in any casle
weigh against the evidence of a flagrant armed attack
on one of the States Members of the United Nations,
4

or deflect the Council from acting decisively in fulfilment of its responsibilities.

even clear-cut distortions. As the Council is fairly
familiar with theappartkeid rdgime’s capacity to indulge
in such postures, I need not abuse the indulgence of
my colleagues to expose what must to them also be
an obvious misrepresentation
of facts. Furthermore,
my colleague, the Foreign Minister of Zambia, has
already effectively demolished
all such deliberate
falsifications. I should none the less like to note with
interest the absurd claim by the representative of the
opnrtheid rCgime that South Africa has sought and
continues to seek a peaceful solution to the situation
in the region. Mr. Botha and the regime he represents
should know better. The Council need hardly be
reminded that the cause of the disturbances in southern
Africa is the very system that his rCgime is trying
to defend. The whole world has condemned clpnrtlwid
and the whole world has declared it a crime against
humanity. I have yet to see criminal acts that make a
peacemaker of the perpetrator.

38. Mr. KADUMA
(United Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, first of all I should like to thank you
most sincerely for the remarks you made on Tuesday
[194&h rneefing] in welcoming me to the Security
Council. This is the first time that I have participated
in these meetings and I therefore look forward to
receiving your guidance, as well as that of all the
representatives here present. For my part, you may be
assured of my fullest co-operation.
39. Secondly, I should like to take this opportunity to
congratulate you on your assumption of the very high
office of President of the Council for the month of
July. I trust that under your efficient and skilled
guidance the Council will be able to arrive at an
amicable
solution which is satisfactory to the
conscience of all well-meaning delegations here that
are genuinely interested in the promotion of world
peace and in the welfare of the people of Namibia
and southern Africa.

43. The Council, rather than allowing itself to be
distracted by such absurdities, must therefore, face up
to its responsibilities if it is to merit the role of peacemaker for the world community
in general and the
people of southern Africa in particulaq.. What is
required of the Council is that it take concrete action
to meet the requirements
of the fast-deteriorating
situation in southern Africa. For I am sure that we
shall all regret our inaction in the matter. We cannot
deny a people fighting for a just cause their right to
self-determination.

40. Thirdly, I wish to join you, Mr..President,
and
all representatives who have spoken before me in
expressing, on behalf of the party, the Government
and the people of the United Republic of Tanzania,
the deepest sympathy to the Party, the Government
and the people of the People’s Republic of China for
the calamity that has befallen them. I should like to
request the representative of the People’s Republic
of China to convey my country’s condolences to the
bereaved families of all those who have lost their
lives in this most unfortunate incident.

44. To us, South Africa’s criminal acts against the
Republic of Zambia are just the beginning of greatel
violations of peace in that region. South Africa must
know that to commit aggression against Zambia is to
commit aggression against Tanzania,
and indeed
against the whole of independent Africa. For the sake
of clarity, I shall take this opportunity
to remind the
Council in general and South Africa in particular of
Africa’s stand on the matter.

41. The events of 11 July 1976 were described very
clearly on Tuesday by my brother, the Foreign
Minister of the Republic of Zambia. I therefore do not
inteqd to repeat them here nor indeed is it necessary
for me to do so. What I want to add is that to those
of us who are well acquainted with the developments
in southern Africa, the incident of 11 July came as
no surprise. For the outrageous acts of aggression
which the racist South African r6gime has perpetrated
against the Republic of Zambia are manifestly a
response to the threat that the rdgime is seeing in the
rapidly mounting liberation pressure being exerted
by the freedom fighters of Namibia and Zimbabwe.
These acts of provocation by South Africa are an
indication of the desperation and isolation in which the
Vorster minority rCgime is finding itself. The panicking
Vorster regime is looking for a scapegoat. This
scapegoat is not only the Republic of Zambia: South
Africa’s futil’e efforts are in effect directed towards
the whole of free Africa. The Council must,.therefore,
look at the problem in this wider context: hence the
need to internationalize
the conflict.

45. In the first place, Africa has committed itself to
the total liberation of the continent. This commitment
is spelled out in many well-known
documents,
including the Lusaka Manifesto of 1969’ and the Dar
es Salaam Declaration on southern Africa adopted by
the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) in April 1975. In these documents,
Africa has stated categorically
that if freedom in
southern Africa cannot be achieved by peaceful means,
then it will be achieved by force. Being a selfrespecting people, we refuse to accept South Africa’s
subjugation of the African peoples of southern Africa.
As we have stated before, until all of Africa is free,
no African State can regard itself as being free.
What we are asking South Africa and the internacommunity
to do is td accept our sincerity
und to believe us. The Fascist Portuguese authorities
laughed at the Lusaka Manifesto,
treating it with
contempt. They did not take serioysly Africa’s commit-

46.

[ional

42. The representative of the racist Government of
South Africa once again clearly chose to come to the
Council with a barrage of misleading assertions and
5

are just such proof of this war-mongering
by South
Africa. The South African racists are in effect reSiStin,!:
the truth and are just fighting against the current of
history. In this adventure, they will fail miserably.

n-tent to fight for its freedom. Given the massive
support that colonial Portugal received from some of
its allies, the authorities in Lisbon considered their
position powerfuI and secure, and they even had a
false sense of invincibility. Thus Africa was left with
no alternative but to support actively the armed
struggle of our brothers in the former Portuguese
colonies. We all know the consequences of that
struggle:. the Portuguese empire crumbled.

50. We therefore view the Sialola attack with thf:
greatest concern. In using force against the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Zambia, South Africa has
violated the Charter of the United Nations as well1
as international law. It is an act of aggression which
should be condemned in the strongest possible terms
by all men of peace. Indeed, if this wanton aggressio,n
is not condemned by this august body of the UniteId
Nations, which is responsible for the maintenance alf
international peace and security, we shall run the risk
of giving licence to the racists to continue their massacre of innocent people. We in Tanzania vehemently
condemn this aggression and pledge our total solidarity
with Zambia.

47. .As my brother the Foreign Minister of the Republic of Zambia said, it is Africa which is a peacemaker
and not South Africa and its collaborators. I should
like to take this opportunity once again to renew our
offer of the Lusaka Manifesto to South Africa. They
still have time to make peace with us. But if they
persist with their white-supremacist arrogance, they
will have, to go the Portuguese way. For they must
know by now that no nation, however mighty, can
defeat the determination of a people to be free. We
saw it happen in Viet Nam and in Cambodia, where
the whole arsenal of American technology crumbled
b$fore a people otherwise presumed to be helpless.
We have also seen it happen in Guinea-Bissau, in
Mozambique
and in Angola, where Portuguese
imperialism,
notwithstanding
the support that it
received from some of its North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) allies, succumbed to the African
cause. As if this was not enough, South Africa
attempted its colonialist venture in Angola. They know
what happened on that occasion.

51. On the other hand, mere condemnations,
without
any sign of stern measures being taken against South
Africa, will not help to bring peace to the region.
The Council will recall its condemnation
in March
of this year of South Africa’s aggression against the
People’s Republic of Angola. We all know that nothing
tangible has come of that resolution [rednfion
387
(1976)]. South Africa has not only refused to compensate Angola for destroyed property, and to restore
to it all the stolen property, but instead it is continuing to commit aggression against that country
as it is doing against Zambia.

48. Let me assure the Council that Africa is not
bloodthirsty,
nor is it working for a racist policy in
reverse. Indeed, it is an exercise in self-deceit for
South Africa and its collaborators to pretend that they
are fighting against communism. For the struggle in
southern Africa is a struggle against only one ideology:
the ideology of exploitation, oppression and privilege.
It is also a struggle for only one ideology: the ideology
of equality, freedom and justice. No reasonable man
can ask us to forgo our freedom. For ours is a just
cause, and we shall win.

52. Besides, in a vain effort to stem the tide of the
popular uprising within its territory, the Vorster clique
has resorted to its powerful instruments
of repression through its police and army. The Soweto mnssacres, in which hundreds of innocent African schoolchildren were killed and maimed,
are a precurstrt
of the kind of conflict brewing in South Africa. These
massacres are an extension of racial discrimination
and rrparthcid. The Council considered the matter in
June, and, as was expected of it, condemned these
brutal murders too.

49. When I started my submission, I argued that
South Africa was deliberately misleading the Council.
To demonstrate its aggressive designs towards the
rest of Africa, South Africa recently adopted a
notorious piece of extraterritorial
legislation which
purports to give it the right of intervention in all African
countries south of the equator. My President, in a
speech at Quilimane, Mozambique, on 6 February
1976, termed this law “the most arrogant piece of
legislation ever heard of’. This legislation seeks to
legalize the dispatch of South African troops to these
African countries in order to fight for South African
interests. As my President stated in his speech, this law
is a big challenge to Africa’s freedom. Free Africa has
no alternative but to defy this wanton South African
aggr_ession. NO peaceful Government can enact a law
which seeks to put its Government permanently
at
war with its neighbours. The recent events at Sialola

53. Thus, despite these repeated condemnations.
South Africa goes on to defy international
opinion.
It has shown no respect for the United Nation<,
or for the Council. For instance, it still illegally
occupies the international Territory of Namibia in spil:e
of numerous General Assembly and Security Counc:il
resolutions. South Africa has turned a blind eye
to resolution 366 (1974), which called on it to with-’
draw from Namibia.
Even resolution
385 (f9761.
adopted unanimously in January, which called for
free elections in Namibia
under United
Nations
supervision, has fallen on deaf ears,
54. Instead, South Africa continues with its absurd.
and untenable so-called Windhoek constitutional
talks.
These talks cannot succeed because they do not
represent the true feelings of Namibians.
Without the
6

participation and supporl of the authentic representatives of Namibia-namely,
the South West Africa
People’s
Organization
(SWAPO)-no
talks can
succeed. South Africa must face the inevitable by
accepting to hold discussions with SWAPO. Otherwise, time is fast running out for Vorster. Let this selfimposed colonial Power know that, with the independence of Mozambique and Angola, freedom has
come to the borders of South Africa and Namibia.
It must thercforc accept these changed circumstances
or be changed by force.

59. What, then, should the Council do? As the
supreme body fqr the maintenance of international
peace and security, it should tell South Africa in no
uncertain terms th& the Council can brook no aggression. The Council should therefore strongly condemn
South Africa for its latest act of aggression against
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Zambia.
The Council should condemn the use of the international Territory of Namibia by South Africa to mount
aggression against free Africa.
60. South Africa should be exposed for its sinister
motives against free Africa in attacking Zambia. South
Africa cannot blackmail Zambia from supporting the
liberation struggle, for no threat, however great, can
stop the liberation of southern Africa.

55. South AErica must realize that, despite its arsenal
of repressive machinery, the concept of “might
is
right” has been buried. What bcfcll Portuguese
colonialism
Mozambique
and
in Guinea-Bissau,
Angola is sufficient proof that right is now might. If
South Africa cannot see this writing on the wall, it
can only mean unnecessary bloodshed on a larger
scale, which could have been avoided had the Fascist
rulers of South Africa realized in time the irresistible
trend. History will hold Vorster and his fellow racists
responsible for the inevitable conflagration in that part
of our continent.

61, The recent attacks on Zambia have shown that it
is too much to expect a racist minority to listen to the
voice of reason. It can be defeated only by the use of
force. We in Tanzania are confident that justice will
triumph in southern Africa and that Africa will be
free.
62. The Security Council has a clear responsibility
to face this latest South African intransigence with
firmness and without equivocation.
For it must be
stated that this latest aggression against an African
State comes less than six months after the Council
categorically
condemned South Africa’s aggression
against Angola. The authorities in Pretoria have not
only ignored the Council’s demands of March of this
year but have, indeed, proceeded to make the policy
of aggression a constant practice against African
States. The Vorster rigime has also ignored the
collective demand of the Council made in both its
resolutions of January and March this year [re.wlution.r
385 (1976) LI& 387 f/976)] calling upon that rkgime not
to use the international territory of Namibia to mount
aggression against African States. Therefore, as we
deliberate on this important question, it is imperative
to take account of this behaviour of the racist
authorities
in Pretoria. Thus, we must draw the
necessary conclusions from the arrogance and contempt they have shown for the Council. Clearly, it
is not sufficient to condemn South Africa’s persistent
aggressions against independent African States, Nor is
it adequate to issue warnings, however strong and
solemn they may be. The time has certainly come to
adopt effective measures, including those provided
for under Chapter VII of the Charter. For if the
Security Council continues to adopt condemnatory
resolutions and issues persistent warnings without
putting some teeth into them, we run the serious
danger of perpetual arrogance and intransigence on the
part of the Vorster rkgime in addition to the danger of
projecting the United Nations as a helpless institution
in the face of clear-cut aggression and defiance. This,
then, is the challenge before the Council.

56. A war is raging on in southerr;l Africa. Freedom
fighters in Namibia and Zimbabwe have taken up
arms. Africa has no alternative but to support these
valiant fighters. We believe that it is in our interest to
support this noble struggle because our own survival
as a free and sovereign State hinges on a free Africa.
We further believe that freedom is for all or it is for
none. Tanzania has no more right to be free than has
Namibia.
We have to do all we can to end this
shameful scourge of colonialism which has reared its
ugly head for too long on the African continent.
57. The struggle in southern Africa is a struggle for
freedom. It is not a struggle for or against East or
West. Those who look upon the struggle as a Powerbloc conflict are misleading the world. We therefore
expect the world by now to have seen the hollowness
of this ridiculous argument. We would also expect all
nations of good will to support our liberation efforts.
At least they should do nothing to hinder them. For
our cause is justice and peace.
58. South Africa is now behaving like a drowning
person not only because of the physical threat posed
by the freedom fighters but also because of the moral
threat from free Africa. It is afraid of the freedom
torch which is shining near its boundaries. It is afraid
because the victories ushering in independence elsewhere in southern Africa will encourage the majority
of South Africans to rebel against the Vorster tyranny.
This panic has now taken the form of Bantustans and
the so-called independent homelands. Vorster unwisely believes ,that by this policy of divide and rule
he will have breathing space. Need we say that these
frantic, meaningless manoeuvres are bound to fail?
Have they not received a slap in the face as a result
of the refusal of some patriots to be hoodwinked by
this mock independence?

63. Mr. BENKHAYAL
(Libyan -Arab Republic):
First, I should like to welcome the presence among
7

us today of the Foreign Ministers
United Republic of Tanzania.

70. The aggression committed
against the African
people by racist regimes has become progressively
more blatant. At the beginning of this month, the
Zionist racist regime engaged in flagrant aggression
against the Republic of Uganda. The continuing aggression committed by the racist regimes in South Africa,
Zimbabwe and Palestine against the African people
provide
substantial proof of broad collaboration
among these racist regimes to halt the Africans’ continuation of their struggle against under-development.
colonialism,
imperialism
and racism. These three
racist regimes, supported by the imperialist countries, are working to intimidate
the African States
and peoples and to force them to resign themselves tlo
the stc~tus y~ro.

of Zambia and the

64, I wish also to express my delegation’s
condolences to the Chinese delegation on the earthquake
that very recently struck the People’s Republic of
China and left so many victims, as well as our
condolences to the Zambian delegation on the wanton
aggression by the racist regime of South Africa, which
also took its toll of victims.
65. Six months have passed since the Security Council discussed the question of Namibia,
and adopted
its resolution 385 (1976) of 3 January 1976, condemning
the South African military buildup in Namibia and any
utilization of the international Territory as a base for
attacks on the neighbouring countries. The Security
Council has convened three times since then to discuss
additional acts of aggression committed
by this same
racist regime against the people of Africa in Namibia,
Angola and Zambia.

71. It is indeed no accident that the Council shoulld
have been convened twice within this month to consider acts of aggression against African peoples and
against African States by the racist regimes in Palestine
and in South Africa. It is clear that peace and security
are continuously threatened by the existence of the
racist regimes in South Africa, Zimbabwe and
Palestine, all supported by the imperialist Powers.

66. In March 1976 the Security Council focused on the
aggression of the racist regime against an independent
African State, the People’s Republic of Angola. The
Security Council adopted resolution 387 (1976) on
31 March, strongly condemning South African aggression against the People’s Republic of Angola, and
demanding that South Africa desist from. utilizing the
international Territory of Namibia to mount aggressive
acts against the People’s Republic of Angola, or any
neighbouring African countries.

72. The events that have taken place in Uganda and
in Zambia during this month are part of a comprehensive plan designed by the imperialist forces and
their intelligence organs to bring the African States
under their domination. These imperialist forces also
attempt to create differences and dissension among
the African States, in order to prevent them from
constituting a major force challenging the aspirations
of the imperialist forces.

67. During June 1976 the Council centred upon the
killings and violence perpetrated by the uparfheid
regime in South Africa in Soweto and other areas. In
its resolution 392 (1976), the Council clearly condemned the South African Government for the massive
killings and violence directed against the Africans,
including schoolchildren
and students, ’ as well as
others opposing racial discrimination.
In addition,
the Council called upon that racist Government, to
terminate immediately
the violence aimed at the
African ,peo,ple and to undertake urgent steps to
eliminate apartheid and racial discrimination.

73. It is clear that manipulative tactics are at present
being undertaken on the African continent, and that a
striking parallelism exists between the policies of the
two racist regimes, in South Africa and Palestine, and
that there is an alliance between them to destroy unity
and the liberation movements in Africa. In addition,
a concentrated
propaganda
campaign has been
launched against the progressive countries in Africa,
in order to mould public opinion by providing false
and distorted information regarding the policy of these
progressive States.

68. It is evident to all of us that the South African
racist regime blatantly defies the foregoing resolutions,
and continues to commit acts of massive violence
against the indigenous people of South Africa.

74. This campaign reflects a preliminary
step to
destroy these progressive forces and to eiiminate the:ir
revolutionary
spirit, which has become a major
obstacle challenging imperialism
and colonialism.
These forces should realize that their malicious
designs will never be achieved, regardless of these
efforts. The people’s volition constitutes a solid rock,
rendering the imperialist manceuvres ineffective, as the
events in Viet Nam and Angola so clearly show.

69. Although only one month has passed since the
Council discussed the killing and violence perpetrated
by the upartheid regime in South Africa, in Soweto
and other areas, the South African regime has initiated
aggression against an independent
and sovereign
African State, the Republic of Zambia, while also
utilizing the international Territory of Namibia. These
recent acts of aggression demonstrate outright defiance
by the South African regime of resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly which
have clearly determined that South Africa’s intervention and presence in Namibia are illegal.

75. The question under discussion is very clear. The
racist regime of South Africa committed flagrant
aggression against an independent African State, the
Republic of Zambia, using the Territory of Namibia,
which is illegally occupied by that racist regime. Thiis
8

81. It is abhorrent and appalling that the aggressive
racist and Fascist rCgime of South Africa is still
receiving
economic
and military
aid from many
Powers, despite the repeated calls for an arms embargo
against it. Those who are helping South Africa must
know that they are helping our enemy, our bitterest
and worst enemy in Africa. This international
hipocrisy must come to an end. They must choose between
Africa and the enemies of Africa.

marked the fourteenth act of wanton aggression by
the racist rkgime of South Africa, which flagrantly
violated the territorial integrity of Zambia, threatening
international
peace and security.
76. It is very interesting to note the statement which
South Africa’s representative made in the Security
Council on 27 July [194&h nzeeting], in which he
attempted to deny the act of aggression committed
by his regime against Zambia. During the current
debate, there were no other alternatives available to
the South African representative. However, last March
during the Council’s deliberations on the situation in
Angola, the South African rkgime chose another tactic
by shrewdly withdrawing its forces from the territory of Angola as soon as it became clear that this
matter would be reviewed by the Council. We have
repeatedly
witnessed the South African rCgime’s
tactics
of committing
flagrant
aggression and
presenting a cover-up for such criminal action, as is
cIearly demonstrated by the document circulated to
us today [S/12157].

82. Earlier this month the Council failed to adopt a
resolution concerning the act of aggressioti by the
Zionist racist rCgime against Uganda. The reasons for
that failure are well known to all members of the
Council. The reasons that prevented a real solution
of that issue set a dangerous precedent within the
Council by distorting the issues arid camouflaging the
truth. We hope that the Council will approach the
question currently under discussion with a clearer
vision and adopt a proper resolution to deal effectively
with this issue. If the Council fails again, it will be
reinforcing a dangerous pattern which could prove to
have extremely harmful repercussions for world peace
and security.

77. In his statement before the Council, the South
African representative
stressed the ‘importance of
seeking a peaceful solution to the problem under discussion. It is ironic that this representative, who
spoke on behalf of a r&gime which promotes the racist
policy of npartheid
and is illegally occupying Namibia,
can say that South Africa wishes to promote conditions
of peace in an atmosphere of understanding. What
kind of peace can the South African representative be
implying?

83. Wit? regard to the continual flagrant acts of
aggression committed by the racist rCgime of South
Africa against the Republic of Zambia and other countries in the region, in defiance of the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, my delegation urges
the Security Council:
first, to take appropriate
measures, including action under Chapter VII of the
Charter; secondly, strongly to condemn the racist
rCgime of South Africa for its aggression against the
Republic of Zambia; and, thirdly, strongly to condemn
the racist rCgime of South Africa for using the international Territory of Namibia as a base for aggression
against the Republic of Zambia and other African
countries.

78. During October 1971, the Security Council
discussed a similar flagrant act of aggression by the
racist rCgime of South Africa against the Republic of
Zambia.
During that debate, the Council adopted
resotution 300 (1971), paragraph 3 of which reads as
follows:
dec+lrr~~~sthat, in the event of South
Africa violating the sovereignty or territorial integrity of Zambia, the Security Council will meet again
to examine the situation further in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter.”

84. The Libyan Arab Republic again reaffirms its
pledge to support any effective and relevant action
that may be taken by the Council against the South
African racist rkgime, and it will spare no effort to
ensure that its African brothers in Zambia and Namibia
enjoy its assistance and support in their struggle
against the racist minority rCgime in South Africa.

79. The facts are well known. The problem is well
known to us. The United Nations has been discussing
this problem for 30 years now and, in the humble
view of my delegation, what we need now is effective
action to terminate this blatant and illegal aggression
against the African people and to put at end to the
South African minority rkgime’s defiance of United
Nations resolutions.

85. MI-. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics)
(intrrprPtution
,fbo/~r R~~ssitrrr): Before
stating the position of the delegation of the Soviet
Union on the question before us, I should like to make
two preliminary
comments which have no bearing
on it.

“ForthrJr

86. My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to congratulate the delegation of the United States on
the successful landing of an automatic interplanetary
station -Viking
1-n
Mars.‘This
is a scientific and
technical
chievement
which is an important contribut’on/
to the study of cosmic space and opens up
new possibilities for further conquering space in the

80. We call upon all nations, particularly
the
developed
countries
and the. Western Powers,
conscientiously
to implement the relevant resolutions
of the United Nations by discontinuing all economic
and military assistance to the racist minority rdgime
in South Africa.
9

,-

,-

measures against the racist rt?gime of South Afrilza.
However, some members of the Security Council have
stubbornly objected-and
continue to object-to that,
sometimes referring to the internal nature of the events
taking place in South Africa, and at other times stating
that they do not consider it a threat to peace for lthc
leaders in Pretoria to engage in such actions. Our
delegation and other delegations have drawn the
Council’s attention to the fact that if we do not enact
the most decisive sanctions as provided for by *the
Charter of the United Nations against the racist South
African rtgime-sanctions
provided for by decisions
of the Security Council and the General Assemblythe racists, who have usurped power and who #are
oppressing the majority of the native populatioh of
South Africa, may enlarge the scope of their crimes and
may extend these actions to neighbouring
African
countries and regions of Africa.

interest and for the benefit of all humanity.
The
further development of international
co-operation in
the conquering of space, the foundations of of which
were laid by the launching of the first Soviet artificial
earth satellite and the first flight by a Soviet man in
space, is fully in accordance with the interests of
peace and mankind.
87. I should also like to express, on b&half of the
Soviet delegation, our condolences to the delegation
of China with respect to the earthquake that took
place in China and which led to the loss of human life
and considerable
material damage. Unfortunately,
.mankind is still not in a position to avoid these
scourges, the suffering and consequences of which
are well known to the Soviet people. Similar tragic
surprises sprung on us by the planet on which we
live illustrate the fact that it is necessary for all
mankind to combine its scientific and creative efforts
in order to make sure that .we can establish peace on
earth and avoid such foreseeable phenomena
as
earthquakes.

92. The ink had not yet dried on resolution 1392
(1976), in which the Council called on the Government
of South Africa to adopt urgent measures to eliminate
trpcrrtheid and racial discrimination,
when all of us
became witnesses to a new criminal act by the South
African rCgime, this time going beyond the borders of
that racist fiefdom.

88. Before expressing the views of our delegation
on the item befort: us, I should also like to say a few
words directed to you, Mr. President. I think that we
are approaching the conclusion of the discussion of
the complaint by Zambia concerning the South African
racist rCgime’s actions against the people of that
country. I should like to express the hope that the
Council will wisely and correctly, and in accordance
with the desires of the people of Zambia and of the
whole of Africa, conclude the discussion of this
question under your presidency by adopting a resolution which really puts an end to the events that we
have witnessed.

93. This time the racists have chosen as their victim
the people of Zambia, an independent African country
which is hundreds of miles from the borders of that
bastion of racism.
94. As has already been reported here in the most
convincing statement by the Foreign Minister of
Zambia, Mr. Mwale [ihid.], in 1976 alone, South
Africa has p&rpetl-ated against that African country
14 utterly uncalled for acts of military aggression and
thus threatened peace and security in that region.
A particularly gross provocation took place on I I July
this year, when a group of military personnel, with
air support, attacked the village of Sialola killing or
wounding dozens of people. Now, nobody here can
accept the idea, as some have already said, that those
military aircraft came from Mars or some other planet:
they could only come-and in fact did only come-from
Namibia, which is- illegally, unfairly, and contrary
to decisions of the Security Council and the Gen’ernl
Assembly, being kept under the yoke of the racist
rCgime of South Africa. That Territory, unlawfully
occupied by South Africa, has been turned into a base
for flagrant acts of aggression against neighbouiring
African countries, as a number of representatives from
African countries have pointed out in the coursf: Of
earlier Council discussions with respect to South
Africa’s policies.

89. This is not the first time this year that the
Council is discussing a question concerning
the
activities and practices of the South African racists.
The gross violations of the human dignity of the
indigenous population, the repression of that population, which has been subjected to countless humiliations and the attacks on neighbouring
countries have
become the standard practice of the racist rCgime.
90. Has not the time now come for us to say-to
paraphrase a Latin expression-“How
much longer
will the South African rCgime try the patience of the
Security Council?”
91. Just recently, the Security Council, in its resolution 392 (1976), decisively condemned the Government of South Africa for its mass killings and violence
against the African population bf that country, and
quite rightly pointed out that the racist, inhuman policy
ofrrprlrtlzriti has become acrime against the conscience
and dignity of mankind and a serious threat to international peace and security. Representatives
of African
countries recently breed from the colonial yoke and
representitives
of the socialist countries have called
many times on the Council to adopt the most decisive

9.5. Attention was drawn to the fact that, as id the
case of the aggression against Angola, the SCM~~
African racists perpetrated this attack against Zambia
from the very Territory of Namibia,
which they
illegally occupy.
Such utilization
of Namibia ihs ii
base for aggression has been condemned by the Unitcc[
10

Nations. I will not list all of the specific resolutions;
there are quite a number of them. However, in resolution 387 (1976) the Council demanded that South
Africa desist from using “the international Territory
of Namibia to mount provocative or aggressive acts
against the People’s Republic of Angola or any other
neighbouring African State”.
96, Now, what did the South African racists do‘?
They simply ignored that decision of the Security
Council, too. Thus they grossly violated both the
Charter and alI the other decisions concerning South
Africa adopted by the United Nations.

concrete actions. It would be better if the representative of South Africa told the Security Council why his
Government
is stubbornly
continuing
its illegal
occupation of Natiibia;
why the Pretoria rCgime is
implementing
the cruel, inhuman policy of upurtheid
in his country; why South Africa is mounting attacks
against independent African States; and why South
Africa is arming so incredibly fast and has recently
been training its troops and mercenaries. It is arming
and training its armed forces in order to oppose the
resistance of its own population and to try the strength
of the liberated neighbouring African countries.
101. The blatant aggression by South Africa against
Angola and Zambia continues, as does the occupation
by force of Namibia and the cruel repression of all
opposition to the inhuman policy of crpurthcid in that
country. All this shows that the racist rCgime in South
Africa prefers to talk to the liberated African peoples
from a position of strength and only from a position
of strength. It is no secret to anybody here that
the arsenals of South Africa are now replete with
weapons which the leaders in Pretoria are ready to
use, not only against their own people but also against
other peoples in Africa. The responsibility for this
must be borne not only by the racist regime of South
Africa but also by those Powers in the West which are
helping South Africa to strengthen its military forces,
which are providing it with a surfeit of weapons and
assisting it in building military bases and airfields,
which are engaging in broad-based economic cooperation with it and have expanding contacts with
it in other fields. The South African rkgime is relying
heavily on this assistance from members of NATO.
The countries interested in maintaining the South
African racist r6gime are not only co-operating
extensively with South Africa but are also showing a
willingness to increase their military assistance to it,
thus helping to make it more aggressive.

97. The attack of I1 July on Zambia by South
African military forces is another link in the endless
chain of aggressive acts committed by South Africa,
and we think that, if the Council does not take
appropriate action, this development can lead to even
greater provocative and hostile acts by the South
African racists against other African countries that
have recently freed themselves from colonialism.
98. The purpose of these acts by the South African
racists is clear. They wish to frighten the peoples of
independent African countries and force them to give
up theit solidarity
with the national liberation
movements and stop them from giving assistance and
support to those national
liberation
movements.
Suffice it to note that Pretoria’s aggressiveness has
sharply increased, especially recently when, under
pressure,
from liberation forces in the southern part
of Africa, the peoples of Mozambique,
Angola and
other countries dealt quite a blow to the racists and
colonialists
by freeing themselves from the colonial
yoke. The inglorious end of the racists’ aggression
against Angola had an immense impact. It has shown
that the arch-racists in South Africa are incapable of
opposing peoples that desire to live in freedom and
justice.

102. This sort of balancing act between feigned
opposition to, and covert support of, c~purtheicl is
something that the Western countries have recently
been engaged in. They have been closing their eyes to
the activities of the transnational corporations and
the business dealings between them and South Africa,
including deals involving the buildup of a nuclear
potential. Behind the backs of the Africans, certain
Western countries are expanding their relations with
South Africa, at a fairly high level. In the course of
these contacts and dealings-and
this fact has even
been admitted by the press in South Africa-it
was
decided that there is to be further expansion of
contacts and relationships in all fields. Now what is
this? I call it support. You can verbally bbject to
racism and opnrtheicl and speak against the continuation of the present policies and practices of the racist
rCgime; but if you help it, if you engage in extensive
economic relations with it, if you sell it weapons,
if you help it to build bases, what is that if not direct
support to strengthen and uphold that rkgime? It is
significant that as those relations have increased, the

99. Fearful for the future of apartheid and racial
discrimination
in Africa, the ruling circles in Pretoria,
by repressing members of the liberation movements,
and by acts of naked aggression against independent
African countries, are trying to put off the downfall
of their administration of South Africa in general. The
peace-loving stance which the representative of South
Africa adopted before us is only a false mask. The
appeal for a dialogue on co-operation that he made
here is a lying appeal: his appeal for patience and
peace is also simply a lie, It is an attempt to gain time
to delay the demise of their rkgime.
100. The speech made by the representative of South
Africa here [ibid.] was full of appeals for making
peace with the’ other countries of Africa. He even
caIled on the Council not to condemn or criticize
South Africa. But the Council and the peoples of
southern Africa expect more from South Africa than
lying appeals for peace and statements about the good
will of the Government of South Africa: they want
11
,

u

aggressiveness of South Africa has likewise been
increasing. The contacts between Vorster, the head
of the South African upcrrtheid rkgime, and a number of
statesmen not only strengthen his position, as the
South African press has said, but also give him the
assurance-and
this was said by a South African
pap&r-that
the NATO countries “have entered into
an unofficial alliance designed to save South Africa
for the West”.

107. In the view of the delegation of the Soviel
Union, the Security Council has the right-not
olll)!
the right, but the duty-to
apply against the racist
aggressors the strictest sanctions provided for in 1,&e
Charter. In this situation, the racist rBgime of South
Africa must be totally and completely isolated in IW
international arena and an embargo binding upon :*ll
countries must be placed on the delivery of weapofl”
and on economic and other assistance.

103. In these circumstances, the question of adopting
immediate and effective measures to put a speedy end
to the aggressive activities of the racist regime of
South Africa against independent
African countries
has now become one of the burning issues of today,
and unless the Security Council provides a solution
thereto, it will not be fulfilling its direct responsibilities
according to the Charter.

108. The policy of the Soviet Union as regards the
struggle against the racist rCgime of the Republic Uf
South Africa and against other racist rCgimes is
consistent. It is directed towards the severance of $11
types of relationships and co-operation
with Ibut
rCgime. As was mentioned in the TASS statement of
23 June 1976:
“The Soviet Union decisively and consisten&’
condemns the criminal policy of crprrrtheitt and ca,lls
for the application of effective measures aimed clt
the isolation and boycott of the South African rdgime
and the implementation
of the decisions adopted hY
the United Nations, the Organization of African
Unity and other international
organizations, who
demand the liquidation of upnrtheid and all racirtl
discrimination,
and the granting to the African
majority of the right to live in conditions of peace
and freedom” [S/12117].

104. In the statements of the representatives of the
African countries, we have noted many facts and we
have at the same time heard convincing arguments to
the effect that, this time, the Council must not confine
itself simply to the adoption of: just any resolution.
The Council must adopt a resolution that will ensure
the full implementation
of all earlier decisions of both
the Council and the General Assembly with regard to
South Africa. The representatives of Zambia [ihid.],
Benin and Madagascar [1945th meting],
the Foreign
Minister of the United Republic of Tanzania, the
representative of Libya and representatives of other
African countries have amply demonstrated that time
is fast running out, and that the South African rkgime
can no longer continue its past policies and practices.

109. True to its principled policy of support for
colonial and subject peoples fighting for their libcration, the Soviet Union will continue to exert every
effort towards the complete eradication of the colonial
and racist rdgimes, which present one of the most
serious threats to peace and security on the African
continent. Our deeply felt solidarity with the national
liberation movements is well known to all. The Soviet
Union has given and will continue to give assistance
to those liberation movements in Africa until the firm]
liquidation of neo-colonialism,
racism and appnrtheid
is achieved,

105. The peoples of Africa that are the victims of the
terror of the racist rkgime of South Africa are expecting
from us, the Security Council, not simply one more
condemnation of such kinds of criminal.activity.
They
expect the Council to take concrete and effective
measures that will put an end once and for all to the
shameful practices and inhuman policy of aggression
of South Africa against its own people and against
neighbouring African countries. It is those practices
and that policy which have created a crisis that has
reached the boiling-point
in the region of southern
Africa. It is those practices and that policy that are
threatening the whole of Africa with a new widespread war.

110. The Security Council needs more than factfinding missions. It needs to take action that will free
southern Africa from all practices, that prevent the
peoples of that area from living in freedom and
independence. The Foreign Minister of the United
Republic of Tanzania, Mr. Kaduma, spoke not only
for his own people but for the peoples of all Africa.
Will the leaders in Pretoria understand? If they do,
well and good. If they do not, all the worse for them.
The whole of Africa must be free and it will be free,
whatever the objections of the colonialists and racists
and their supporters. Our delegation is ready to adopt
the most effective measures to ensure that the decisions
of the Security Council help the people of Zambia and
the peoples of other African countries to save themsemves from the aggressive acts of South Africa.

106. I think

it is appropriate at this time to recall
of the Conference of Communist
and
Workers’ Parties of Europe which was held at the end
./of June 1976 in Berlin, calling for
the appeal

“strict compliance with the trade embargoes imposed on racist r6gimes under United Nations resolutions, severance of relations with the Government
of the Republic of South Africa by all States, and,
most important, a complete stop to all arms supplies
to that Government.“3

111. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is tihc
representative of Ethiopia. I invite him to take a pkXc
at the Council table and to make a statement.
12

112. Mr. IBRAHIM
(Ethiopia): Mr. President, allow
me at the outset to thank you and, through you, the
other members of the Security Council for acceding
to my delegation’s request to be allowed to participate
in the debate. As I am participating in the deliberations
of the Council for the first time since your assumption
of the presidency for the month of July, permit me
also, even in these final days of the month, to extend
my warm felicitations to you and to express the confidence of my delegation that under your wise and
dedicated leadership the Council will rise to the
challenge and fulfil the mandate entrusted to it by the
Charter.

116. The facts surrounding this latest aggression
have been clearly and comprehensively presented by
the Foreign Minister of Zambia [1944th meeting] and
my delegation is very grateful for that presentation.
My delegation feels that these revealing facts will lielp
the Council to consider the item in a responsible,
dispassionate and businesslike manner.
117. What was the response of the representative
of South Africa [ibid.] to these serious charges? He
not only denied that his Government had had any hand
in them-a
denial which my delegation did not find
surprising-but
also denied all knowledge that the
incident had taken place in the first instance. Is the
Council to believe this pure and simple denial? I think
not. For a change, the South African troops did not
attack villages at random. They attacked a particufar
village, Sialola, the SWAP0 transit qamp. Is it difficult,
then, to impute a motive to South Africa here? We
do not think so.

113, May I also seize this opportunity to express to
the delegation of the People’s Republic of China the
deep sorrow of my delegation at the loss of life and
the destruction of property sustained by the people of
China as a result of the devastating earthquake that
hit their country recently. While expressing the
sympathy and solidarity of the Government and people
of Ethiopia with the Government and people of China,
and particularly the families of the bereaved, we are
confident that the industrious peoplt of China, with
their indomitable
spirit, will overcome the material
loss sustained.

118. As the Foreign Minister of Zambia indicated,
the South African authorities hope, through their
attacks on camps such as Sialola, to force African
Governments,
in particular Governments of frontline States, to withdraw their support from the liberation movements which have embarked upon armed
struggle as a last resort to free themselves from
South African colonial oppression and thereby rid
themselves also of the humiliation of op(l/4thcid. There
can therefore be no doubt that the South African
authorities not only knew of this incident but also
authorized it. A mere denial of knowledge of this
violation cannot and should not absolve South Africa
of its responsibility for these crimes.

114. My delegation has asked to participate in this
debate not only to add the voice of Ethiopia to those
that have preceded us in their expressions of deep
indignation at the wanton killings of those proud sons
and daughters of Africa on the sad day of I1 July
at Sialola, but also to register here its deep concern
at the alarming developments that have taken place in
southern Africa since the beginning of this year and,
more specifically, the persistent violations by the
South African authorities, directly or in collusion with
the rebel Ian Smith ri?.gime, of the sovereignty and
territorial
integrity of independent African States in
the region; and to request the Council to take urgent
and effective action to bring such a situation to an
end in accordance with the responsibility entrusted
to it by the Charter.

1.19. The South African representative also dwelt at
.length on one important point to which I feel I must
revert. While categorically denying that his Government had committed any act of aggression, he sought
to promote the hollow and cynical policy of dialogue.
It was done cleverly, I must,admit.
120. While his call for trust and togetherness and the
resolution of differences peacefully between States
of the region are nothing more than strategems
designed to show that a reasonable, conciliatory and
even daring South Africa is emerging, these overtures
are clearly attempts to force those African States
which feel aggrieved by South Africa to begin talks
with Pretoria. Could this be an indication of a new
policy, a policy of attacking your neighbours with
impunity and inviting them to hold bilateral talks,
thereby promoting a policy of empty dialogue, which
was rejected when it was originally offered but could
perhaps now be forced upon Africa?

1 15,. Not content with their illegal occupation of the
international
Territory of Namibia and their avowed
policy of breaking up that Territory into ethnic ghettos
in clear violation of the Charter and countless resolutions of the United Nations, the South African
authorities
have for some time now been embarked
upon the exportation
of their sinister policies of
rrp(rr~lzcid and bantustanization
to the rest of Africa.
Unsuccessful in their covert and overt attempts at
subverting the political unity and economic independence of Angola, they have turned their attention
once more to Zambia. In just the first six months
of this year they have violated the territorial integrity
of the Republic of Zambia 14 times, the latest violation
being the air and land attack on Sialola on I I July,
with its high toll in human life, not to speak of the
ccfestruction of property.

121. The South African representative has also
attempted to convey the impression that the authorities
in Pretoria are doing everything possible to expedite
the process of independence for Namibia, sometimes
even in the face of great opposition from the white
I3

population. The idea here, of course, is to appeal to
those members of the Council who have in the past
felt that signs of progress, however slight, should be
encouraged. Without going into the merits of this
policy of encouragement of small gains, we submit
that in the case cited by the representative of South
Africa, there is no progress to speak of. Council members are aware of the sham nature of the Constitutional
Conference which is taking place in Namibia, as they
have access to impartial sources. They cannot be
persuaded that this sinister policy of fragmentation is
progress towards self-determination
for the people of
the international
territory of Namibia.
The Council
cannot be a party to the dismemberment
of a people
which aspires to build one united Namibia.

the Territory as a staging ground for ceaseless incll
sions into the territories of neighbouring Africrin
States. Above all, we request the Council to adopt IIII
the necessary measures under Chapter VII of t]
Charter in order to deal effectively with this intrzj
sigence of South Africa.

LG7
is rhs
soutt

125, The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is tlie
representative of Uganda. I invite him to take a pla,~
:e
at the Council table and to make his statement.
MWANGAGUHUNGA
126. Mr.
(UgandeI):
Mr. President, allow me to congratulate you on y01
ur
assumption of the presidency of the Security Coun.(
:il
for the month of July and to reiterate our satisfacticIn
at the way you have been leading the Council, This
was already stated to you by my Minister for Forei:n
Affairs early this month, when Uganda’s complaint
against Israeli aggression was before the Council.

122. The Republic of Zambia has fallen victim to the
repeated aggression of South Africa only because it
implemented
faithfully the obligation
placed upon
every Member of the United Nations. As one of the
front-line States, it has been the unfortunate fate of
Zambia to bear a disproportionate
responsibility
in
morally
and materially
assisting the people of
Zimbabwe and Namibia to free themselves from
colonial oppression and rid their country of the heinous
crime of ~/p~lrr/z~~id. Should, therefore, the same
international
community
that placed such a heavy
burden on Zambia sit idly by and watch Zambia suffer
at the hands of racist Pretoria, or should it come with
immediate and commensurate help? To my delegation,
the answer is obvious. Those who fail to show their
solidarity with Zambia, those who deny it assistance
now, must know th’at they are directly aiding racism
to grow and international gangsterism to flourish in
southern Africa.

127. I should like to join you and others who ha\fe
spoken before and to convey, through you, to t]ie
Government and people of the People’s Republic of
China the sympathy and grief of the Government III
:d
people of Uganda on the recent catastrophe cau:?(
by the earthquake, with the resultant destruction of
life and property.
128. I should like to welcome the Foreign Ministe1’s
of Zambia, the United Republic of Tanzania ;\IId
Mozambique,
tiho have come to participate in Ilhis
very important debate regarding the blatant violalic
Id
on 11 July of Zambia’s airspace, sovereignty ,ar
territorial integrity by the forces of the racist rCgim1:of
South Africa, which resulted in the death of
24 people and injury to 45 people. In that connexiofl,
I should like to inform the Council that Field Marshal
Idi Amin Dada, Life President of the Republic of
Uganda, on behalf of the Government and people’of
Uganda sent a message on 24 July to the President of
the Republic of Zambia, Mr. Kenneth David Kaunda,
condemning the raid by South Africa-a raid whi(:h
came in the wake of Israel’s invasion of Ugarld iI*
The President of Uganda pledged Uganda’s solidari
with the gallant people of Zambia in standing :!il
against the racist rCgime in Pretoria. My Govemnle
has asked the Uganda delegation to repeat in 11
strongest terms during this debate this condemnatic
of South Africa’s aggression against Zambia.

123. South Africa, in committing
aggression against
the Republic of Zambia, not only violated a cardinal
rule of the Charter but also used a Territory under
the direct responsibility of the United Nations to bring
about that violation. The international
Territory of
Namibia, for which the United Nations is directly
responsible, has been used to violate the sovereignty
and territorial
integrity of a State Member of the
United Nations. This dual violation of South Africa
should not go unpunished. The United Nations cannot
continue to be ignored. It is not only Zambia that is
asking that justice be done: the whole of Africa
demands it. Indeed, by resolution 490 (XXVII) adopted
at the twenty-seventh
session of the Council of
Ministers of the Organization of African Unity held at
Port Louis, Mauritius, the OAU solemnly declared
that any act of aggression by the South African
rigime against any independent African State is an act
of aggression against the whole of Africa.

129. Mr. Mwale, the Foreign Minister of Zali+
set forth in detail before the Council [ihill.] a ch;lin
w
of incidents illustrating
South Africa’s aggressic
against his country since it became independent, H
country has in the past complained to the Secufil
Council and the Council has found South AC:\ 1
be an aggressor. The Council has now beforeil

124. My delegation requests the Security Council to
condemn in the strongest possible terms South Africa’s
wanton killing of innocent persons, its repeated violations of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
peace-loving sister African Republic of Zambia, its
continued illega! occupation of Namibia and its use of

another

complaint

of aggression

commited

by SN th

Africa

against Zambia,

on 11 July, 30 kilometrt

inside

Zambian

at Sialola

territory

in the KNN

Mashi area of the Western Province. His details
In
analysis of the aggression and the motives or >ouih
Africa are clear. He succinctly informed the council:
14

;I11d 1
ill1 ill
an d:
holk)
amb 1
landThe [
attac
list 0

ilS ;ld

day I
/‘iI”/.
130.

1

ltgime
the dot
against

tnembe
countril
the rep
of aggl
[/Y44i/l
given t
sentati\
“A

Afric
on a
The 5
and
villag
131. 7
tried to
by Ltsin
trackink

shamefl
denying
werebl
hesh in
South t’
and sid
against
wheretl
the COI
derers1
COUntric
a green
State in
are in i
recent c
hot pur,
its proj,
States c
132. s
national
standarc
and it

“The scenario leading to the attack on the camp
is that South African military aircraft, flying from the
south-east to the north-west, hovered over the area
and dropped armed men, who planted land-mines
all around the camp. Subsequently, they attacked
and shelled the camp. The inhabitants of the camp
hollowed out, but some of them were caught in an
ambush and killed. Others died of injuries from
land-mines which exploded as they ran over them,
The preliminary count of casualities of this senseless
attack was 22 people dead and 45 others injured. The
list of the dead has since risen to 24 and could grow
as additional bodies are discovered. The area to this
day remains infested with live land-mines.” [/hid,,
/“rro.

flouted the resolutions of the United Nations requesting
it to quit Namibia,, which it occupies illegally. As
though that was not enough insult and injury to the
people of Namibia, it has used that Territory to mount
aggression against independent African nations like
Angola and now Zambia. If the Council does not
take a firm stand against it, there is every likelihood
that, with its massive military buildup in the area, many
more acts of aggression will be mounted by South
Africa from that illegally occupied Territory against
independent African countries.
133. South Africa has been telling the world that it
wants peace and stability in southern Africa, and the
representative of the Pretoria regime repeated that
hollow assertion to the Council on 27 July. If South
Africa wants peace and stability in the region, why
does it not emulate the spirit and ethos that is conducive
to that peace? Why does it not relinquish Namibia,
which it occupies illegally? Why does it not desist
from staging acts of aggression from that Territory’?
Why does it not put pressure on the rebel regime in
Salisbury to grant majority rule to the people of
Zimbabwe? Why does it not work for the eradication
of the evils of ~~pnrtlzeid on its own doorstep? It
wants peace and stability in the region, but on its
own terms. South Africa should not expect black
Africa to be inebriated with the empty pious aspirations of the racists that peace will come within the
limits of the ,statu.s q~lo. Prime Minister Vorster and
his supporters may think that they have good intentions
for southern Africa, if indeed these intentions are good,
but the road to hell is paved with good intentions.

IO. 1

130. This is a clear case of aggression by the racist
regime of Pretoria against Zambia. South Africa is in
the dock to answer this latest charge of aggression
against Zambia, an independent sovereign State and a
member of OAU and of the group of non-aligned
countries. But what defence did the Council hear from
tfle representative of South Africa against this charge
of aggression‘? Addressing the Council on 27 July
[/9&t/r meting],
after a detailed account had been
given by the Foreign Minister of Zambia, the representative of South Africa said:
“At the outset I wish to state that the South
African Government had no knowledge of an attack
on a Zambian village at Sialolo on 11 July 1976.
The South African Government at no time authorized
and would not authorize attacks on Zambian
villages.” [/hit/., pmr. 48.1

134. South Africa has so far shown itself incapable
of a peaceful transition towards majority rule in the
area and of uprooting the evils of upwtlwid.
Time
is running out for Salisbury and Pretoria to effect a
peaceful change. Events in Mozambique and Angola
have clearly shown that people cannot be held in
perpetual subjugation against their will. The writing is
on the wall for Mr. Vorster and his supporters. The
buffer zones to the north of the racist regimes of
Pretoria and Salisbury have crumbled and will not
be erected again. The liberation movements, with the
support of all peace-loving people in the world, are
closing in. The noose is tightening, for these liberation
movements know that the only language the racists of
southern Africa understand is the language of force.
The Sharpeville and Soweto massacres, the invasion of
Angola and the recent aggression committed against
Zambia will not intimidate the liberation movements,
the front-line countries and the people of Africa from
Following their objective for the total liberation of our
continent.

13 I. This is not the first time that South Africa has
tried to evade the issue of its ignominious aggression
by using unbelievable stories, subterfuges and sidetracking
manceuvres in the Security Council. Its
shameful invasion of Angola-when
it was all the time
denying its aggression there until its mercenaries
were brought before the cameras in Luanda-is
still
fresh in the minds of the members of the Council. If
South Africa thinks that it can hoodwink the Council
and side-track it from the issue of its aggression
against Zambia, it has miserably failed to explain
where the invaders of Zambia came from or to convince
the Council that it is in control of its terrorist murderers who are poised to attack independent African
countries. Perhaps Pretoria has given these aggressors
a green light to attack any independent sovereign
State in Africa south of the Sahara, as it says these
are in its field of military operations. South Africa’s
recent obnoxious laws regarding the so-called right of
hot pursuit up to the equator are just a cover-up for
its projected aggression against independent African
States on the continent.

135. Africa and the whole world have their eyes on
the Council to see what action it will take against
South Africa in this clear case of aggression against
a country that has left no stone unturned in the quest
for a peaceful solution in the southern African region,
a country that is the father of the Lusaka Manifesto2

132. South Africa is an incorrigible violator of international law, the Charter of the United Nations and
standards of decency against the black people of Africa,
and it is a ruthless aggressor. It has persistently
15

and whose peace overtures have been Persistently
abused by the racist regime of South Africa.
136. In expressing our solidarity with Zambia’s stand
against the racist regime of South Africa ‘and condemning in the strongest terms the blatant aggression
committed ‘against a sister country and a member of
OAU, my delegation requests the Council to take the
action requested by Zambia. Uganda strongly endorses
the request of Zambia-that
is:
“In the specific case before it, the Council must
condemn in the strongest terms South Africa’s
wanton aggression against Zambia and the senseless,
savage and cold-blooded murder of innocent people.
The Council must also demand that the racist regime
of South Africa henceforth respect the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Zambia, as well as those
of other front-line States. Moreover, the Council
should declare in no uncertain terms that South
Africa should relinquish forthwith its illegal hold on
Namibia, and that peace and security in southern
Africa are inextricably linked with the liberation of
the region. In this regard, the Council must,
support for
therefore, express its unqualified
SWAP0 and for the other liberation movements in
southern Africa.” [Ibid., paru. 3Y.l

142. Mr. MOGAMI
(Botswana):
Mr. President,
I wish first of all to express to you and to the members
of the Security Council the gratitude of my delegation
for this rare opportunity to address the Council. I. am
pleased to extend to you personally our congratulattorls
upon your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for the month of July. It has been a very busy month
indeed.
143. May I also take this opportunity to extend to the
delegation of China our deep grief at the severe
earthquake which has just recently struck that country.
A delegation from my country will be in China shortly.
and I am sure that it will convey the condolences of
the people and Government
of Botswana to the
Government and people of China.
144. I wish also to take this opportunity to expi.;ess
our gratitude to the three African Foreign Ministers
who are here: the Minister of Zambia, the Minister
of the United Republic of Tanzania and the Minister
of Mozambique.
I am sure that we shall all-both
within and outside the Council-benefit
from their
participation.
145. My country is one of the so-called front-line
States bordering both South Africa and Zambia, as
well as the Territory of Namibia.
South Africa and
Zambia are the principal
parties involved in the
question under consideration
by the Council. The
desire of my delegation to participate in this discussion
is therefore not a surprise, in view of our intimate
involvement in developments in that area.

137. The Uganda delegation appeals to the Council,
to adopt at the end of its deliberations, a unanimous
resolution embodying those requests. After all, South
Africa has already been condemned for similar acts of
aggression against Zambia in resolution 300 (1971).
The Council must reiterate this condemnation and go
further.

146. But beyond the obvious considerations of
geopolitical relationships in the southern African ‘subregion, there are other impqrtant considerations w’hich
motivate our desire to participate in this discussion;
for indeed it is worthwhile that all of us should iook
down the road as we consider the question under
discussion-an
issue so unwarranted,
and yet SO
fraught with serious consequences for stability, peace
and security in the region; an issue which cannot be
considered as a new, isolated act of military provecation against Zambia by South Africa.

138. As far as Uganda is concerned, our views on
South Africa have been made abundantly clear in the
past, and our strong support for the liberation
movements in southern Africa is incontestable. We
shall continue to give moral and material support to
these liberation movements until our whole continent
is free and the evils of llpartheid are totally eradicated.
It is only when the whole of Africa is free and
independent that we shall be able to live in peace and
harmony and to enhance prosperity for our people.
139. The aggression by the racist regime of South
Africa ,against Zambia was an affront to the whole
continent of Africa-an attempt to intimidate frontline countries and a desperate last stand to demoralize
the liberation movements in southern Africa, Such
manoeuvres cannot succeed, for we are solidly behind
Zambia, the other front-line countries and the liberation movements in a concerted effort for the total
liberation of Africa.

147. The attention of the Council has been drawn
time and again to the implications
of the dangerojs
situation in the southern African region, and it is the
earnest hope of my delegation that all the members
of the Council have by today fully grasped the
potentially explosive nature of the situation. A while
ago, the pronouncements of our leaders-that
is, the
Presidents, Ministers and others in positions of leadership in Africa--on the situation in South Africa mighk
have sounded to outsiders like perhaps an exaggeraition
which did not merit immediate and vigorous attention.
Current developments show that these pronounce
merits were, in fact, timely. NOW, as it appears that
we now know better the gravity of the situation there,
we hope that the Council will enter the final stages
of this discussion with a clear vision of why and how

140.. TO the Zambians we say: “Stand firm, as you
always have. We are all with you. Africa will win.
Long live Africa.”
141. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Botswana, whom I invite to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
16

it could assist in the process of creating a free,
independent South African society fit for a decent and
dignified human life, and with a firm commitment
thereto; for otherwise, this goal-that
is, the creation
of such a society in southern Africa-will
be achieved
through brutal struggle.
148. In his opening address to the Council two days
ago, the Foreign Minister of Zambia [1944th meeting]
presented a detailed and well-documented account of
the numerous incidents of border violations and acts
of military
provocation
against Zambia by South
Africa. I believe the Council has since had time to
reflect upon that statement.

Council have demanded Sout‘h Africa’s withdrawa
from the Territory. In disregard for, and defiance of,
the decisions and resolutions,
that is to say the
authority, of the Council, the South African Government is using its illegal presence in Namibia
to
perpetrate unlawful military attacks against an independent Zambia which would otherwise be enjoying
friendly and peaceful relations .with the people of a
free and independent Namibia. Using the Territory
that it occupies illegally,
South Africa conducts a
series of military operations into Zambia, a country
whose sole interest in the subregion is national independence, racial equality and peace and prosperity
for all.

149. The representative of South Africa also informed
the Council two days ago [ibid.] that his Government had no knowledge of the attack by its armed
forces against Zambia on 11 July, and that his Government had not authorized that particular military
operation against Zambian territory. However, my
delegation believes the Council has taken note that the
fact of the attack against Zambia by a South African
armed unit was not denied by the representative of
South Africa. Considering the 13 other similarincidents
of action against Zambia by South Africa’s armed
forces between January and July 1976, the issue of
who sanctioned the fourteenth attack-that
is, the
attack of 11 July-against
Zambia by a South African
military unit appears to my delegation io be immaterial
or irrelevant, particularly as South Africa’s representative has admitted that there have been incidents and
that his Government was aware of them,

152. Again my delegation poses a query to the
Council: Will the Council remain silent, in spite of the
disregard of its authority by South Africa, with regard
to the status of Namibia? The illegal,occupation
of
Namibia by South Africa threatens innocent lives in
the neighbouring village communities of the countries
to the north. In Zambia alone many lives have been
lost as a result of the attacks staged from Namibia.
Botswana cannot accept that South Africa should
use its illegal presence in Namibia for attacks against
Zambia. Furthermore,
seen against the background
of the current struggle in Southern Rhodesia, the
occupation of Namibia diminishes the prospects for
peace and stability in the region, and, taking into
account the tension brought about by the system bf
rrprrrtiwid,
the chances of racial strife are further
increased. Bold initiatives by African States to avert
this eventuality have come to naught.

150. The Republic of Zambia, in our view, has a
valid complaint against the South African Government.
The root cause of these attacks should not escape
the attention of the Council. My country takes a
serious view of such acts of military provocation. We
ourselves have suffered wanton armed provocation
and senseless acts of brutality by hostile racist elements
of the minority regimes, along our northern borders
as well as deep inside our country. These attacks
could lead to serious consequences of such magnitude
as to engulf the black independent African States in
ugly and bloody racial strife-a grim event that would
deal a merciless blow to world peace and security.
The United Nations, and the Security Council in
particular, should note that such attacks are meant to
intimidate
and harass the African countries which
support the cause of justice, freedom and racial
equality in southern Africa. It is with this consideration
in mind that we pose a query to the Council: Will
the Council deny Zambia the redress that it seeks, in
spite of the validity of its complaint and taking into
account the known root cause of such attacks?

153. My delegation is aware that the Council has met
several times before to consider similar acts of aggression against Zambia. With reference to the current
meeting, the Foreign Minister of Zambia has rightly
reminded the Counc,il of its undertaking contained in
Council resolution 300 (1971). We know that the
Council will in due course decide what appropriate
measures it wishes to take on this occasion.
154. The acts of armed provocation under consideration are not limited, temporary, rare occurences
but, quite to the contrary, they indicate a consistent
and sustained pattern of threats against Zambia fbt
what it stands for in the subregion, and further undermine that country’s territorial integrity. The front-line
countries in the region stand and speak with one voice
for freedom, racial equality and justice, in spite of their
geopolitical situation. It is a burden cast on them by
historical circumstances. It is a burden which they
shoulder with no apologies. Even their invasion is not
likely significantly to alter the course of events now
unfolding in the subregion. To muzzle them now either
through sheer force of arms or economic leverage
simply because they stand for justice would probably
do more harm than good. Indked, such an action
would not only threaten the security of the neighbouring countries in the region, but would pose a
threat to international peace and security as well:

151. A third party is involved in the question under
consideration: that is to say, the Territory of Namibia.
The United Nations and the Security Council have
determined
that South Africa’s presence there is
illegal, and the United Nations and the Security
17

I

The struggle for liberation and racial equality is being
waged with more vigour in this region now. Independent Africa has not relented in its commitment
to this
struggle. We support this struggle because we see in
it a move towards the realization of justice.
155. My delegation welcomes the exposure by
Zambia of these unfriendly acts of provocation.
We
condemn these provocations for the fact that they
undermine’ Zambia’s territorial integrity and sovereignty. We condemn them because they destroy
precious and innocent human life. These acts have to
be condemned because they heighten tension and
jeopardize prospects for peace in the subregion and
create a state of insecurity. We condemn them because
they are carried out from Namibia in defiance of the
decisions of the Council. We ask, in solidarity with
Zambia and its people, that the Council unite in likewise condemning such unnecessary provocations.

Affairs, Mr. Mwale. Yugoslavia has for years been
developing the most cordial. and friendly relations.
with this proud and outstanding non-aligned African.
country in every field of life.
163. Zambia plays an important role in the struggle.
for the complete liberation of Africa from colonialism,
racial discrimination and the systemofaprrrtheid.
From
the first days of its independence, Zambia has been an.
active Member of the United Nations and member of
the non-aligned movement and has constantly upheld.
the implementation
of the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.
164. At the same time I should like to express a.
warm welcome to the Foreign Ministers of the United
Republic of Tanzania and Mozambique.
165. The recent grave violation of the territorial.
integrity of Zambia and the continuing aggressive acts
by the military forces of the racist regime of South.
Africa against that peace-loving African country are
nothing new to the Security Council. In October 1971,
in its resolution 300 (1971), the Council called upon
South Africa to respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Zambia and resolved that in the event thal.
South Africa continued its aggressive actions againsl:
Zambia the Council would again meet and take appropriate steps in the spirit of the provisions of the
Charter. South Africa answered this warning from
the Council with a premeditated, aggressive military
attack against the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of Zambia on 11 July, causing 24 deaths and severe
injuries to 4.5 persons, as well as the destruction of
property. As was stated by the Foreign Minister oiT
Zambia [1944/h lrrccti,rg], it was only the last o:f
14 attacks and provocations
perpetrated againslt
Zambia in recent months, So the South African
minority
racist regime has once again openly
challenged the authority of the Council.

156. In conclusion, I wish to’state that my delegation
has paid close attention to the views expressed before
the Council, and we shall continue to do so. We
have also noted the appeal which the representative
of South Africa has made. He said: “I appeal to the
Council not to mete out condemnations, criticisms and
pejoratives to South Africa” [ihid.,
parvr. 681.
157. But of course the Council is considering
a
matter concerning which criticism cannot be avoided,
particularly taking into account the status of the Territory of Namibia as well as the violation of Zambia’s
territorial integrity and sovereignty. My delegation,
1 am happy to say, can do very well without pejoratives,

158. In his concluding remarks, the Foreign Minister
of Zambia made an appeal to the Council. We understand and support that appeal, and we hope that it
will receive the sympathy it deserves.
159. The PRESIDENT:
The next and last speaker
is the representative of Yugoslavia. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make a
statement.

166. In the first half of this year the Council had
to discuss on several occasions the acts of aggression
carried out by the racist regime of South Africa against
independent
and sovereign neighbouring
African
States. Thus, in January [reso/rlfio/~ 38.5 (/Y76)]. the
Council condemned the illegal occupation of the Territory of Namibia, which is under the Mandate of the
United Nations. Two months later [,.e.sc>/r,tio/r 38;’
(197h)], the Council strongly censured South Africa felt
aggression against the People’s Republic of Angola.
As recently as June [,*cso/r/lio/r 392 f/976)], Council
had to express its sharp condemnation of the massacre of innocent students by the racist regime of
South Africa as a result of the abhorrent oppression
which that regime has for years been practising against
the black majority population of South Africa, which,
with full justification,
is rebelling more strongly and
widely against slavery and racism. All this clearly
demonstrates the aggressive nature and goals of the
racist regime and the danger it represents to the indee
pendence of African countries and to peace and

160. Mr. MUJEZINOVIC
(Yugoslavia): Mr. President, 1 should like first of all to thank you and the
members of the Council for giving me the opportunity
to address this respected gathering.
161. At the same time I would like to avail myself
of this opportunity to express to the delegation of the
friendly People’s Republic of China our sincere
condolences and feelings of solidarity in connexion
with the grave natural calamity that has inflicted
severe losses in life and property on the people of
China.
162. Allow me to extend the inost cordial greetings
of my delegation to the representative of Zambia, a
‘friendly non-aligned country, the Minister for Foreign
18

security in Africa and beyond it. That is why the
Security Council must most seriously consider the
military attack by South African forces on Zambia
both as an attack on that country’s independence
and as a threat to peace and security. My delegation
therefore believes that the Council should discuss the
application
of effective measures, based on the
Charter, against the racist regime of South Africa to
prevent it from threatening the independence ofAfrican
countries, further violating the Charter and the resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council, and endangering peace and security in Africa.
167. In conformity with its obligations and authority,
the Security Council should strongly condemn the
aggression by South Africa against Zambia and compel
South Africa to compensate Zambia for the material
and other damage caused by the aggressive acts of its
military forces,
168. Finally, the Council should undertake effective
measures to compel South Africa’to withdraw from
Namibia, which it occupies illegally, and to stop its
aggression against the Namibian people.
169. In its struggle against the racist regimes of Ian
Smith and Vorster for the liberation of the peoples of

.

Zimbabwe, Namibia and Azania and for the defence of
its own independence, Zambia will continue to have
our full and friendly help and support.
170. The PRESIDENT:
I call upon the representative of China, who wishes to say a few words.
171. Mr. CHOU Nan (China) (inferp~efafian
fkm
CIri~~csc): Before the conclusion of today’s meeting,
I wish to express, in the name of the Chinese delegation, our sincere thanks to the Foreign Minister of the
United Republic of Tanzania and the distinguished
representatives of many other countries for their
sympathy on the earthquake which occurred in eastern
Hopei province of China, and I shall convey their
cordial feelings to the Chinese Government and people,
The lneeting

rose nt 6.3S.p.m.
Notes

South ‘.Africrr
iti Nomib&
(South
west Africn)
notwithstnndin~
Sectrrity
Council
Resolution
276 (1970), Advisory
Opitliott,
I.C.J.
Reoort;
1971. D. 16.
i Officio/
ddcords
of the Gencrol Assembly, Twtwty-fovrth
SesSkJfi,
Amexes,
agenda item 106, document
A/7754.
3 A/31/124,
annex, p. 19.

-

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United

Nations

world.

Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales Section,
New

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publicaGons
des Nations
Unies
monde
entier.
Informez-vous
aupris
des ventes,
New York ou Genbve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations,

New York

DES

NATIONS

DE LAS

NACIONES

Unidas
estin en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

00400

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

sont en vcnte dans les librairics
et les agences
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
$ : Nations

PUBLJCACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes del mundo.
Cons&e
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

ddpositeircs
du
Unies, Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas.
Secci6n de Ventas.

83-60801-April

1985-2r200
