RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY DURING ITS
FIFTH SPECIAL SESSIONª

CONTENTS
/>ayc

lfrm

JJatc of ado/>tion

2248 (S-V)

Question of South West Africa (A/L.516/Rcv.1)

7

19 May 1967

2249 (S-V)

Comprehensive rcvicw of the whole qucstion of peace-keeping
operations in ali their aspects (A/6654)

8

23 1fay 1967

2

2250 (S-V)

Postponement of thc United N ations Confercncc on thc Exploratinn
and Peaceful Uses of Outer Spacc ( A/L.518 and Add.1 and 2)

9

23 May 1967

3

2251 (S-V)

Credentials of representativcs to the fifth spccial scssiun oí the
General Asscmbly (A/6655/Rev.1)

3 (11)

23 11ay 1967

3

Question of South \,\'est Africa

7

5 May 1967

3

Comprehcnsive review of the wholc question of peace-keeping opcrations m ali
their aspects ...

8

23 May 1967

3

Resolution No.

Title

Other decisions

--3 Resolutions

adopted without rcference to a Main Committee ( see foot-note !, p. v).

2248 (S-V). Question of South West Africa

Council) comprisi11g eleven :\1ember States to be electecl
cluring the present session ancl to entrust to it the
following powers ami functions, to be discharged in the
Territory:
(a) To administer South '.Vest :\frica until iudepenclence, with the maximum possible participation
of the people of the Territory;
( b) To promulga te such laws, decrees ancl administrative regulations as are necessary for the administration of the Territory until a Jegislative assembly
is established following elections conducted on the basis
of universal adult suffrage;

The General Assembly,
H aving considered the rcport of the Ad H oc Committee for South West Africa,4
Reafjirming its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries aml Peoples,
Reafjirming its resolution 2145 (XXT) of 27 October
1966, by which it terminated the Mandate conferred
upan His Britannic Majesty to be exercised on his
behalf by the Government of thc Union of South Africa
and decided that South Africa had no other right to
administer the Territory of South W est Africa,
H aving assumed direct responsibility for the Territory of South \Vest Africa in accordance with resolution 2145 (XXI),
Recognizing that it has thereupon become incumbent
upan the United Nations to give effect to its obligations by taking practica] steps to transfcr power to the
people of South W est Africa,

(e) To takc as an immediate task ali the necessary
measures, in consultation with the peoplc of the Territory, for the establishment of a constituent assembly
to draw up a constitution on the basis of which elections
will be held for the establishment of a legislative assembly and a responsible government;
( d) To take all the necessary measures for the
maintenance of law and arder in the Territory;

(e) To transfer all powcrs to the people of thc
Territory upon the declaration of independence;

I

2. Decides that in the exercise of its powers and in
the discharge of its functions the Council shall be
responsible to the General Assembly;

Reafjirms the territorial integrity of South West
Africa and the inalienable right of its people to freedom and independence, in accorclance with the Charter
of the United Nations, General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV) and all other resolutions concerning South
W est Africa;

3. Decides that the Council shall entrust such executive and administrative tasks as it deems necessary
to a United Nations Commissioner for South West
A frica ( hereinafter referred to as the Commissioner),
who shall be appointed during the present session by
the General Assembly on the nomination of the
Secretary-General;

II
l. Decides to establish a United Nations Council
for South W est Africa ( hereinafter referred to as the
4' Official

4. Decides that in the performance of his tasks the
Commissioner shall be responsible to the Council ;

Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Special

Session, Annexes, agenda item 7, document A/6640.

1

General Assembly-Fifth Special Session

2

III
l. Decides that:
( a) The administration of South West Africa under
the United Nations shall be financed from the revenues
collected in the Territory;
( b) Expenses directly rclated to the operation of the
Council and the Office of the Commissioner-the travel
and subsistence expenses of members of the Council,
the remuneration of the Commissioner and his staff
and the cost of ancillary facilities-shall be met from
the regular budget of the U nited N ations ;
2. Requests the specialized agencies and the appropriate organs of the United Nations to render to
South W est A frica technical and financia! assistance
through a co-ordinated emergency programme to meet
the exigencies of the situation;

IV
l. Decides that the Council shall be based in South
W est Africa ;
2. Requests the Council to enter immediately into
contact with the authorities of South Africa in order
to lay clown procedures, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI) and the present
resolution, for the transfer of the administration of thc
Territory with the least possible upheaval;
3. Further requests the Council to proceed to South
W est Africa with a view to:
(a) Taking over the administration of the Territory ;
( b) Ensuring the withdrawal of South African
police and military forces;
(c) Ensuring the withdrawal of South African
personnel and their replacement by personnel operating
under the authority of the Council;
( d) Ensuring that in the utilization and recruitment
of personnel preference be given to the indigenous
people;

4. Calls upon the Government of South Africa to
comply without delay with the terms of resolution 2145
(XXI) and the present resolution and to facilitate the
transfer of the administration of the Territory of South
W est A frica to the Council ;
5. Requests the Security Council to take ali appropriate measures to enable the United Nations
Council for South West Africa to discharge the functions and responsibilities entrusted to it by the General
Assembly;
6. Requests all States to extend their whole-hearted
co-operation and to render assistance to the Council
in the implementation of its task;

V
Requests the Council to report to the General Assembly at intervals not exceeding three months on its administration of the Territory, and to submit a special
report to the Assembly at its twenty-second session
concerning the implementation of the present resolution;

VI
Decides that South W est Africa shall become independent on a date to be fixed in accordance with the

wishes of the people and that the Council shall do all
in its power to enable independence to be attained by
June 1968.

1518th plenary meeting,
19 May 1967.

*

* *

At its 1524th plcnary meeting. on 13 ]une 1067, thc
Cenera[ Assernbly, in pursuance of scction II, paragra¡,h 1, of the above rcsolution, clected thc mcmhers
of the United Nations Council for South Wcst Africa.
Thc C ouncil will be com posed of thc followiny
Membcr States: CHILE, COLOMBIA, CuvANA, lNDJA,
INDONESIA, NIGERIA, PAKISTAN, TURKEY,
ARAB REPUBLIC, YUGOSLAVIA and ZAMBIA.

UNITED

At the sanie meeting, in ¡,ursuance of section JI,
f'aragraph 3, of thc abm,e resolution, the General Asscrnbly considercd thc question of thc appointmcnt of
the United Nations High Comrnissioner for South
W est A frica. On the proposal of the Secretary-Gcneral, 6
the Assembly ap¡,ointcd Mr. Constantin A. STAVROPOULOS, Legal Counsel of the United Nations, as
Acting United Nations lligh Comniissioncr for South
W cst A frica.
2249 (S-V). Comprehensive review of the whole
question of peace-keeping operations in ali
their aspects

The General Assembly,
H aving cxamincd the fourth report of the Special
Committee on Peace-keeping Operations, 6
Recal/ing the consensus set forth in the report of
the Special Committee of 31 August 1%5 7 adopted by
the General Assembly at its 1331st plenary meeting,
on 1 September 1965, and its resolution 2053 (XX) of
15 December 1965,
Acknowlcdging the commitments unclertaken ancl the
assurances given during the recent session of the Special
Committee, 8

l. Renews its appeal to all Member States, an<l
in particular to the highly developed countries, to make
voluntary contributions to overcome the continuing
financia! difficulties of the Organization;

2. Requests the Special Committee on Peace-keeping
Operations to continue the review of the whole question
of peace-keeping operations in ali its aspects and to
stucly the various suggestions made by different delegations cluring the Special Committee's recent session,
in particular those relating to :
(a) Methods of financing future peace-keeping
operations in accorclance with the Charter of the United
Nations;
( b) Facilities, services and personnel which Member
States might voluntarily provicle, in accordance with
the Charter, for United Nations peace-keeping operations;
5 !bid., document A/6656, para. 3.
6 !bid., agenda item 8, document A/6654.
7 !bid., Nincteenth Session, Anncxes, annex

No. 21, document A/5916.
8 The Special Committee met in K ew York on 16 February,
3 May, 15 May and 16 May 1967.
