S/2018/140

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 February 2018
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya
I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2376
(2017), covers political and security developments in Libya, provides an overview of
the human rights and humanitarian situation in the country and outlines the activities
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) since the issuance of my
previous report on 22 August 2017 (S/2017/726).

II. Political and security-related developments
2.
The reporting period was marked by a renewed dynamism and engagement by
all Libyan actors to conclude the transitional process, following the launch on
20 September 2017, during the seventy-second session of the General Assembly, of
the United Nations action plan to resume an inclusive political process in Libya.
Member States expressed a strong commitment to resolving the crisis in Libya and
lending their political backing to the plan, while consolidating their ongoing efforts
in support of the facilitation of my Special Representative for Libya, Ghassan Salamé.
3.
To kick-start the implementation of the action plan, my Special Representative
facilitated two rounds of consultations among representatives of the House of
Representatives and the High Council of State to negotiate amendments to the Libyan
Political Agreement. At the same time, my Special Representative engaged with a
wide range of actors to discuss the next steps of the political transition and broaden
support for and engagement in the political process.
4.
The resumption of the Libyan political process under United Nations facilitation
took place in a volatile security environment. While the ous ter from Tripoli of armed
groups opposed to the Government of National Accord marked some improvement to
the security situation in the city, clashes continued to the west of the city between
competing groups, particularly in Warshafanah and Sabratah and in the eastern city
of Darnah. In Tripoli, clashes at Mitiga airport on 15 January 2018 were of particular
concern owing to the high number of casualties and the fact that the clashes resulted
in the closing of direct air traffic to and from Tripoli for a we ek.
5.
At my request, the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Jeffrey
Feltman, visited Libya from 9 to 12 January and met with the Prime Minister, the
Speaker of the House of Representatives and the Head of the High Council of State,

18-02156 (E)

230218

*1802156*

S/2018/140

among others, to follow up on the implementation of the action plan and express my
personal commitment to the resolution of the Libyan crisis.
Implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement
6.
The objective of the United Nations action plan is to end the prolo nged
transition of Libya. There are three main elements to the plan: facilitate agreement on
limited amendments to the Libyan Political Agreement to provide for a revitalized
Government for the remainder of the transition; convene a national conference to
revitalize the national polity and guide the remainder of the transition; and hold
elections. At the same time, the plan is intended to reinvigorate Libyan institutions,
engage armed groups, address urgent economic issues and promote local and national
reconciliation.
7.
The dialogue committees formed by the House of Representatives and the High
Council of State met for the first time in Tunis on 26 September 2017. Each committee
delegated members, including one woman, to form a joint drafting committee. Th e
joint drafting committee agreed to a restructured Presidency Council and to an
executive authority distinct from the Presidency Council. The drafting committee
discussed various mechanisms to form the new executive authority but were unable
to come to a consensus at the time of writing. On 10 November, UNSMIL presented
the leadership of the House of Representatives and the High Council of State with a
proposal drawing on elements that emerged from the talks to promote further dialogue
between the parties and conclude the discussions on the executive authority. Both the
House of Representatives and the High Council of State remain actively engaged and
have met on at least four occasions on their own initiative.
8.
On 6 December, a voter registration update was launched by the High
Commission for National Elections to enable Libyan citizens to register and
participate in any forthcoming electoral event. In preparation for the national
conference, my Special Representative hosted a number of town hall meetings across
Libya to hear from a wide range of interlocutors from the country’s many
constituencies.
9.
The second anniversary of the signing of the Libyan Political Agreement was
marked on 17 December. In addition to the issuance of a statement by the Preside nt
of the Security Council on 14 December (S/PRST/2017/26), many other Member
States publicly reiterated that the Agreement remained the only viable framework to
end the Libyan political crisis.
International and regional engagement
10. International and regional engagement on Libya continued to play a vital role in
supporting both the political process and the ongoing political transition.
11. My Special Representative attended the fourth meeting of the Ad Hoc Highlevel Committee on Libya in Brazzaville on 9 September 2017. On 21 September, the
fourth meeting of the Quartet on Libya, composed of the African Union, the European
Union, the League of Arab States and the United Nations, was held at United Nations
Headquarters in New York. The Quartet issued a communiqué that endorsed the
United Nations action plan and resolved to continue to work together to ensure a
common and complementary approach to addressing the challenges facing Libya.
12. On 17 December, Tunisia hosted a tripartite meeting between the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Algeria, Egypt and Tunisia. The Ministers voiced their full support
for the work of the United Nations and urged all parties to work collaboratively to
implement the action plan. Morocco also hosted my Special Representative for a
round of meetings to discuss the situation on the ground and advance the action plan.
2/17

18-02156

S/2018/140

On 3 and 4 January 2018, my Special Representative visited Niamey to meet with
President Mahamadou Issoufou and N’Djamena to meet with President Idriss Déby,
who expressed their concerns about the situation in Libya and their strong
commitment to and support for a resolution to the crisis.
13. On 15 January, my Special Representative visited Addis Ababa to eng age with
officials of the African Union to further strengthen the collaboration on Libya
between the African Union and the United Nations. My Special Representative and
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Moussa Faki Mahamat, discussed
concrete ways to reinforce UNSMIL cooperation with the Commission, ahead of the
African Union Summit. During my participation in the Summit, I, along with my
Special Representative, also had an opportunity to exchange views with many African
leaders on the impact of the crisis on the continent and on ways to redouble our efforts
to promote a peaceful resolution to the crisis and stable governance.
Situation in the western region
14. There was significant military activity in western Libya during the reporting
period. The Anti-ISIL Operations Room, a force affiliated with the Government of
National Accord, took control of Sabratah from two militia groups in October 2017,
after three weeks of intense fighting which resulted in 43 deaths and more than 300
injuries. On 31 October, the Government of National Accord -affiliated Commander
of the western military region launched a military operation against the Libyan
National Army-affiliated Fourth Brigade in Warshafanah, south-west of Tripoli, to
secure the territory under the command of forces allied with the Presidency Council.
The clashes continued for 11 days and resulted in 18 deaths. In January 2018, the
same Commander launched an operation to extend the control of forces allied with
the Presidency Council along the border area with Tunisia around Ra’s Ajdir.
15. There were also a significant number of incidents in and around Tripoli, some
of which centred around the airport and caused it to close, most recently in
mid-January. In October 2017, clashes erupted between pro-Government of National
Accord forces and opposing forces south of Tripoli, which resulted in the arrest of a
leader who supported the former regime. In retaliation, the opposing forces seized
control of the water network and cut its supply to Tripoli for approximately one week,
which also affected the well at the United Nations compound. On 16 and 17 October,
in the Ghararat neighbourhood, the Special Deterrence Force conducted a raid to shut
down a drug-dealing facility, which devolved into armed clashes that resulted in
7 fatalities, including 1 civilian, and 11 injuries on both sides. Owing to the
neighbourhood’s proximity to Mitiga airport and the use of light and medium
weapons, United Nations air operations were halted from 16 to 18 October.
16. On 17 December, the Mayor of Misratah, Mohamed Eshtewi, was abducted in
the vicinity of Misratah airport by unidentified armed men, possibly due to an internal
feud. Mr. Eshtewi’s body, bearing multiple gunshot wounds and a blow to the head,
was later found in front of a local hospital. Investigations are currently under way.
UNSMIL strongly condemned the assassination of an elected civilian mayor.
17. On 15 January 2018, there was an escalation in the clashes between the Special
Deterrence Force and the Al-Bugra militia, who launched a major assault on Mitiga
airport. The attack reportedly was planned to free individuals held at the detention
facility operated by the Special Deterrence Force at the airport base, and possibly was
also intended to take over control of the airport. The fighting lasted hours and
involved tanks and other heavy weapons. At least 23 fatalities and more than
60 injuries were reported. A number of civilian aircraft parked at the airport were
lightly damaged in the fighting and the airport was subsequently closed for one week
while the area was checked for unexploded ordnance.
18-02156

3/17

S/2018/140

Situation in the eastern region
18. There were intermittent clashes between the forces of the Libyan National Army
and armed groups in the towns of Benghazi and Darnah. In Benghazi, after further
fighting around the Sidi Khuraybish area, the Libyan National Army announced its
liberation on 28 December 2017. Tensions between the Government of National
Accord Deputy Interior Minister Faraj al-Gaem and Libyan National Army forces led
to an outbreak of violence on 10 November when four mortars hit the Interior Ministry
building in Benghazi. Libyan National Army brigades took control of the building the
following day and arrested the Deputy Interior Minister and his supporters. The
Deputy Interior Minister has been held incommunicado since 11 November, amid
allegations that he has been tortured. The clashes caused 14 fatalities, including at
least 1 civilian, and injured 25 people, including at least 4 civilians. On 24 January
2018, a double vehicle-borne improvised explosive device attack in the Salmani
district in Benghazi claimed more than 30 lives, including children, and dozens were
injured. The attack targeted senior security figures of Salafist ideology aff iliated with
the Libyan National Army. I, along with UNSMIL, immediately condemned the
bombings and reiterated that there could be no military solution to the Libyan crisis.
In retaliation, on 25 January, Libyan National Army Commander Mahmoud
al-Werfalli carried out 10 summary executions. UNSMIL condemned the executions
and called for the handing over of Mr. Al-Werfalli pursuant to his arrest warrant by
the International Criminal Court. In the days that followed, more than 25 bodies,
bearing gunshot wounds and with their hands tied, were found in various places in
Benghazi. On 9 February 2018, 2 people were killed and 75 were injured in a bombing
inside a mosque in the Majuri district in Benghazi.
19. The situation in Darnah continued to be tense and access to the city remained
highly restricted, which has resulted in a worsening humanitarian situation. Areas of
the town under the control of the Darnah Mujahadin Shura Council remain under
siege by Libyan National Army forces. In the aftermath of the Benghazi bombing and
retaliation, the Darnah Mujahadin Shura Council carried out three extrajudicial
executions against members of a Libyan National Army cell suspected to be planning
targeted assassinations.
20. On 30 October 2017, an unidentified aircraft carried out airstrikes on several
positions around Darnah. At least 15 people, including 12 civilian women and
children, were killed, and 17 others, including 6 civilians, were injured.
Situation in the southern region
21. The security situation in the south remained precarious. Criminal acts such as
robbery, carjacking and kidnapping have frequently occurred in an environment
marked by tenuous security and a proliferation of arms. On 3 November 2017, a group
of unidentified armed men kidnapped four international workers upon their arrival at
Awbari airport. Their status remains unknown. On 12 January 2018, an international
aid worker and two Libyans were abducted in the neighbourhood of Abdelkafi in
south Sabha city upon their return from Tripoli. All three were subsequently released.
Also on 12 January, a Ukrainian doctor was abducted in Sabha and released two days
later.
22. The Libyan National Army continued its attempts to enforce its presence in the
south following the withdrawal of Misratan forces in 201 7. On 27 August 2017, the
Libyan National Army issued a decree establishing a military presence in Birak
al-Shati’, 120 km north of Sabha. On 28 September, armed clashes were reported
between the 116th and 160th Brigades of the Libyan National Army over th e Sabha
oil depot.

4/17

18-02156

S/2018/140

23. The issue of foreign armed groups in Libya continues to be a destabilizing
factor, particularly in the south-west and south-east. Between 19 and 21 September,
clashes took place in Umm al-Aranib town, 100 km south of Sabha, between members
of the Tebu tribe and rebels from Chad (Zaghawa tribe) and Darfur. The clashes
erupted after the rebels attacked Tamsa checkpoint, 250 km south -east of Sabha, and
killed five Tebu tribesmen. On 4 December, the city of Sabha witnessed clashes
between Chadian mercenaries and armed men from the Qadhadhfa tribe over the
allocation of resources. In the south-east, the Libyan National Army continuously
targeted Chadian and Darfurian armed groups along the Libya -Chad border.
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in Libya
24. Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) intensified its movements around the
former stronghold of Sirte. In response, airstrikes were carried out against ISIL
elements by forces from Libya and the United States of America. On 22 S eptember
2017, United States Africa Command (AFRICOM) confirmed six airstrikes against
positions in the Khushum al-Khayl area, resulting in 17 ISIL fatalities. Four days
later, AFRICOM announced that two additional airstrikes against ISIL militants had
been conducted in coordination with the Government of National Accord. On
15 November, the Libyan Air Force carried out two airstrikes against ISIL positions
in Harawah, a small town east of Sirte. On 17 November, in a desert area south of
Sirte, United States airstrikes targeted ISIL positions, resulting in an undisclosed
number of casualties. On 28 November, near Al-Fuqaha’ town in Jufrah, the Libyan
Air Force targeted an ISIL convoy, which resulted in an unspecified number of
casualties. The Libyan National Army declared the area south of the Gulf of Sirte to
the Black Mountain, including the oil field sites, a “military zone”.
25. On 4 October, ISIL claimed responsibility for an attack against the Misratah
courthouse. The attack led to the death of the 3 attackers and 4 people, including
2 civilians, and at least 41 others were wounded. On 8 October, an anti -crime police
unit, backed by local security forces from Misratah, arrested six members of an
alleged ISIL cell at a residence in Ru’aysat district, in eastern Misratah. Significant
amounts of arms and ammunition, including man-portable air-defence systems
(MANPADS), were discovered and seized.
26. ISIL claimed to be behind two attacks against Libyan National Army
checkpoints in central and southern Libya. On 23 August, there was an attack against
a Libyan National Army checkpoint (90 km north-west of Al-Fuqaha’), that resulted
in the deaths of nine members of the Libyan National Army and two civilians. On
31 August, a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device attack on a Libyan National
Army checkpoint in Nawfaliyah caused two Libyan National Army fatalities and
injured four people. On 25 October, there was an attack on another Libyan National
Army checkpoint, the “60th Gate”, 60 km south-west of Ajdabiya. Two guards from
the 152nd Brigade were killed in the attack and four others were injured.
27. On 11 January 2018, in Abu Qurayn town in Misratah, Bunyan Marsus forces
announced the arrest of an ISIL member with a vehicle -borne improvised explosive
device after he failed to detonate it at the security checkpoint. After his arrest,
Ministry of Interior forces in Tripoli established checkpoints and arrested two other
suspected ISIL members.
28. While no longer in control of territory, ISIL continues to be ac tive in Libya and
retains the ability to conduct complex terrorist attacks. ISIL so -called “desert units”
continue to operate in the oil crescent, the central region around Jufrah, as well as in
the south of Libya. There are sleeper cells in other parts of the country, including the
western region. That presence is augmented by a number of ISIL elements moving
into Libya following their eviction from Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic.
18-02156

5/17

S/2018/140

Economic situation
29. While economic indicators reflected a significant improvement in the Libyan
economy owing to an increase in oil production (1.1 million barrels per day in January
2018, compared with 860,000 barrels per day in August 2017), as well as an increase
in international oil prices, structural issues have not been addressed, causing concern
that the fiscal and monetary crisis will worsen further in the long term. The National
Oil Corporation reached an agreement with the Organization of the Petroleum
Exporting Countries that granted Libya a continued exemption from measures aimed
at cutting global oil output.
30. Libyan authorities have not yet reached an agreement on the budget framework
for 2018. The deepening monetary crisis, defined by rising inflation and a lo ss in
purchasing power, required the Government of National Accord to increase spending
to provide public services. Currency depreciation hit a record high on the black
market towards the end of 2017 reaching 9.8 Libyan dinars to 1 United States dollar,
compared with the official exchange rate of 1.39 Libyan dinars to 1 United States
dollar. The country’s currency rapidly gained value in the informal market following
an announcement by the Central Bank that it would increase the supply of foreign
currencies available and an announcement by the Ministry of Economy that it would
increase imports of non-food items.
31. Political divisions and insecurity further exacerbated the country ’s
macroeconomic instability. The contested vote by the House of Representati ves
regarding the replacement of the Governor of the Central Bank on 19 December
created uncertainty concerning the legitimate authority of the Bank.
32. UNSMIL received reports of pervasive corruption. Abuse of the official
exchange rate for instant profit on the black market has driven up prices and created
shortages of basic commodities. There are widespread reports of bribes being paid to
facilitate transactions. Porous borders have enabled the systemic smuggling of goods,
including fuel subsidized for the benefit of the Libyan people, which contributes to
the illegal economy.

III. Constitution-making process
33. Members of the Constitution Drafting Assembly were active in their outreach to
promote the draft constitution adopted by the body on 29 J uly 2017. Challenges
against the legitimacy of the Constitution Drafting Assembly and the validity of the
vote adopting the draft were filed in court. On 7 January 2018, the Southern Benghazi
Court rejected a challenge to the continued legitimacy of the co nstitutional body
ahead of a definitive ruling expected by the Tripoli Supreme Court. On 14 February
2018, the Supreme Court ruled in favour of the draft constitution, thereby removing
all legal obstacles to the holding of a referendum.
34. Libyan and international organizations have worked to support the outreach by
the Constitution Drafting Assembly to pave the way for a possible referendum ahead
of parliamentary and presidential elections. Particular effort has gone into reaching
out to communities opposed to the draft, including some minority groups.

6/17

18-02156

S/2018/140

IV. Other activities of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya
A.

Electoral support
35. There was significant progress with regard to preparations for elections in 2018.
UNSMIL provided advice and support to the High Commission for National Elections
and other Libyan counterparts. An exercise to update and expand voter registration
was launched on 6 December 2017, on the basis of the voter roll from 2014, which
included 1.48 million registered voters. At the time of writing, there were more than
600,000 new registrants following the launch of the exercise, and the number of
registered voters was more than 2 million as at 24 January 2018. More than 1 million
women had registered to vote, representing 42 per cent of the overall number of
registered voters. The registration of out-of-country voters was due to start in early
February.
36. UNSMIL established three working groups with international electoral
assistance partners on voter registration, public outreach and electoral legislation to
coordinate the efforts of the international community in support of the electoral
process. In coordination with the High Commission for National Elections,
workshops were held to discuss electoral draft legislation aimed at supporting the
finalization of an electoral law.
37. Following a request by the High Commission for National Elections, a needs
assessment mission, led by the Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat, was
deployed in September 2017. A new electoral assistance project from the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) was developed to complement the
Mission’s efforts. The project, entitled “Promoting Elections for the People of Libya”,
received funding of more than $10 million from the European Union, France,
Germany, Italy and the Netherlands.

B.

Human rights, transitional justice and the rule of law
38. Armed groups engaged in ongoing fighting committed violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law. The weakness of judicial
institutions and the general climate of lawlessness and insecurity hampered victims ’
ability to seek protection, justice and redress.
39. Ongoing conflicts continued to claim civilian casualties. During the reporting
period, UNSMIL documented a total of 135 civilian casualties, including 56 deaths
and 79 injuries. Leading causes of death included gunfire, airstrikes, explosive
remnants of war, improvised explosive devices and shelling.
40. UNSMIL recorded seven attacks on health-care facilities in Benghazi, Misratah,
Awbari, Sabratah, Sirte and Warshafanah. UNSMIL documented physical assaults
against medical personnel during the performance of their professional duties, and
the unlawful deprivation of liberty of doctors in Bayda ’, Darnah, Sabha and Tripoli.
The Libyan National Army continued to impose restrictions on the freedom of
movement of Darnah residents and on the entry of certain goods into the city.
Abductions and killings
41. Armed groups continued to take hostages or otherwise unlawfully deprive
civilians of liberty. Civilians were targeted for ransom or on the basis of their family
or tribal identity, political affiliations and opinions. Arrests on grounds of violating
“public morals” were documented in both western and eastern Libya.

18-02156

7/17

S/2018/140

42. In the context of armed clashes in the Ghararat area of Tripoli between the
Special Deterrence Forces and members of the Al-Mungar family between 16 and
22 October 2017, the former captured three men alive. Their bodies were found days
later bearing gunshot wounds. On 26 October, 36 bodies were found in Abyar, some
60 km north-east of Benghazi. Several bore gunshot wounds and signs of tortur e and
had their hands tied. Armed masked men had reportedly seized several victims from
their Benghazi homes days or months before their bodies were found. The Libyan
National Army announced that it would conduct investigations into the incidents, but
no information has been shared.
43. UNSMIL also documented politically motivated assassinations. On 4 January
2018, unidentified assailants shot dead the Director of the Department of Education
at his home in Abyar. He had reportedly received death threats aft er announcing his
candidacy for parliamentary elections.
44. At the time of writing, a field commander with the Special Forces in Benghazi,
Mahmoud al-Werfalli, had turned himself in to the military police in eastern Libya,
but had reportedly been subsequently released, following violent protests demanding
his release. On 15 August, the International Criminal Court had issued an arrest
warrant against Mr. Al-Werfalli for the crime of murder for his alleged involvement
in the summary executions of suspected fighters with the Benghazi Revolutionaries
Shura Council and other opponents.
Detention, torture and deaths in custody
45. Across the country, arbitrary detention continued to be widespread in both
official prisons and detention facilities controlled by armed groups. In October 2017,
judicial police officers estimated that some 6,400 men, women and children were held
in 26 official prisons and that some 75 per cent were in pretrial detention. Limited
progress was made in reviewing individual cases to ensure that those held were either
referred to trial or released, in accordance with Libyan law.
46. UNSMIL conducted six visits to prisons in western Libya and interviewed
detainees in private. Despite repeated requests, the Mission was not able to visit t he
Mitiga detention facility, controlled by the Special Deterrence Force, where some
2,600 people were held in December. UNSMIL continued to receive credible reports
of torture and other ill-treatment, poor detention conditions, medical neglect and the
denial of visits from family and lawyers. There is a similar pattern of unlawful arrests
in eastern Libya. UNSMIL has documented prolonged arbitrary and incommunicado
detention, torture, ill-treatment and inhumane detention conditions at Kuwayfiah
Prison. UNSMIL has raised concerns in writing and other official communications
with relevant authorities. The exact number of detainees held at Kuwayfiah is
unknown, as UNSMIL has been unable to visit the facility since its evacuation from
eastern Libya in May 2014. In a meeting with UNSMIL in August 2017, judicial
police officers estimated that there were roughly 1,800 detainees held at Kuwayfiah.
The entire prison compound is guarded by the Libyan National Army and allied armed
groups.
Groups in vulnerable situations
Migrants
47. Migrants were subjected to arbitrary detention and torture, including rape and
other forms of sexual violence, abduction for ransom, extortion, forced labour and
unlawful killings. Perpetrators included State officials, armed groups , smugglers,
traffickers and criminal gangs.

8/17

18-02156

S/2018/140

48. UNSMIL visited four detention centres overseen by the Department for
Combating Illegal Migration, and observed severe overcrowding and appalling
hygiene conditions. Detainees were malnourished and had limite d or no access to
medical care. As at 15 January 2018, there were some 5,200 migrants held in
Department centres, down from approximately 19,000 in October 2017, according to
the Department.
49. UNSMIL continued to document reckless and violent conduct by the Libyan
Coast Guard in the course of rescues and/or interceptions at sea. For instance, on
6 November 2017, members of the Coast Guard beat migrants with a rope and pointed
firearms in their direction during an operation at sea. UNSMIL also documented t he
use of excessive and unlawful lethal force by officials of the Department for
Combating Illegal Migration. On 19 November, during a raid on a makeshift migrant
camp in the area of Warshafanah, members of the Tajura’ and Janzur groups affiliated
with the Department for Combating Illegal Migration opened fire on migrants without
providing any verbal warning, causing a number of deaths and injuries.
Women
50. Women were arbitrarily detained, often because of family affiliations or for
“moral crimes” such as engaging in sexual relations outside of marriage, and were
held in facilities without female guards, exposing them to the risk of sexual abuse.
Women reported being strip-searched and subjected to intrusive cavity searches by or
under the gaze of male guards. Migrant women and girls were subjected to rape,
forced prostitution and other forms of sexual violence at the hands of State officials,
members of armed groups, smugglers and traffickers. A number of women activists
reported facing questioning and harassment when travelling abroad without a male
“guardian”.
Children
51. UNSMIL continued to receive reports of grave violations against children,
including the killing, maiming and abduction of children. During the reporting period,
20 children were killed and 25 were injured. Children were killed as a result of air
strikes as well as stray bullets, or were killed or injured in incidents involving
explosive remnants of war or unidentified explosive ordnance. The conflict -related
abduction of children was reportedly perpetrated by different armed groups, militias
and criminal organizations. The recruitment and use of children by armed groups, as
well as their detention on the basis of their alleged or actual association with other
parties to the conflict, continued to be reported.
Activists and media workers
52. Media professionals, writers and activists faced restrictions to their rights to
freedom of expression and association and were subjected to abductions, arbitrary
detention, intimidation and threats. On 13 November 2017, fighters affiliated with the
Libyan National Army raided the offices of the Libyan Roh Al-Watan television
station in Benghazi and confiscated equipment. They also briefly detained two
journalists and subjected them to ill-treatment.
53. On 28 August, an event at the “Faqih centre” in Tripoli to launch a collection of
short stories and poems by Libyan authors was suspended following warnings that
Special Deterrence Force members were heading to the venue with armoured
vehicles. On 30 August, the Government’s General Committee of Culture criticized
the collection’s alleged “pornographic and immoral” content and called for legal
action against those involved.

18-02156

9/17

S/2018/140

Transitional justice and national reconciliation
54. With assistance provided by the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund and UNDP,
UNSMIL continued to support the national reconciliation process through a
comprehensive and inclusive programme. On 20 and 21 September 2017, UNSMIL
facilitated a dialogue between representatives from Zintan and Tripoli to reach an
agreement providing for the safe return of persons, through a series of security and
accountability mechanisms, who were displaced to Zintan from the capital in 2014.
55. Following a reconciliation process between the Qadhadhfa and Awlad Sulayman
tribes that began in May 2017, a women’s track of the dialogue took place in Tripoli
on 6 November. On 26 November, delegations from the cities of Kabaw and Batin
al-Jabal in the Nafusa mountains agreed to establish an independent fact -finding
committee to investigate past violations and called for t he creation of a national land
commission. The dialogue laid the basis and set the principles for a future negotiation
process between the two neighbouring communities.
56. On 24 October, an agreement was reached between tribal representatives and
notables from eastern Libya and Misratah, under the auspices of UNSMIL. The
meeting led to the establishment of an official liaison committee between both parties
to promote the safe return of displaced communities from Benghazi and Tawurgha ’.
57. In December 2017, there were a series of protests by the Tawurgha’ against the
dire conditions in camps, and against the slow implementation of an agreement
between the Misratah and the Tawurgha’ on the return of internally displaced persons
and reparations that had been endorsed by the Presidency Council in June. On
26 December, the Council announced that displaced persons from Tawurgha ’ would
be able to begin to return to their city starting 1 February 2018. The Council also
instructed relevant national security and service institutions to lay the ground for
returns and the Central Bank to dedicate funds for the first batch of reparations for
victims. Decree 1423 of 2017, issued by the Council on 26 December, established a
committee tasked with the implementation of the agreement reached by the Misratah/
Tawurgha’ dialogue committee in August 2016 on returns and reparations. On
1 February 2018, families from the Tawurgha’ community were prevented by
extremist elements from returning to their town as had been planned. UNSMIL
deplored the threats made against members of that community and called for the
implementation of the agreement allowing their return.
58. In December, more than 70 tribal leaders, elders, notables and activists from the
south signed a comprehensive “Charter for peaceful coexistence in Fezzan”, whereby
they agreed on a joint conflict analysis framework and a set of measures, mechanisms
and principles to bring peace to the south of Libya. UNSMIL engaged with other
southern constituencies to broaden grass-roots support for the Charter.
59. At the national level, a preparatory committee for national reconciliation,
established by a decree of the Presidency Council on 14 May, has yet to be activated.
On 16 October, the Council issued a decree providing for the creation of a national
reparations fund for all conflict-related victims since 2011, but the administrators of
the fund have yet to be nominated.
Judicial and penal system
60. Prosecutors, judges and other judicial staff continued to work in a di fficult
security environment, while attacks on court and prosecution complexes continued,
such as the attack against the Misratah courthouse on 4 October 2017. Despite the
challenges, a partial reactivation of prosecution and court offices took place in Si rte
and Warshafanah.

10/17

18-02156

S/2018/140

61. UNSMIL continued to support the strengthening of national institutions. In
September and December, UNSMIL, in cooperation with UNDP, facilitated two
workshops on arbitrary and prolonged detention, bringing together representatives of
municipalities, judges, prosecutors, lawyers, academics, civil society activists, prison
managers and judicial police officers.
62. In December, UNSMIL facilitated a week-long training on international human
rights law in Tripoli for 17 senior officers of the Libyan Presidential Guard. UNSMIL
continued to advise the Presidential Guard on the establishment of an internal
compliance and accountability mechanism.
63. Also in December, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
in partnership with the Ministry of Justice of Libya and the United States Bureau of
International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs, organized a workshop on
criminal justice reform that focused on addressing proposed amendments to the
Libyan Code of Criminal Procedure. Participants included representatives of the
Ministry of Justice, the High Judicial Institute, the Supreme Court, the Office of the
General Prosecutor, academia and civil society. On 10 December, UNODC, in
cooperation with an Algerian school for penitentiary management, began an in-depth
training course for 12 Libyan judicial police officers in Algeria, aimed at
strengthening prison management and fostering the social reintegration of offenders.
Human rights due diligence policy
64. The United Nations system in Libya continued its efforts towards the
implementation of the human rights due diligence policy on United Nations support
to non-United Nations security forces. UNSMIL and the United Nations country team
are currently reviewing their support to Libyan security forces, with a view to
mitigating any identified risk that recipients of United Nations support might commit
grave violations of international humanitarian law, human rights law or refugee law.
65. On 4 September 2017, the Libya human rights due diligence policy task force
adopted a risk assessment with respect to United Nations support to the Libyan Coast
Guard. Involved United Nations agencies are currently in the process of implementing
several risk-mitigating measures, including increased monitoring, advocacy and
accountability. A risk assessment and the development of mitigating measures with
respect to United Nations support to the Department for Combating Illegal Migration
are currently under consideration.

C.

Security sector
Support for Libyan planning for interim security arrangements
66. The relative calm in Tripoli allowed for further implementation of the Tripoli
security plan. With continued support from UNSMIL and the European Union Liaison
and Planning Cell, both police and army made progress towards greater operational
control of the city. Donors committed funds to security-related projects, including
technical support to the Libyan criminal justice system, the joint community policing
programme of UNDP/UNSMIL and the model police station. Additional support was
provided for the Joint Operations Centre in Tripoli. The Presidential Guard is playing
an increasingly prominent role in Libyan security affairs. Those “bottom-up”
initiatives contribute to creating the conditions necessary to further unify the Libyan
security apparatus.

18-02156

11/17

S/2018/140

Arms and ammunition management
67. In collaboration with the Mine Action Service, UNSMIL assisted Libyan
authorities in their efforts to address the threat posed by the uncontrolled proliferation
of arms and ammunition. In Misratah, the Mine Action Service began a stockpile
clearance and destruction project. In Sirte, efforts to coordinate the international
response to the threat of explosive hazards continued.
68. With a view to enhancing the response to the current humanitarian situation and
enabling safe access for internally displaced persons and returnees, UNSMIL and the
Mine Action Service organized training sessions for national authorities on
institutional and operational capacity-building, including explosive ordnance
disposal. The Libyan Mine Action Centre was also supported with t he development
and implementation of national standards. The Mine Action Service continued its
coordination with risk education partners to raise awareness about the dangers posed
by explosive hazards. From July to December 2017, approximately 9,000 people
participated in such programmes across Libya. The Mine Action Service also
continued its women-focused risk-awareness training regarding small arms and light
weapons.

D.

Women’s empowerment
69. During the reporting period, UNSMIL observed a positive trend in women’s
engagement in various political and social processes throughout the country, coupled
with demands for reconciliation at local levels. Three Ministries (Education, Labour
and Economy) established dedicated units to support women’s empowerment in
Libya. UNSMIL provided the women representatives in the joint drafting committee
with technical assistance to ensure women’s perspectives were reflected in
amendments to the Libyan Political Agreement. The representatives succeeded in
ensuring that the Women’s Support and Empowerment Unit of the Presidency Council
reports to the Prime Minister with regard to any future restructuring of the
Government.
70. To promote the role of women in Libyan political life and gender sensitivity in
the legislative process, UNSMIL supported the establishment of a forum composed
of 14 women, which reviewed the draft constitutional proposal from a gender
perspective. The forum will present comprehensive recommendations to members of
the House of Representatives and the High Council of State in February 2018.
71. UNSMIL, in partnership with UNDP, completed a comprehensive process for
designing a peace campaign on social coexistence to be led by Libyan women.
Various capacity-building activities continued. In November 2017, an induction
training on gender and gender mainstreaming was provided to 20 female staff
members of the Women’s Empowerment Unit at the Ministry of Education.

E.

Young people, peace and security
72. The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), in collaboration with the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), discussed a
strategic plan for young people for 2018, supported by the Networks of Mediterranean
Youth Project, with local partners in a workshop held in Tunis. Within that framework
and in collaboration with Libyan youth and women’s associations, UNFPA conducted
two workshops in Tripoli and Misratah on public policies, as well as training sessions
for trainers on civic engagement for social change, sexual and reproductive health,
the prevention of gender-based violence and fighting drug abuse. In December,

12/17

18-02156

S/2018/140

UNFPA supported the Y-PEER Youth Network in developing its strategy on peer
education for young people for 2018. UNESCO conducted training sessions for
teachers, cascade training sessions and awareness-raising workshops in Benghazi,
Misratah, Sabha and Tripoli that focused on the strategic plan for young people, which
were followed up by local microprojects on peacebuilding and countering violent
extremism.

F.

Coordination and international assistance
73. The overarching coordination framework for international technical cooperation
with the Government of Libya, the Senior Policy Committee, created two new
working groups on human rights and migration, resp ectively. A meeting will be
convened in Tripoli at the end of February 2018 to take stock of the progress made
by the working groups in finalizing sectoral priorities.
74. On 29 November 2017, the United Nations development system, together with
humanitarian agencies and Member States working in Libya, gathered 67 national
officials from various Libyan ministries and national entities as well as
representatives of civil society to discuss a draft strategic framework for Libya for
the period 2019–2020. Three priority areas were identified, including governance,
social services and economy, with peace and security as the overarching theme and a
link to the Sustainable Development Goals. The United Nations country team was
preparing the country assessment and the strategic framework for 2019–2020, which
were expected to be finalized with the Government by the end of January 2018.

G.

Humanitarian, stabilization and development assistance
75. The humanitarian situation in Libya deteriorated during the reporting period.
Refugees and migrants continued to be subjected to violence, forced labour and other
grave violations and abuses. Reports of migrants allegedly being sold into the slave
trade in Libya shed light on the appalling conditions the majority endure in a climate
of impunity.
76. On the margins of the African Union-European Union Summit in Abidjan on
29 and 30 November 2017, a joint African Union, European Union and United
Nations task force on migration was established to support migrants and refugees
along migration routes as well as inside Libya. In December, the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) identified 621,706 migrants across the country but
estimates the actual number to be between 700,000 to 1,000,000.
77. IOM has scaled up its voluntary humanitarian returns programme. As at
25 January 2018, a total of 7,723 migrants wishing to return home were repatriated.
During the reporting period, the Office of the United Natio ns High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) evacuated a total of 389 refugees and asylum seekers in
coordination with Libyan authorities. Approximately 24,000 refugees and migrants
reached Italy by way of the central Mediterranean route and some 780 lost the ir lives
or have gone missing. IOM and UNHCR undertook protection monitoring and
provided assistance at 12 disembarkation points in western Libya.
78. From September to December 2017, UNHCR registered 2,277 refugees and
asylum seekers in Libya. The number of refugees now exceeds 45,000. UNHCR made
more than 450 monitoring visits to detention centres throughout Libya, provided
medical assistance and advocated for alternatives to detention. Some 1,034 refugees
and asylum seekers were released from detention following interventions by UNHCR.

18-02156

13/17

S/2018/140

79. Since November, UNHCR has scaled up its resettlement and humanitarian
evacuations programme with a view to providing solutions in third countries for the
most vulnerable refugees and asylum seekers. Between November a nd December, a
total of 659 refugees were processed through direct resettlement and humanitarian
evacuations.
80. Sporadic escalations of violence in western Libya resulted in small -scale
displacements and further need for medical support. The World Healt h Organization
(WHO) provided medical supplies that benefited around 90,000 individuals, provided
trauma kits that could treat more than 1,600 moderate to severe injuries and procured
42,000 bags of blood. In November, WHO deployed a team of 16 specialized doctors
and nurses, provided life-saving medicine and restored services to a hospital in Ghat
that had been closed for the past two years.
81. Following the reported increase in maternal deaths in the south of Libya,
UNFPA and WHO jointly deployed mobile health teams to enable 1,850 women to
deliver safely in the affected areas, and made available emergency reproductive health
kits. WHO also supported the Ministry of Health in expanding its disease early
warning system network to more than 100 sentinel sites and detention centres across
Libya. In November, the Ministry of Health, with the support of WHO, the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and IOM conducted a national immunization
campaign resulting in about 1.4 million children receiving vaccinations against polio,
and 721,488 children receiving vaccinations against measles, mumps and rubella.
82. UNICEF provided 18,350 migrants and refugees with access to safe water and
sanitation services at the assembly points of Sabratah/Dahman, Tajura ’ and Gharyan.
It also rehabilitated water and sanitation facilities in 30 schools in Benghazi, Sabha,
Awbari, Tripoli and Sirte that continued to provide a conducive learning environment
to 19,510 children. In Benghazi and Tubruq, 5,000 internally displaced persons a nd
returnee families gained access to safe water, sanitation and hygiene assistance.
83. UNDP, through its resilience and recovery programme, is working closely with
municipalities to build their capacities as legitimate authorities that are responsive to
the needs of their populations and able to deliver essential public services. In that
context, UNDP worked in key communities on the migration routes (from Sabha and
Murzuq to Kufrah and Sabratah, and not least to Benghazi and Tripoli) engaging local
municipalities, identifying entry points for the integration of key community
members, enhancing local stability and community security, advancing the
socioeconomic development of municipalities and providing income generation
opportunities for communities, and especially young people.
84. UNICEF provided community reintegration packages to 125 children and
adolescents released from armed groups in Zintan. Some 3,500 adolescents
participated in sessions on prevention of recruitment by armed groups. In addition,
some 70 justice professionals (police officers, judges, prosecutors and social workers)
were trained on child-friendly procedures and at least 121 migrant women and
children were provided with specialized psychosocial services in Sabratah.
85. During the reporting period, more than 9,000 students (including 4,767 girls and
young women) benefited from catch-up and remedial education classes in conflictaffected and underserved areas in places such as Benghazi, Sirte and eight areas in
southern Libya. A total of 4,120 children (including 2,120 girls) benefited from the
establishment of six mobile classes in Benghazi. In Benghazi and Sirte, 61,315
children (including 31,044 girls) received essential learning materials and supplies.
As part of UNICEF support for teachers’ development, a total of 187 teachers and
master trainers (including 146 women) received training.

14/17

18-02156

S/2018/140

86. The Stabilization Facility for Libya received financial contributions amounting
to $62 million by the end of January 2018. By the end of 201 7, the programme had
rehabilitated 22 facilities, including schools, hospitals and sports centres, across
Libya.

V. Deployment of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
and security arrangements
87. UNSMIL and the United Nations country team have gradually increased their
operations inside Libya and maintain a temporary rotational presence of security,
support and substantive personnel in the country. On 30 December 2017, the United
Nations Guard Unit completed its deployment to safeguard UNSMI L premises in
Tripoli. On 7 February 2018, the Department of Safety and Security lifted the
evacuation status in Libya.
Security and safety of staff members and operations
88. United Nations personnel in Libya continued to work in a high -risk security
environment. Restrictions continued to be imposed on the movement of personnel in
Libya and on international staff taking flights to Tripoli and other destinations within
Libya.

VI. Observations
89. Since the launch of the United Nations action plan, significant progress has been
attained in revitalizing the political process in Libya. The passing of the second
anniversary of the Libyan Political Agreement without major incident was a
demonstration of the commitment by all parties to the process and th e Agreement as
the sole political framework to end the transition. In that regard, I strongly welcome
the renewed dynamism of Libyan actors and their engagement with my Special
Representative. I also welcome the unity of the international community behind the
action plan and the efforts of my Special Representative for the establishment of
stable, unified, representative and effective governance, as reflected in the statement
by the President of the Security Council of 14 December 2017 ( S/PRST/2017/26).
90. The mutual recognition of the House of Representatives and the High Council
of State and the formation of the joint drafting committee reflected a commitment to
reject military solutions and find political solutions as part of a Libyan-owned and
Libyan-led process. The meetings of the joint drafting committee concluded in
focusing on the need for a more inclusive, representative and effective government to
support the end of the transitional period and prep are for elections. It is my hope that
a spirit of collaboration and compromise will continue to prevail among all Libyans
as they forge the path forward.
91. I am encouraged by the support displayed by Libyans across the country at the
prospect of holding elections to conclude the transitional period. The high number of
voter registrations, including by women and young people, is testament to Libyans ’
eagerness to participate in free and fair elections that will mark the end of the
transitional period. The United Nations remains committed to supporting the High
Commission for National Elections throughout the electoral cycle. However, voter
registration is only one of a number of prerequisites needed for elections to take place.
It is essential to have broad political consensus regarding the elections in order to
encourage both participation as well as acceptance of the results. It is also critical that
the appropriate legal framework be in place. I therefore urge the House of

18-02156

15/17

S/2018/140

Representatives to uphold its duty to the Libyan people by enacting the requisite
legislation, in accordance with the Libyan Political Agreement. The United Nations
stands ready to support those processes as needed.
92. I also welcome efforts to hold local municipal elections as the ter ms of
municipal authorities draw to a close. Municipalities have assumed increasing
responsibilities not only in governance but also in the provision of basic services. It
is therefore paramount that support for those institutions is maintained and further
strengthened.
93. My Special Representative has rightly identified the need for meaningful
reconciliation to take place in order to rebuild a national polity. Those efforts are key
to the reunification of institutions and the restoration of security and stability. In that
regard, I join his commitment to engaging and including actors and groups who were
previously marginalized and who are now prepared to commit to the political process.
94. I also welcome ongoing efforts by communities across Libya to engage with one
another to reach local reconciliation agreements. Those agreements, some of which
have been facilitated by the United Nations, are critical to creating the building blocks
for reconciliation at the national level. They are also vital for impro ving the lives of
those affected by conflict, as they enable in some cases the return of internally
displaced persons to their homes with security and dignity. In that regard, I am
encouraged by the announcement of the Government of National Accord to secu re the
return of Tawurgha’ internally displaced persons to their homes. I further encourage
the activation of a preparatory committee for national reconciliation and the
establishment of a national reconciliation fund.
95. I strongly welcome the active engagement of Libyan women in the political
process, as well as in ongoing reconciliation efforts. In that regard, I was pleased to
see that women were part of the joint drafting committee. Nonetheless, more needs
to be done to ensure that representation of women translates into effective and
meaningful participation. I continue to call on all Libyan political actors to strive for
the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and
security.
96. I am concerned by the deteriorating humanitarian situation across parts of the
country. I welcome the Libyan Government’s allocation of $5 million to the
Stabilization Fund and call upon Member States to continue to provide much -needed
assistance. In that regard, I urge funding for the Libya Humanitarian Response Plan,
which aims to support 1.1 million people in need across the country.
97. I also remain concerned by the underlying insecurity across much of the country.
Over the past month, violent clashes in Tripoli resulted in the closing of Mitiga airport
for close to a week while Benghazi witnessed bomb attacks on 24 January and
9 February, which resulted in the loss of lives, including those of civilians. I call on
all actors to avoid any further deterioration of the security situation and to engage in
meaningful dialogue to find a political solution. I reiterate the urgent need to reform
and unify armed and security forces, operating under civilian leadership. The
widespread proliferation of arms in the country also needs to be addressed, owing to
the threat they pose to law and order and the extension of State authority.
98. I take note of the efforts made by Libyan experts to address the continued
widespread presence of mines and unexploded ordnance, and express my gratitude to
donors who have supported the increase in capacity that has made such efforts
possible. Explosive hazards continue to pose a significant, indiscriminate threat to the
civilian population and I urge Member States to expand their funding to activities in
priority areas through the provision of training and equipment.

16/17

18-02156

S/2018/140

99. I am deeply disturbed by the continuing reports of human trafficking in Libya.
I encourage the Libyan authorities to spare no efforts to identify and prosecute those
responsible for such heinous crimes. I call on all actors to cooperate with and support
the efforts of the Libyan authorities to bring perpetrators to justice. The plight of
migrants and the abuses they suffer both in Libya and as they attempt to cross the
Mediterranean continue to call for joint, concerted and urgent action. I am hopeful
that the newly established United Nations, African Union, and European Union task
force will help to address the issue of migration in a comprehensive manner. I also
commend recent efforts by countries of origin to address the plight of their citizens.
United Nations agencies will continue to address the humanitarian situation and have
already increased their support to voluntary repatriation and reinte gration initiatives.
I commend countries that have agreed to host migrants who are unable to return to
their countries of origin and are in need of asylum.
100. I wish to recognize the important role of regional organizations and
neighbouring States in support of the United Nations facilitation of the Libyan
political process. The unity of the international community in supporting a peaceful
resolution to the Libyan crisis remains of critical importance. I wish to express my
gratitude for the strong support Member States have shown to my Special
Representative and encourage them to ensure that the United Nations is able to
maintain the momentum generated over the past few months.
101. I wish to express my sincere appreciation to the Government of Nepal for
providing the personnel of the United Nations Guard Unit. I also wish to express my
gratitude to my Special Representative, Ghassan Salamé, and to the staff of the United
Nations system in Libya for their dedication and hard work in support of a peaceful
end to the transition in Libya and the establishment of a stable and effective
governance that responds to the legitimate aspirations of the Libyan people.

18-02156

17/17
