S/PV.9371

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9371st meeting

Tuesday, 11 July 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Dame Barbara Woodward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. França Danese
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Anyanah
Mrs. Shino
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-20022 (E)
*2320022*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9371

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
documents S/2023/506 and S/2023/507, each of which
contains the text of a separate draft resolution.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): As co-penholders,
Brazil and Switzerland actively and constructively
engaged with all Security Council members, as well as
partners in the region and other relevant stakeholders,
both governmental and non-governmental, throughout
intense negotiations during the past few weeks. We
spared on effort to try to achieve a text as consensual
as possible. Throughout, we were guided solely by the
urgent humanitarian needs of the Syrian people. The
result of our effort is the amended draft resolution
(S/2023/506) that we have put for the consideration by
Council members today.
We listened carefully to the humanitarian actors
on the ground. They firmly advocate for a year-long
authorization as necessary to design and implement
projects that go beyond life-saving supplies and that
offer dignified solutions. Even though we support their
call for a 12-month extension, the text before members
provides for a nine-month renewal. It is our renewed
attempt for a compromise. The draft resolution would
renew the authorization for the Bal Al-Hawa border
crossing, but we also worked to help ensure that the
language reflected the commitment to humanitarian
assistance to all those in need in Syria through all
modalities. It includes a paragraph on the cross-line
modality and calls for an expansion of humanitarian
operations, more funding for enhanced early-recovery
activities, as well as humanitarian mine action. It also
addresses the demand for the creation of conditions for
safe, voluntary, informed and dignified returns.
2/11

11/07/2023

We believe this draft resolution is a fair compromise.
It represents a balance between the different positions
of Council members. We are grateful to all Council
members for their engagement to that end. The adoption
of a consensual draft resolution on this crucial issue
would show the unity and commitment of the Security
Council with respect to humanitarian issues in general
and to the needs of the Syrian people in this specific case.
We now commend the draft resolution to the Council and
ask all members to support it.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I deliver this statement before
the voting on behalf of the 10 elected members of the
Council (E-10).
The E-10 appreciates the extensive efforts by
the co-penholders, Brazil and Switzerland, to draft
a balanced text that reflects the views and legitimate
concerns of delegations and, more important, meets the
pressing humanitarian needs of the Syrian people. The
draft resolution (S/2023/506) before us will guarantee
the uninterrupted flow of aid to 4 million people in
need of emergency humanitarian support in north-west
Syria. Particularly after the devastating earthquakes in
February, the cross-border aid mechanism remains a
crucial lifeline.
The draft resolution authorizes a nine-month
extension of the mechanism, and thereby allow
humanitarian organizations to reach those in need
effectively and with the better predictability, under the
strict monitoring of the United Nations. We commend
the efforts of all delegations, including the three African
members of the Council and the United Arab Emirates,
for their constructive proposals.
The text also reflects issues raised by Council
members and the country concerned, such as humanitarian
funding, humanitarian mine action, cross-line deliveries
to all parts of Syria and the creation of conditions for
safe, voluntary, informed and dignified returns.
While the E-10 would have preferred a longer
mandate authorization, we recognize the utility of
upholding the Council’s unified position and strongly
urge all Council members to vote in favour of this
draft resolution. It not only represents our collective
diplomatic endeavour to produce a compromise text, but
it also demonstrates our determination to meet the dire
needs of the Syrian people.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): From the beginning,
Gabon, Ghana and Mozambique, the three African
members of the Security Council (A3), engaged in the
23-20022

11/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East

negotiations process in good faith, with the ultimate
purpose of adopting a balanced text that would be
acceptable to all members of the Security Council. In that
connection, the A3 regrets that the Council has before
it today two competing draft resolutions (S/2023/506
and S/2023/507) on the Syrian humanitarian situation.
We have always aimed for the consensual adoption of
a draft resolution that would be supportive in meeting
the pressing humanitarian needs of the Syrian people.
Between an annual mandate and a half-year mandate,
we believe that the nine-month mandate reflects the best
available option that should garner the consensus of the
Council. The A3 will therefore vote in favour of the
draft resolution (S/2023/506) supported by the 10 elected
members of the Council, guided only by the defence of
the supreme interests of the Syrian people.
We thank the co-penholders, Brazil and Switzerland,
for their efforts in trying to encourage all the members of
the Council to come together. The A3 pledges to continue
to play a constructive role in helping the Council forge a
consensus position on the matter.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank the co-penholders. In a few moments,
we will vote on the co-penholders’ compromise draft
resolution (S/2023/506). How we all vote will speak
volumes. Supporting the draft resolution will extend
humanitarian assistance to the Syrian people and ensure
that aid will not be cut off in the dead of winter. But
should any Member State oppose the draft resolution, it
will be voting to shutter a critical humanitarian lifeline.
Today it is unconscionable that cross-border aid through
Bab Al-Hawa is paused while humanitarians wait for
the Security Council to act. And there is no time to
waste. The Syrian people are counting on us — people
like Mohammed Al-Fandi, who lives in a camp near the
Syrian-Turkish border. When asked about the stakes of
the vote on this draft resolution, Mohammed said,
“Closing the crossing to humanitarian aid means
death by starvation for most camp residents.”
He says, “death by starvation”. The stakes of this vote
are quite literally life or death. In a letter to the Council,
32 non-governmental organizations (NGOs) wrote,
“If the Council fails to renew this mechanism, it will
send a message to Syrians that the Council is willing
to accept preventable additional suffering and loss of
life on its watch”.

S/PV.9371

Often the issues before the Council are contentious,
and that is to be expected, but this vote should not be
contentious or controversial. We know that the crossborder mechanism allows for food, water, medicine and
other essentials to reach 2.7 million people in Syria
every single month. We know that the cross-border
mechanism is one of the most closely monitored and
inspected crossings in the world. And I saw that firsthand during my two visits to Bab Al-Hawa. And we
know that the humanitarian situation in Syria has never
been more dire. Twelve years of war and this year’s
devastating earthquakes have pushed the Syrian people
to the brink. This is the moment to increase our support
for vulnerable Syrians. Following the earthquakes, we
therefore surged assistance to the region. The United
States is the single-largest humanitarian donor to the
Syrian people, and we need others to step up and join us,
especially right now, as the United Nations humanitarian
appeal for Syria remains grossly underfunded.
But let us be clear. No amount of aid will meet the
needs of the Syrian people if the aid cannot reach the
Syrian people. The United States has lived up to its
pledge to support for cross-line aid deliveries and earlyrecovery efforts, but nothing can replace the scope and
scale of cross-border aid. And after the earthquakes
in February, which temporarily closed Bab Al-Hawa,
just as needs spiked, we saw how insufficient one
border crossing point is. For that reason, the United
States, together with humanitarian organizations and
other Member States, called for this draft resolution
to expand the cross-border aid mechanism to include
all three border-crossing points currently in use,
namely, Bab Al-Hawa, Bab Al-Salam and Bab Al-Rai.
Al-Assad has reportedly told the United Nations and
some members of the Council that he is amenable to
keeping those additional border-crossings open beyond
13 August, but he has yet to make that commitment
publicly or call for an extension of the mechanism. If
the regime fails to follow through, we will bring that to
the top of the Council’s agenda during our presidency
of the Security Council in August. Council members
have my word on that.
This text is a compromise and, in many ways, it
really is the bare minimum. This draft resolution falls
short of what United Nations officials and humanitarian
leaders called on us to do. It falls short of what meeting
the needs on the ground require. The Secretary-General
and NGOs on the ground have urged the Council to
extend the cross-border mechanism for 12 months. The

23-200223/11

S/PV.9371

The situation in the Middle East

United States and the vast majority of Security Council
members supported a 12-month extension. While we will
support today’s compromise draft resolution, we know
that it does not fully meet the needs of the moment. Going
forward, we will continue to work with our partners
to meet the immense needs of the Syrian people. The
bottom line is this: there is no legitimate or humanitarian
justification for voting against this draft resolution. None
whatsoever. We must extend this critical lifeline, and we
must ensure aid continues to reach the Syrian people
during the cold winter months. Let us therefore put aside
geopolitical gamesmanship. Let us do the right thing. Let
us do the humane thing, and let us continue to provide
life-saving assistance to the Syrian people. The United
States will vote in favour of the draft resolution, and
we will encourage all Security Council members to do
the same.
The President: The Council is ready to proceed to
the vote on the draft resolutions before it.
I shall first put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/2023/506, submitted by Brazil
and Switzerland.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, Ecuador, France, Gabon, Ghana,
Japan, Malta, Mozambique, Switzerland, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Against:
Russian Federation
Abstaining:
China
The President: The draft resolution received 13
votes in favour, 1 against and 1 abstention. The draft
resolution has not been adopted, owing to the negative
vote of a permanent member of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.

11/07/2023

concerns and reach common ground. We engaged
constructively and in good faith, always keeping
one single and clear aim in our minds: to ensure that
millions of people in need would get the humanitarian
assistance on which they rely to survive in the most
difficult circumstances.
The text would have ensured that life-saving
humanitarian assistance continued to reach those in
need in north-west Syria by all modalities, crossborder and cross-line, and by all humanitarian actors
with no exception. The Secretary-General, as well as
humanitarian partners working on the ground, have
stressed that the 12-month mandate duration would
provide humanitarian actors with the predictability
necessary for their operation planning.
Even though we hear and support their call, we made
a further compromise — for a nine-month extension.
This timeline would allow for bridging the harsh winter
months and still enable the expansion of humanitarian
activities, including early-recovery efforts called for by
the draft resolution. And in a context of humanitarian
needs worldwide that is far outgrowing the available
funds, it would still improve the cost efficiency of the
whole-of-Syria humanitarian response.
The briefings the Security Council receives
monthly leave no doubt that the humanitarian needs
in Syria are greater than ever before. The earthquakes
in February have further compounded an already very
complex humanitarian crisis. We have continuously
stressed the need for all modalities, including crossborder and cross-line, to be available for humanitarian
actors across Syria. The cross-border operation remains
a lifeline for millions of Syrians who are dependent on
humanitarian aid.
We welcome the engagement from all sides during
this negotiation process. We are thankful for the support
that our approach and text received from the vast
majority of Council members. We deeply regret that this
compromise was rejected through the use of one veto.

Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland): Brazil and
Switzerland are very disappointed that the Security
Council did not adopt the draft resolution on crossborder humanitarian aid into Syria, on which we have
just voted (S/2023/506).

As co-penholders, Brazil and Switzerland are
guided by the humanitarian imperative. We will
therefore not let this veto cease our tireless efforts to
find a solution. We will continue to engage with all
Council members to ensure that humanitarian aid keeps
reaching those in need.

Over recent weeks, we engaged with all Council
members, as well as partners in the region, and did
not spare any efforts — any efforts — to accommodate

Last night, the mandate for the cross-border
mechanism expired and left millions of people
wondering if they will continue to receive much-needed

4/11

23-20022

11/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East

life-saving humanitarian aid. We, the members of the
Security Council, cannot fail the millions of people
in Syria who depend on assistance. We cannot fail
the thousands upon thousands who help them day by
day, and we cannot keep watching the situation on the
ground get worse. The Council has a responsibility to
renew the mandate for cross-border aid, and we will
keep on working to find common ground and to ensure
that we collectively live up to that responsibility.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): This is really a sad moment. It is a sad
moment for the Syrian people, and it is a sad moment
for the Security Council, save for one country. What
we have just witnessed — what the world has just
witnessed — was an act of utter cruelty. The majority of
the Council stood together to extend this humanitarian
lifeline to save lives, but one permanent member
blocked this draft compromise resolution (S/2023/506),
and I just have to ask why.
Russia has not lived up to its responsibility as a
permanent member of the Security Council, which is
beneath the dignity of this body. This is a gross affront
to the values we all hold dear, to our efforts to advance
peace and security, and, above all, to the Syrian people
who have endured so much needless suffering and
violence at the hands of the Al-Assad regime.
As I said earlier, this text was a compromise, and
in so many ways it was the absolute minimum that we
could achieve. But the United States and other Council
members supported the co-penholders’ draft resolution
in the spirit of compromise. And Russia could not even
do that. Now Moscow must answer to the international
community, and its delegation to the Security Council
has to answer to the Syrian people. It will have to
go before the General Assembly and explain why it
neglected the dire humanitarian needs of more than
4 million Syrians. Russia will have to try to justify
the unjustifiable.
We cannot accept this obstruction. We must keep at
this. The Syrian people are counting on us, and we must
all urge Russia to come back to the table in good faith.
There is no time to waste. Lives hang in the balance.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): Japan deeply regrets that the
Security Council failed to adopt the draft resolution
that would have reauthorized the cross-border
humanitarian aid mechanism in Syria for another nine
months (S/2023/506). We are extremely disappointed

S/PV.9371

that the veto was cast today, which hinders the delivery
of life-saving humanitarian assistance to over 4 million
people in need.
Ongoing violence and insecurity, deteriorating
socioeconomic conditions, the cholera outbreak and,
to make matters worse, the 6 February earthquakes,
have gravely worsened the already dire humanitarian
situation in Syria. The vetoed draft resolution was
intended to encourage further life-saving assistance
to Syria through all modalities, including support for
early recovery. The Council must demonstrate unity,
make compromise and ultimately alleviate the suffering
of Syrians.
As we all know, the needs of Syrians are at their
highest level since the start of the conflict. The result
of this negative vote means a major disruption of
humanitarian activities in Syria. The veto will therefore
be interpreted as utter disregard for the suffering and
lives of the Syrian people.
Moving forward, Japan will continue to work
constructively with other Council members to find
a realistic arrangement that holistically addresses
the severe humanitarian situation in Syria. Until we
achieve an inclusive, comprehensive and sustainable
political solution in line with resolution 2254 (2015),
we must put the needs of the Syrian people at the top of
our agenda.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): We thank the co-penholders,
Brazil and Switzerland, for their tireless efforts during
a most constructive process of negotiations. We were
happy to work actively with them and other members
of the Security Council, but unfortunately these efforts
were wasted.
What just happened is a terrible setback. It is one
of those sad days for the Council, the United Nations
and the entire humanitarian world. It is a stab in the
back to solidarity — one of the raisons d’être of the
United Nations.
Millions of Syrians in need and hundreds of
humanitarian actors ready to help them have been
anxiously looking to the Security Council to guarantee
humanitarian access for a period of 12 months. This
case has continuously been made by the United Nations
at the highest level and in this Chamber — and it has
been made many times by the United Nations officials
on the ground — in order to ensure predictability,
preparedness and efficiency.

23-200225/11

S/PV.9371

The situation in the Middle East

As was mentioned before, a group of 32
non-governmental
organizations
operating
in
Syria — people who live every day with those in
need, and not in New York — describe Bab Al-Hawa
as the most critical supply line for providing food,
medical care and shelter. A mandate of nine months as
proposed, although not ideal, would nonetheless have
provided and continued to provide humanitarian aid for
more than 4 million people in north-western Syria, who
need it not for comfort but for survival; not as an option
but a critical vital need.
The Council, which is responsible for peace and
security, has been taken hostage by another shameless
misuse of the veto. Today the Council, which in a normal
world represents people’s hopes for a better world,
decided to starve people in need, deprive children
of food and deny the elderly medical care. Russia’s
position is wrong because its decision goes against life.
This is one of those days when it becomes harder to
convincingly face the people who criticize the United
Nations — those who think that there is something
seriously wrong with our Organization, the Security
Council and the way it functions nowadays, with the
misuse of the veto and the sickening geopolitical games
played at the expense of innocent life. Helping people
in need should never be mixed with politics. One
permanent member did that just now — unfortunately,
unsurprisingly, regrettably and shamefully.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today we are once again being obliged to
witness yet another act being played out by Western
countries in the show entitled the cross-border
mechanism for providing humanitarian assistance
to Syria. Its main distinguishing characteristics are
a complete disregard for the interests of the Syrian
people, that they supposedly want so much to protect,
and a desire to artificially provoke Russia into using the
veto. We heard today and will probably hear again later
Russia accused of killing the cross-border mechanism.
It is dishonest and disingenuous. With the 12 or 9 months
that were portrayed as a compromise in the extension
of the cross-border mechanism, our Western partners
wanted to gift the Syrians with a whole lot of nothing.
When we tried to reach a compromise in good faith,
we saw what some of our colleagues had written in the
correspondence on the issue. They said that they had
already made an incredible number of concessions to
Russia, specifically on cross-line activities, demining,
refugee returns and early recovery. Is everything that I
6/11

11/07/2023

just listed what we call concessions? Our colleagues are
simply giving themselves away by calling provisions
that draft resolution S/2023/506 should have contained
by default “concessions” to Russia and Syria. It betrays
their true attitude to the cross-border mechanism,
which they are interested in only so that their aid
can supply the terrorists in Idlib. And yes, they talk
about a life-and-death situation in the context of the
cross-border mechanism. It is all disingenuous and
hypocritical. There are ways to help people without the
cross-border mechanism if the desire is there. They try
to convince us that closing the Bab Al-Hawa crossing
will lead to a collapse of humanitarian aid to people in
Idlib, completely ignoring the fact that through its own
sovereign decision the Syrian Government has opened
two additional and functioning cross-border points.
We would like to thank our Emirati, African and
Brazilian colleagues, who made appreciable efforts
to somehow avoid the show that was put on today
and reach a compromise. To do that, it was above all
important to consider the position of the State whose
interests are directly affected by the draft resolution
in question — that is, Syria. However, our colleagues
from Switzerland, who have essentially monopolized
the Syrian humanitarian file, proved completely
incapable of that. From the very beginning they have
been promoting the interests of the Western members
of the Council alone, while ignoring Syria’s legitimate
demands. The result was a draft resolution that does
not allow us even a hope of an actual improvement
of the mechanism, the need for which many Council
members have underscored. It is not a compromise
text, as it has been disingenuously presented by some
of our colleagues.
We are not about to give our blessing to a mechanism
whereby terrorists from Idlib, with impunity, will be
able to prevent cross-line humanitarian assistance
provided for by the Security Council resolution
from entering their enclave, while Western countries
essentially fund early-recovery and humanitarian aid
projects only in areas that are not under the legitimate
Government’s control and while Syria itself is being
strangled with inhumane sanctions. Not to mention
that, as we all know, the cross-border mechanism is
an obvious violation of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Syria that was permissible five to seven
years ago but looks completely anachronistic today. We
would advise the United States representative to ask the
Syrian people about the Syrian people. It would be a
23-20022

11/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East

better idea to talk to Syrians about the Assad Regime
Anti-Normalization Act, which will completely strangle
Syria. And speaking of the Syrian people’s suffering, let
them talk about how their sanctions do not even allow
Syrians to buy life-saving medicines and equipment.
The problems that the Swiss penholders for the
Syrian dossier failed to resolve today have nothing to do
with the draft resolution’s timetable. They are about its
content. Essentially, our colleagues from Switzerland
unfortunately overplayed their hand and led us all into
an impasse, making no effort to lead us out of it. Of
course, we can get out of it and salvage the situation, but
only by supporting our draft resolution (S/2023/507),
which we will vote on after the voting on the Swiss draft
resolution (S/2023/506), and that provides for practical
measures to repair the cross-border mechanism. I am
warning everyone right here and now that if our draft
text is not supported, the cross-border mechanism can
be closed. In the circumstances, we will not accept
a technical rollover for any time period, and as our
Swiss colleagues have eloquently indicated in the past
few days, they are not willing to compromise and the
Council has simply run out of time. I would like to ask
any member who is interested in preserving the crossborder mechanism to bear that in mind when voting on
our draft resolution, which takes genuine account of the
interests of the Syrian people.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I want to start by joining others in thanking Brazil
and Switzerland for their work as penholders. The
Secretary-General was absolutely clear. He asked the
Council to give humanitarians a 12-month mandate to
deliver aid to 4.1 million people who desperately need
it. The humanitarian partners who brief us regularly
have set out the case for that again and again. And
countries in the region that are directly impacted by
the conflict in Syria have also called for a 12-month
mandate. The partners I met on the ground last month
at the Syrian border were clear. A 12-month mandate
was a minimum lifeline, and all the more so after
February’s earthquakes.
The penholders and a majority of the Council
worked in good faith to try and deliver that, including
through an eleventh-hour compromise to try and find
common ground. But Russia has yet again used its veto
to restrict life-saving humanitarian access to 4 million
Syrian people. There is no rational or moral argument to

S/PV.9371

veto this draft resolution. Humanitarian access should
respond to humanitarian need and should not be taken
hostage by Russia.
Since 2014, year after year, Russia has chipped
away at this humanitarian lifeline. Today, it has
continued its efforts to restrict access to people in need.
As the United Kingdom, we will continue, as we has
done every year, to put our humanitarian responsibility
above politics. We call on Russia to do the same. We
need to put the needs of the Syrian people first.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/2023/507, submitted by the
Russian Federation.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
China, Russian Federation
Against:
France, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Brazil, Ecuador, Gabon, Ghana, Japan,
Malta, Mozambique, Switzerland, United Arab
Emirates
The President: The draft resolution received 2
votes in favour, 3 against and 10 abstentions. The draft
resolution has not been adopted, having failed to obtain
the required number of votes.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Security Council has just voted on two draft resolutions
on the renewal of the mandate for cross-border
humanitarian assistance into Syria, and neither of them
was adopted. China regrets the failure of Council to
reach consensus on this important matter.
China’s position on the humanitarian issue in
Syria has been consistent and clear. We have always
maintained that humanitarian assistance to Syria should
be provided in a way that respects the sovereignty
of Syria and the Syrian Government’s ownership.
Cross-line relief should become the primary modality
for humanitarian assistance to Syria. The cross-

23-200227/11

S/PV.9371

The situation in the Middle East

border relief mechanism was an expedient, temporary
arrangement made under specific circumstances, and
there is a need to speed up the transition to cross-line
assistance and to phase out the cross-border mechanism
over time until its eventual discontinuation.
Over the past years, every time the Council has
addressed this matter, the discussions have been
invariably very heated and the debate fraught with
difficulties and twists and turns. Since last July,
the Council has, in effect, come to a regularized
arrangement whereby this matter is reviewed every six
months, which provides the Council with the necessary
flexibility to assess the implementation of the resolution
in a timely manner and to promptly adjust and optimize
the mandate. Facts have shown that the length of
the mandate’s extension is not the main obstacle to
humanitarian assistance to Syria, nor should it be the
main obstacle to consensus among Council members.
In considering today’s mandate renewal, in view of the
current humanitarian situation in Syria, China supports
the continuation of the cross-border mechanism. At the
same time, China maintains that the Council must take
seriously the problems and inadequacies of the existing
humanitarian relief mechanism and make efforts to
address those problems and inadequacies.
First, practical measures should be taken to prevent
the parties in de facto control of north-western Syria
from once again obstructing cross-line relief efforts
and to ensure a significant increase in the frequency
and scale of cross-line relief efforts as compared to the
same period last year.
Secondly, the scope of human humanitarian
activities should be further expanded. Humanitarian
demining should be integrated into early recovery,
alongside efforts to support the Syrian people in key
areas to achieve sustainable development in order to
consolidate early recovery gains.
Thirdly, we must ensure adequate humanitarian
funding for Syria, which is also an important aspect of
measuring how well the resolution is implemented.
Fourthly, we must acknowledge the negative
impact of unilateral sanctions on humanitarian
assistance and take practical measures to eliminate
those negative effects.
Generally speaking, any action taken by the Security
Council should be conducive to easing the situation in
the Middle East and promoting political reconciliation
8/11

11/07/2023

between Syria and the countries concerned, rather than
creating new tensions and difficulties.
In the recent period, Brazil and Switzerland did
a great deal of work as co-penholders. The United
Arab Emirates, China, Mozambique and other African
members of the Council also made positive efforts
towards resolving the issues at hand. However, the
positions within the Council were sharply divided, and
in particular, consensus failed to materialize on major
issues such as unilateral sanctions. As a result, the
Council was unable to make meaningful decisions on
a comprehensive and effective solution to those issues.
Dialogue and consultation are the best possible
means for resolving differences and forging consensus.
In order to resolve the current difficult situation facing
the Council, we call on all the parties to be rational
and pragmatic, demonstrate the necessary political
will, abandon double standards and the politicization of
humanitarian issues, continue to negotiate patiently and
to seek the greatest common denominator and solutions
that accommodate each other’s concerns.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): France
regrets that draft resolution (S/2023/506), submitted
by Switzerland and Brazil and supported by nearly
all members of the Security Council, was not adopted
owing to the lone veto of the Russian Federation. That
decision jeopardizes international humanitarian aid in
Syria and the survival of millions of people, at a time
when the needs have not been so high since 2011.
France commends Switzerland and Brazil’s
tireless efforts to reach a compromise. Cross-border
humanitarian aid remains vital for millions of Syrians.
The earthquake of 6 February tragically demonstrated
the importance of that channel. There is currently no
alternative means for providing assistance to more than
4 million people, at a time when the Syrian regime
continues to use aid for political ends.
The United Nations has been very clear. A one-year
renewal is necessary for the planning of humanitarian
operations. The Russian Federation has consistently
opposed that duration out of cynicism and political
manipulation. The draft resolution (S/2023/507) that it
submitted is proof of that and clearly does not take into
account the humanitarian needs in Syria. Let me remind
the Council that more than 90 per cent of humanitarian
aid to Syria is funded by the European Union and its
member States, the United States, Canada and Japan.
Russia provides virtually no humanitarian aid to Syria.
23-20022

11/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East

The humanitarian community unanimously
agrees that a mere six-month renewal is insufficient.
Humanitarian operations require predictability and
stability. A renewal for six months would be all the
more problematic, since it would plunge Syria into
uncertainty in the middle of winter at the very moment
when aid is most needed. That is why France voted
against the text proposed by the Russian Federation,
whose adoption, incidentally, was soundly rejected just
now. France calls on all Council members to show unity
and responsibility and to pursue dialogue with a view
to renewing this vital mechanism, as the SecretaryGeneral himself has called for, along with humanitarian
agencies and non-governmental organizations. France’s
determination and mobilization can be counted on to
that end.
Ms. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): The United States is committed to
reauthorizing the cross-border mechanism. And as I said
earlier this morning, that is a moral and humanitarian
imperative. The Syrian people are counting on us to get
it done. However, the United States could not in good
conscience support the text that Russia forced on the
Council. Russia’s draft resolution (S/2023/507) would
not have been able to ensure that aid would continue
to reach the Syrian people during the cold winter
months. Let us be clear. Both penholders on the Syrian
humanitarian file made every effort to listen to all
Council members and broker a compromise, and the 10
elected members of the Council were united. But Russia
refused to meaningfully participate in negotiations
and instead demanded that everyone accept its
ultimatum, like a bully in the playground. For Russia’s
representatives it was my way or the highway, and they
delayed the vote while they pretended to negotiate. And
then this morning we hear them say that if their draft
resolution is not adopted, it is over. That is their way
of negotiating. It is not the behaviour of a responsible
country, a permanent member of the Council. Russia
was not forced to exercise its veto this morning. It
chose to use it.
The United States will continue to work with all
Council members to renew this life-saving mechanism,
and we must urge Russia to reconsider its position, but
in the meantime, I want to make it clear that we will
continue to support the Syrian people.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): Brazil abstained
in the voting on draft resolution S/2023/507, some
elements of which, it is important to note, we included

S/PV.9371

in our co-penholders’ draft (S/2023/506). In our
capacity as co-penholder on this very difficult file on
the Security Council agenda, we worked tirelessly and
transparently with our dear Swiss friends and partners
in this to garner support for a consensus text guided by
the humanitarian imperative.
On one hand, Brazil has strong historical and
human ties to Syria, especially because of the presence
in our country of a long-established, sizable and vibrant
Syrian-Brazilian community. We are deeply concerned
about the acute humanitarian needs that the Syrian
people are facing these days, especially in the wake of
the deadly earthquake that hit it in February. On the
other hand, we insist that the text that the co-penholders
submitted is the best option for responding to the
humanitarian imperative in Syria today. It provides
for an extension of the current mechanism for a
time period that corresponds more closely to that
which was legitimately and authoritatively requested
by all humanitarian actors, governmental and
non-governmental, and in addition addresses legitimate
concerns raised by Syria. Now the absolute priority is
to ensure the uninterrupted and timely provision of
crucial aid to all Syrians in need, regardless of any
other political or ideological considerations. Given
the continued disturbing impasse in the Council, it is
paramount that we set aside political differences and
respond effectively to the Syrian people’s call for
humanitarian assistance. In its role as co-penholder
with Switzerland, Brazil remains committed to seeking
common ground and forging an essential compromise,
and will keep to that commitment until the end.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I asked for the floor not in order to enter
into polemics with my French colleague as regards the
assistance to Syria that he says Russia is not providing,
nor to recall the Brussels Conference, to which Syrians
are not invited and where aid is collected for people
who are outside Syria, without giving anything to
Syria itself and even creating obstacles to aid to Syria,
including through early-recovery projects. That is not
why I took the floor.
I understood that in one of the statements there
was a mention of work on the future fate of the crossborder mechanism, and I would like to repeat what
I said when I spoke after the vote on the BrazilSwitzerland resolution.

23-200229/11

S/PV.9371

The situation in the Middle East

“Of course, we can ... salvage the situation, but only
by supporting our draft resolution (S/2023/507),
which we will vote on [after...] the Swiss draft
resolution, and that provides for practical measures
to repair the cross-border mechanism. I am warning
everyone right here and now that if our draft is not
supported, the cross-border mechanism could be
closed down. In the circumstances, we will not
accept a technical rollover for any time period”.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): From the first day of consultations related to
the extension of the provisions of the resolution on the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to Syria, the Syrian
Arab Republic has firmly adopted a constructive
approach aimed solely at meeting the humanitarian
needs of Syrians in all parts of Syria, without any
politicization, discrimination or exclusion, particularly
in the aftermath of the devastating earthquake that
struck Syria in February. That disaster has had
enormous humanitarian repercussions and significantly
compounded an already fragile humanitarian situation.
It has made it imperative to address the situation
more effectively and promptly, deliver an expanded
humanitarian response and find sustainable solutions
to providing necessary basic services to Syrians.
The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic, the
primary party concerned with conveying the needs
of Syrians, engaged in an open and positive manner
with the humanitarian penholders and with friendly
countries on the Security Council. We expressed our
substantial concerns about their draft resolution clearly
and transparently, based on an objective assessment of
the application of resolution 2672 (2023), which has
revealed weaknesses in its implementation and shown
the scale of Syrians’ actual humanitarian needs. A
quantum leap is needed to upgrade the humanitarian
response so that it can address the living conditions and
service needs of Syrians effectively. In view of that,
my delegation expressed its view of how this Council
should respond to the humanitarian situation.
First, there is a need to accelerate cross-line
deliveries, particularly in view of the catastrophic
failure to facilitate any humanitarian convoys in the
past six months and in taking the necessary measures
to that end.
Secondly, there is a need to strengthen earlyrecovery projects in order to incorporate sustainable
development solutions, especially after the earthquake.
10/11

11/07/2023

In addition, other vital sectors of importance to the
Syrian people must be included in those projects, such
as support for demining and the removal of explosive
devices, given their significant impact on preserving
Syrian lives.
Thirdly, the necessary requirements must be met
for the safe, dignified and voluntary return of displaced
persons and refugees to their homes and lands.
Fourthly, there should be assurances that the illegal
and immoral unilateral coercive measures imposed by
the United States of America and the European Union
do not interfere with humanitarian relief operations
that benefit the Syrian people. They hinder the
implementation of the early-recovery projects referred
to in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/284).
Those who spoke today of life and death should
immediately lift their inhumane sanctions against the
Syrians, rather than shedding tears for them.
Fifthly, concerns about the decrease in funding for
the humanitarian response plan should be addressed
and donor countries should be called to honour their
pledges and increase humanitarian funding. The World
Food Programme alone will reduce its food assistance
to more than 2.5 million Syrians as a result of that
funding shortfall.
Sixthly, the duration of the resolution should be six
months, which would allow for a process of continuous
evaluation and regular follow-up of the implementation
of the aspects of that resolution.
We appreciate the efforts made by the humanitarian
co-penholders, but it is regrettable that the draft
resolution they presented (S/2023/506) did not reflect
the aspirations of the Syrian people, nor did it reassure
us that it could be implemented in good faith.
My delegation was surprised by the insistence on
extending the mandate of the cross-border mechanism
for a period of more than six months under the pretext
of the need for planning and predictability. At the
same time, we are left wondering how planning and
predictability can be ensured in the light of the huge
funding shortfall, which has not yet reached 12 per cent
of what is needed this year.
My delegation deplores the insistence of some
Western delegations in the Council on distorting the
facts and diverting the debate from the justified and
objective concerns expressed and supported by the
delegation of the Russian Federation, among others. The
23-20022

11/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East

continued politicization of humanitarian work by the
United States and its Western allies, their obstruction of
any sincere effort to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian
people and their perseverance in using the cross-border
mechanism as a tool of political pressure and blackmail
against my country is what led to the divisive positions
within the Council that we have witnessed today.
My delegation thanks the delegation of the
Russian Federation for its initiative to submit the draft
resolution just voted on (S/2023/507). Our thanks go
also to China for its support based on its keenness
to improve the humanitarian situation in Syria by
strengthening aspects of resolution 2672 (2023) and
ensuring the implementation of its essential pillars

S/PV.9371

to reflect positively on the humanitarian situation in
Syria. The draft resolution submitted by the delegation
of the Russian Federation represents a sincere attempt to
enable the Council to fulfil the responsibility entrusted
to it to improve the humanitarian situation in Syria in a
real and effective manner.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to thank
the delegation of our sisterly the United Arab Emirates
for its sincere efforts to reach a consensus-based text.
The time has come for the Security Council to unite
around an acceptable objective and balanced approach
to the humanitarian issue in Syria aimed solely at
meeting the humanitarian needs of the Syrian people.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

23-2002211/11
