UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
THIRTY-FOURTH

COUNCIL
RECORDS

YEAR

MAY2 8 1982

2143rd

MEETING:

NEW

30 ApRIw&jfs~

~~~~~~~~~~~

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2

143)

. . . . . . . . . . . %. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Adoption of the agenda . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 26 April 1979 from the Charge d’Afkires
a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of the Ivory Coast to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/13276)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Page

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
j
~Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the O@iaZ Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is
given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with .a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of ResoZutions and Decisions of the
Security Council The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2143rd MEETING
Held in New York on Monday 30 April 1979, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Mr. Ole ALGARD

(Norway).

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tlou (Botswana)
and Mr. Komatina (Yugoslavia) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.

3. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them document S/13282, which contains the text
of a draft resolution sponsored by Bangladesh, Bolivia,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria and Zambia. Members
also have before them document S/13283, which contains the text of a telegram dated 27 April from the
Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation
of the’Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to, Colonial Countries and
Peoples addressed to the President of the Council.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2143)
1. Adoption

of the agenda

2. Question concerning the situation in Southern
Rhodesia:
Letter dated 26 April 1979 from the Charge d’Affaires a.i; of the Permanent Mission of the Ivory
Coast to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/13276)

4. Mr. El-JEAAN (Kuwait): Mr. President, it gives me
great pleasure to congratulate you on the able manner in
which you have been presiding over our informal and
formal deliberations. I also wish to congratulate your
predecessor, Mr. Harriman of Nigeria, on his perseverance and dedication during a month in which the Council
was in almost continuous session.

The meeting was called to order at 4.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

5. The Security Council meets today at a crucial
moment in the life of Southern Rhodesia. The will of the
Council has already been clearly manifested in resolution
445 (1979), in which it condemned all attempts and manreuvres by the illegal regime, including its so-called elections of April 1979, aimed at retaining and extending
racist minority rule and at preventing the accession of
Zimbabwe to independence and genuine majority rule.

The agenda was adopted.
Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 26 April 1979 from tlie Charg6 d’Affaires
a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the Ivory Coast to the
U&d
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13276)

6. Some would no doubt claim that a government is
about to be installed in Rhodesia that has been chosen by
free elections in which all parties were allowed to participate freely and which were observed by impartial international observers. Bishop Abel Muzorewa, the declared
winner in the sham elections, is already making appeals
to the Patriotic Front freedom fighters to lay down their
arms and accept what he calls the will of the people.
Bishop Muzorewa has already called on the United Kingdom and the United States to lift economic sanctions and
to recognize his Government.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2142nd meeting, I invite the representatives
of India, the Ivory Coast, Kenya, Sri Lanka and the
Sudan to take the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President. Mr. JaipaI (India), Mr.
Sangaret (Ivory Coast), Mr. Maina (Kenya), Mr. Fernando
(Sri Lanka) and Mr. Sahloul (Sudan) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT:
I wish to inform members of the
Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Botswana and Yugoslavia in which they request
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the question on the agenda. In accordance with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

7. Reports in the western press abound concerning the
coercive and corrupt measures used to rig the elections.
The Washington Post of 27 April rightly pointed out that
the new constitution under which the elections were carried out was so stacked-with an automatic reserve of 28
per cent of the parliamentary seats and control of the
military, the police, the civil service and the judiciary for
whites, who constitute less than 4 per cent of the population-that
the elections, no matter the level or ostensible
fairness of the voting, could hardly be called free. The
I

installation of a new Government whose real task is to
perpetuate white control in a country where whites make
up only 4 per cent of the population. The constitutional
plan worked out by Ian Smith made sure that whites
would retain control of such key government functions as
the judiciary, the police and the military. It has been
rightly said that to observe or even acknowledge the
elections would serve only to validate the discriminatory
constitutional arrangement on which the elections rest’:

New York Times of 26 April went a bit further by saying:
“The real issue is not how the election was conducted! but
what it was about”. The newspaper, in its leading edttorial, then posed the question:.
“But if Rhodesia’s leaders really believe that their
constitutional formula for distributing power has the
overwhelming support of blacks, why did they allow
only whites to pass judgement on it in the earlier
referendum?”
The New York Times gave the following reply to the
question it had posed:

12. It is the understanding of my delegation that the
Council is not called upon to do anything new. It is
merely called upon to reaftirm its previous resolutions
and to expose the tactics of the illegal regime. We merely
wish to tell the illegal regime that behind the mask of
Bishop Muzorewa there hides the face of Ian Smith.
Hence, there can be no recognition of the Government to
be installed and the sanctions must remain.

“The electoral exercise just completed merely asked
voters to state a preference among the black parties
that had accepted Mr. Smiths-and
the white
minority’s-constitutional
plan. Voters opposed to the
plan had the choice of abstaining-at
the risk of reprisals from employers or soldiers-or of casting a dutiful
vote for the least distasteful of the collaborating parties. It is therefore a mistake to assume that all the
blacks who cast ballots, under conditions of martial
law, approved of the proposed structure.”

13. I should like to introduce the draft resolution contained in document S/13282 on behalf of the delegations
of Bangladesh, Bolivia, Gabon, Jamaica, Nigeria, Zambia and Kuwait.
14. The draft resolution reaffirms the illeealitv of the
Smith regime and reaffirms resolution 445 (i979’j, which
is more timely than ever, since it declares that any elections held under the auspices of the illegal racist regime
and the results thereof will be null and void. The draft
resolution recognizes the obvious when it states that the
so-called elections were designed to perpetuate racist
minority rule. The draft resolution condemns the socalled elections of April 1979 and reaffums that they are
null and void. It reiterates the call to all States not to
accord recognition to any representatives or organ established by that process and to observe strictly the mandatory sanctions against Southern Rhodesia.

8. With regard to the conduct of the elections themselves, The New York Times of 27 April had this to say:
“. . . serious doubts were raised by the potential for
forced voting in hundreds of ‘protected villages,’ where
tribesmen have been forcibly gathered during the war,
and in tribal areas patrolled by military ‘auxiliaries*
loyal to Bishop Muzorewa and to his principal internal
rival, the Reverend Ndabaningi Sithole.
“Another problem for advocates of recognition was
the effort to deter peaceful opposition. In the Bulawayo
area, a stronghold of... Joshua Nkomo, the police
detained some 900 -Nkomo supporters to head off a
boycott campaign. In Salisbury, 500 black students at
the University of Rhodesia were intercepted by police
when they attempted to march off the campus in protest against the voting.*’

15. We are confident that the members of the Council
will adhere to the Charter and the previous decisions of
the Council and not fail the people of Zimbabwe at this
crucial stage in their history.
16. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of India. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.

9. In these circumstances, one could rightly ask what is
the purpose of these elections7 Well, Mr. Ian Smith
visited the United States a few months ago to persuade
the American Congress and Administration to recognize
his Government and lift the sanctions. He brought with
him Bishop Muzorewa who is now proclaimed as the
victor in the elections. Hence the elections are envisaged
as a means of persuading Western Governments to recognize the illegal regime and lift the sanctions.

17. Mr. JAIPAL (India): Mr. President, first of all let
me express my delegation’s gratitude to you and to the
other members of the Council for giving us this opportunity to place before the Council our views on the present situation in Rhodesia. I would also extend to you our
warm congratulations for your dedicated leadership and
skilful guidance of the Council during this difficult
month; and I say this with full knowledge of the problems
you have had to face both as President of the Council and
as representative of Norway.

10. One should emphasize, however, that there is
nothing new in the situation. The position of the Council
is clearly defined in resolution 445 (1979). If the Council
meets today, it is merely to reaffirm its previous position
and to thwart any attempt by the illegal regime to mislead
the world community.

18. The Council is now considering the situation in
Rhodesia resulting from the elections held by the illegal
regime this month. The Minister for External Affairs of
my country denounced those eiections as “neither free
nor fair”. They were in fact an elaborate fraud conceived
and executed by the illegal regime in order to create ,a
black facade for white rule. White illegality does not

11. The Security Council cannot give its blessing to an
election in a country where martial law is in effect, where
voters are accompanied to the polls by security forces,
and where no voices opposed to the election process are
allowed to be heard. How can the Council agree to the
2

become any more acceptable by the addition of some
black colouring to it. And giving it a black veneer
through an electoral process makes both democracy and
independence doubly counterfeit.

clear: it is to uphold the Charter and the principles of
decolonization and to vote unanimously in favour of the
draft resolution, which seeks only to reaffirm the Council’s well-established position.

19. It is not my purpose to discuss the so-called constitution under which the elections were held. It is sufficient
to draw attention to the fact that that constitution was
framed without the participation of the political parties
that have been engaged in the national liberation struggle. Furthermore, it is an imposed constitution that is a
typical paternalistic arrangement providing for the trappings of black visibility, while leaving the levers of real
power with the white minority. No colonial territory has
emerged to independent nationhood on such an absurd
basis of constitutional change without any real transfer of
power.

25. Mr. LEPRETTE
(France) (interprefatiop from
French): This being the first time this month that I have
spoken in the Council, I should like, Mr. President, to say
how pleased I am at seeing the Council presided over by
the representative of a country which has long-standing
ties of friendship with mine. My delegation has especially
admired the competence, authority and dedication with
which you have personally conducted the many delicate
consultations of these past weeks.
26. I wish also to pay a tribute to the effective work
accomplished during the month of March, a particularly
busy one for the Council, under the active presidency of
Ambassador Harriman, the representative of Nigeria.

20. I cannot see anv nractical merit in it for the white
minority even for thd short term. The black majority is
not going to take very long to realize how securely it has
been tied hand and foot, though the mouth may be left
free of restraint. It does not need a prophet to predict that
frustrations will mount rapidly among the black majority
when it discovers the extent of its deception.

27. France’s .position on the agenda item before us is
clear. My country fully appreciates why the elections
organized and held in Southern Rhodesia by an illegal
Government in disregard of recommendations of the
international community have aroused condemnation
and strong feelings within the United Nations and why it
has become necessary for the Security Council to meet
once again to consider the resultant situation.

21. Official recognition of the newly elected leadership
as the legitimate Government of independent Zimbabwe
would be tantamount to violation of the Charter, The
Charter calls for termination of colonial rule through the
attainment by the people of genuine independence. Until
then the United Nations must remain the trustee for
Zimbabwe and its people. Neither the United Nations nor
its Member States should lend any support or extend any
sort of recognition either to the elections or to the new
regime.

28. However, as my delegation has repeatedly stated
here, the only legitimate authority which my country
recognizes at the present time in Southern Rhodesia is
that of the United Kingdom. Moreover, the entire international community recognizes the special responsibilities of the British Government vi.+a-vis its colony. Yet
today that Government, for reasons of which no one is
unaware, is not in a position to take any major decisions
on the matter. Therefore, the convening of the Security
Council on the subject of Rhodesia does not seem particularly well-timed. That is why France cannot associate
itself with a draft resolution dealing with the responsibilities of the administering Power, when that Power has not
yet had an opportunity to take a stand as it sees tit.

22. The existing sanctions should be continued until the
latest subversion of the process of decolonization is rectified. And this rectification will not be possible until all the
constituent elements of the national liberation movement
accept a negotiated basis for peaceable transfer of real
power to the majority in terms of General Assembly
resolution 15 14 (XV)-one which will also take fully into
account the legitimate interests of the minority.
23. The anomaly of white rule which began in Rhodesia
in 1921 is now seeking respectability under the guise of
black acquiescence. A new disturbing dimension is provided by the ready and quick support for it from South
Africa, which remains the last stronghold of racism. We
see in this an attempt by the Pretoria regime to forge an
empire in southern Africa based on a cosmetic concept of
racism. It will not last, of course, nor will it succeed; but I
am afraid that it may prolong and even widen the base of
the struggle.

29. To that political consideration may be added a
consideration of a legal nature. The draft before us in its
preamble restates the eleventh paragraph of resolution
445 (1979), the controversial language of which prompted my delegation to abstain from voting on 8 March last.
On that same occasion [2122nd meeting] I none the less
set forth unambiguously France’s attitude towards the
elections that were about to be held in Rhodesia. The fact
that they have been heid since then does not change their
nature; in our view, they remain fundamentally flawed in
that they were arranged by a Government set up under an
agreement judged inappropriate by the United Kingdom.

24. Constitutional niceties cannot hide the face of racial
subordination. Independence is the natural end of colonial constitutional advancement-not
an unprincipled
political expedient foisted on a war-weary people for the
sake of peace. Peace bought at the expense of principle or
justice cannot endure. The duty of the Security Council is

30. Furthermore,
regardless of the percentage of
participation proudly announced by Ian Smith after the
vote, doubts arise by reason of the imposing police and
military apparatus deployed on that occasion. One may
wonder whether weapons were not used to convince
rather than to protect and guarantee the free application
3

/-

of the rules of genuine democracy. In these circumstances, my Government remains determined to apply
strictly, as it has always done, the sanctions in effect
against the rebellious colony.

to the so-called representatives of the majority of the
population of Zimbabwe. This obvious tactic of the racist
regime is part of a broader plan to transform the problem
of racism and colonialism, the existence and maintenance
of which is condemned by the whole world, into an
internal issue-that is, to present it as an internal problem of African countries. The immediate aim is the creation of satellite bantustan entities around South Africa,
which would not only provide a base for the system of
racial oppression and exploitation but also pose a constant threat to the independence and security of African
countries. The actual purpose of such manceuvres, which
characterize the situation in Namibia as well, is to perpetuate the system of domination over a significant part of
the African continent, which would remain a preserve for
the acquisition of profits and the maintenance of strategic
strongholds.

31. The electoral operation which has taken place in
Rhodesia has only added to the confusion and complicated the efforts to bring about a settlement. The United
Kingdom and the United States recently appealed to all
parties to get together without prior conditions in order
to define conditions that would allow the emergence of a
legitimately independent Zimbabwe. France hopes that
that appeal will be heeded.
32. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
33. Mr. KOMATINA
(Yugoslavia): I wish to thank the
Security Council for having given me this opportunity to
explain my country’s position with regard to the situation
prevailing in Southern Rhodesia at this particular
moment, which is of great importance to the national
liberation struggle of the people of Zimbabwe, nowentering its decisive stage.

38. These obvious colonial designs could not deceive
the international public, and the scenario of the strategy
conceived by the racists met with a timely and unequivocal response., By its resolution 445 (1979), the Security
Council condemned the intention of holding so-called
elections and emphasized that the results of such elec- a
tions would be null and void and that representatives and
organs elected under the auspices of the racist regime
would not be recognized by the United Nations or its
Member States.

34. I congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption and
carrying out of the functions of President of the Council
and express the conviction that your diplomatic skill and
political wisdom will contribute positively towards the
successful outcome of the debate on this question, which
is important to peace and security not only in Africa but
also in the world at large. An additional reason for wishing you successstems from the excellent relations existing
between our two countries, as well as from our long
personal friendship, which I consider to be one of the
highlights of my career.

39. The racist rCgime turned a deaf ear to the decisions
of the world Organization and, supported by powerful
imperialist interests, held sham elections conducted
under the coercion of the repressive military-political
apparatus. In such conditions, the elections, far from
being free, were actually transformed into an ordinary
masquerade. The fact that they could be held with impunity constitutes a challenge to the conscience of the whole
of mankind. This entails the responsibility of all of us and
in particular the responsibility of countries which,
through their economic, political and other ties with
South Africa, can and should exert decisive pressure with
a view to preventing this quasidemocratic
trick from
obtaining even the beginning of international recognition
and, even more, preventing its being used as a pretext for
abolishing sanctions against the illegal r&me of Southern
Rhodesia. What is more, the holding of elections and the
defiance of and the failure to comply with the decisions of
the Organization confirm our view that in response to
this challenge it is imperative to lay even greater stresson
the question of strict application of mandatory sanctions
and of their extension to all areas, from oil to nuclear
technology, and to check any step taken in the aforementioned sense by the forces supporting the racists.

35. I also wish to pay a tribute to your predecessor, the
‘representative of Nigeria, Mr. Harriman, for his dedication and for the skilful manner in which he conducted the
deliberations of the Council in the month of March.
36. The Council has dealt with the same problem
recently. The result of the debate held on’that occasion
was an expression of solidarity with the people of Zimbabwe and with its struggle to achieve independence and
to decide its own fate in a free and independent State of
Zimbabwe. At that time it was noted that the minority
colonial regime in Southern Rhodesia continued to
pursue a policy of brutal repression against the people of
Zimbabwe, endeavouring at the same time to legalize
neo-colonial relations through a so-called internal settlement, to carry out plans aimed at breaking up the
national unity of Zimbabwe and the united front of fighters for freedom and thus prevent the genuine independence and free development of the people of Zimbabwe,
which enjoy broad international support.

40. Proceeding from the policy and positions of the
non-aligned movement, which were further elaborated
and confirmed at the Ministerial Meetings at Belgrade in
July 1978 and at Maputo in February 1979, and with
regard to the specific case of the illegal elections in Southern Rhodesia and the statement issued by the Coordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries in New
York on 16 April [S/132.52], the non-aiigned countries
have in word and deed expressed their firm resolve to

37. From all this it clearly appears that the purpose of
the internal solution is to prolong the life of the rtgime of
oppression in a new garb by creating the falseimpression
that racial discrimination and apartheid have been abolished and that power has, as they allege, been transferred
4
.. -- ‘- - ..

contribute-by
supporting the national Ii&ration strug
gle of Zimbabwe in all its forms under the leadership of
the Patriotic Front-to the liquidation of racism and.the
foiling of all manoeuvres aimed at portraying that rCgime
as representing majority rule. It is not and it cannot be a
rule of the majority because, beside the stage&managed
character of the elections, the instruments of real power
have remained in the hands of the racist minority. The
national forces of Zimbabwe have repudiated those manceuvres, and Africa has condemned them. It is therefore
incumbent upon the Security Council and all the
members of the international community to do the same,
both in order to give assistance to the peopie of Zimbabwe and to fulfil their duty in furtherance of universal
peace and freedom in general.

utesas a matter of urgency. Any procrastination on our
part would make us willing or unwilling accomplices in
the legalization of a system of oppression that we have
ourselves proclaimed to be a crime against mankind, a
system that treats with scorn all the values that have
asserted themselves in the evolution of the international
community. My country will support every effective
action leading to the liquidation of that system.
44. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Botswana, who wishes to make a statement on
behalf of the front-line States. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make a statement.
45. Mr. TLOU (Botswana): Mr. President, I thank you
and the other members of the Council for according me
the opportunity to participate in this very important
debate on behalf of the front-line States-Angola, Botswana, Mozambique, the United Republic of Tanzania
and Zambia. I need not add that it is always a singular
honour to speak on behalf of this group of States which,
acting under the supreme mandate given to them by the
Organization of African Unity, have untiringly and
unflinchingly sought ways to resolve the crisis that continues to bedevil the British colony of Southern Rhodesia; and this they have done at great risk to their own
countries and peoples, as evidenced by the now only too
familiar, and repeated aggression against them. But then
the price of principle is always very high.

41. The substance of the positions of non-aligned countiies was explained in detail at the last meeting of the
Security Council by the Chairman of the Co-ordinating
Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries, the representative of
Sri Lanka, Ambassador Fernando. We therefore believe
that the task facing the Council at present is to reaffirm
the stands embodied in resolution 445 (1979), to reject the
elections and all quisling substitutes arising therefrom, to
condemn South Africa, to draw the attention of the.world
to the dangers inherent in the current situation and to
take effective measures against the rampaging of South
Africa, which threatens peace and security in Africa and
throughout the world.

46. Mr. President, you have the onerous task of guiding
this debate to a successful conclusion and, in congratulating you upon the assumption of the presidency for this
month, I should like to wish you well in this exercise and
to express our full confidence in youcguidance, since you
are endowed with such great diplomatic skills and since
you represent Norway, a country whose Support for the
struggling peoples of southern Africa is well known.

42. Yugoslavia will, as in the past, continue to lend full
material, political and diplomatic assistance and support
to the struggle of the peoples of southern Africa, particularly those of Zimbabwe and Namibia, to achieve independence and to decide their own fate without outside
interference. Such a position has also been adopted by the
Committee of 24,’ whose session in Belgrade, opened on
23 April, has just closed. In his message addressed to that
session of the Committee, the President of the Socialist
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, losip Broz Tito,
emphasized, among other things, that southern Africa
was increasingly turning into a very dangerous crisis area
constituting a threat to peace not only in the region of
Africa but in the world in general. He said that, because
of the difficult situation in southern Africa, it was necessary to undertake concrete actions and adopt measures
for the urgent and unconditional withdrawal of South
Africa from Namibia and for the establishment of majority rule in Zimbabwe. He also emphasized that it was
imperative to put into effect all the measures necessary
for the total international isolation of those rtgimes and
the application of effective sanctions.

47. Speaking after the Chairman of the African Group
for this month, the current President of the Organization
of African Unity, the representative of the Patriotic Front
and others, I can afford to be very brief, since the African
position regarding recent developments in Southern
Rhodesia has been amply stated. It therefore only
remains for me to make a few remarks and merely reaffirm the front-line States’ stand on the bogus elections in
Rhodesia.
48. At their meeting held on 3 and 4 March 1979 at
Luanda, the front-line Presidents declared the so-called
elections in April null and void. I reaffirm that position
today.

43. We expect that the Security Council will take the
necessary measures against the minority racist r6gimes
without delay. The constant deterioration of the situation
in southern Africa due to intensified repressive measures
against the peoples of that region and daily aggression
and terrorist acts against the independent African frontline States makes it imperative to undertake these meas‘Special Committeeon the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independenceto Colonial

49. The front-line States remain committed to a search
for a genuine solution to the Zimbabwean problem: a
solution which will enable the people of Zimbabwe to
exercise their inalienable right to self-determination and
true independence; a solution which will end the state of
illegality and white minority privilege and control which
the Smith “constitution”
seeks further to entrench and
perpetuate. Only a democratic constitution approved by
the people of Zimbabwe as a whole can enable them to
choose their true leaders in a free and fair election.‘.

Countries and Peoples.

5

50. What is important in any election-and
especially
in an election that should mark the transition from colonialism to independence-is not so much the electioneering processes, very important though they are, as the
constitution under which such an election is held. Failure
to grasp this essential fact can easily lead to futile, confused and distorted assessments of the recent so-called
elections in Southern Rhodesia, which, in effect, were a
gigantic farce whose only result can be to throw our
region into yet greater chaos and insecurity.

56. Such is the clear choice facing those who are entertaining ideas of recognizing the regime. Besides, to
encourage the rkgime in any way, including being equivocal about whether or not to recognize it, can only prolong
the war which we all want to end; for Smith and his
collaborators will hobble along hoping that international
recognition will eventually be forthcoming.
57. Recognition of the regime will further strengthen
the unholy alliance now unfolding in southern Africa
similar to the Salisbury-Lisbon-Pretoria
one that was
toppled by the victorious revofutions against Portuguese
colonialism. The South African Prime Minister has
recently stated that he is embarking upon the creation of
a new alliance in southern Africa. That alliance will
certainly include the illegal regime at Salisbury, which
some are now talking of recognizing. For our region, this
will mean not only the intensification of oppression of the
majority in the white-ruled countries but also increased
attacks against the front-line States. Indeed, in recent
weeks the illegal regime in Salisbury has escalated its
attacks against Botswana, Mozambique and Zambia,
and not so long ago South Africa attacked Angola.

51. Document S/13277, which is before this august
body, very ably exposes the Ian Smith elections for what
they really are-yet one more attempt to hoodwink the
world and buy time for Smith’s tottering regime, which
will henceforth, until its demise, operate through the
agency of some men with black faces.
52. Detailed analyses have been made elsewhere, for
example in a recent study by the Commonwealth Secretariat entitled “An Analysis of the Illegal Regime’s ‘Constitution for Zimbabwe-Rhodesia**’ [S/13235]. The verdict
is unanimous and unequivocal. The so-called constitution and, consequently, the fraudulent elections held
under it are intended to entrench the status quo in Rhodesia, namely, by preserving racism, colonialism and effective white minority control of the socio-economic and
.mihtary structures of the country. The following brief
quotation from the Commonwealth Secretariat study of
the Smith “constitution” puts in a nutshell the real nature
and intention of that document:

58. Therefore, as a first and immediate step foilowing
the bogus elections, the international community should
refrain from recognizing the Salisbury regime. Secondly,
the international community should continue to support
the struggle of the people of Zimbabwe, led by the Patriotic Front, in addition to sustaining the sanctions against
the illegal regime.

. . . virtually every lever of institutional power has
been retained in white hands;. . . the people at large are
bequeathed a government bereft of the power to govern
effectively and a legislature denuded of all means either
to change the ~taru.r quo or to advance the legitimate
aspirations of the nation as a whole. Taken as a whole
and judged by the democratic standards claimed for it
by its proponents, it is revealed as a carefully woven,
carefully contrived subterfuge for sustaining a wholly
antidemocratic
regime.”

59. The Security Council should give the lead in this
direction by unanimously adopting the draft resolution
now before it [S/13282] by which it rejects the results of
those elections. Any hesitation on the part of even one
member alone could encourage Smith and his collaborators to continue along the road to certain disaster.
60. For their part, the front-line States wilI continue to
support the struggling people of Zimbabwe, despite
attacks against us, for no other reason than that we are on
the side of justice. No amount of intimidation can make
us abandon this sacred duty.

53. That, then, is the “constitution’*
that the illegal
regime, in an attempt to win international recognition
and thus end the sanctions decreed by the Security Council, has imposed upon the people of Zimbabwe through
the so-called elections.

61. Mr. HULINSK~
(Czechoslovakia) (interpreration
from Russian): Mr. President, allow me, albeit at the very
end of the month, to congratulate you officially on having assumed the responsible post of President of the
Security Council; better late than never. At the same
time, I should also like to thank you for your able guidance of the work of the Council this month.

54. Of recent days there have been reports and statements emanating from certain quarters that, on the basis
of the recent Smithdirected elections, sanctions ought to
be lifted and the illegal r&me recognized.

62. The recent turn of events in Southern Rhodesia is
yet another proof that the aims of the Smith policies have
always been to preserve colonial domination by the racist
minority over the people of Zimbabwe in whatever form.

55. Quite clearly, recognition of the illegal regime,
which will now be led by a powerless black man who
perforce must dance to Smith’s tune, will mean making a
clear choice between supporting the legitimate struggle of
the Zimbabwean people for genuine freedom and aligning with the forces of racism, colonialism and gross
exploitation. Those who recognize the regime will find
themselves on the side of South Africa, which is the main
backer of the illegal regime.

Many years of struggle waged over the People of
Zimbabwe and their relentless resurgence under the guidance of the Patriotic Front, which enjoys all-round
support from anti-colonialist
forces in the world, have
certainly made the fall and the complete elimination of
63.

6

the racist Smith regime inevitable. As was noted in the
tinal communique
of the Extraordinary
Ministerial
Meeting of the Co-ordinating
Bureau of Non-Aligned
Countries held this year in Maputo:

condemned all attempts and manmuvres by the illegal
regime to prevent Zimbabwe from attaining independence. They state that any internal settlement and any
elections conducted under the aegis of the illegal regime
would be illegal and unacceptable and call upon all States
not to recognize any representatives or organ established
as a result of that process.

“By virtue of its extension in depth throughout the
entire Territory, the liberation struggle has reached an
advanced stage, which has weakened the position of
imperialism and enables the Patriotic Front to dictate
the pace of the advance to genuine independence in
Zimbabwe.”
[S/13185, annex, para. 46.1

69. Notwithstanding
the unequivocal decisions taken
by the Council, certain Western countries, particularly
the United States and the United Kingdom, are openly
taking steps to recognize the results of those illegal elections and the entire internal settlement process. The lifting of the mandatory sanctions decided upon by the
Council against the racist regime is under way. Despite
the various arguments which are advanced to justify
those steps, the behaviour of the allies of the racists is
totally unjustifiable, since it runs counter to the resolutions adopted by the Security Council and by the General
Assembly.

64. Recognizing that fact, the racists, assisted by their
protectors, have made efforts to prevent the natural outcome of the struggle and to force on the African majority
a settlement which would fully ensure their own selfseeking interests and the interests of the economic and
political circles of Western countries.
65. Those goals are the basis of the entire policy of the
racists, namely, to put the so-called internal settlement
into effect in Zimbabwe and thereby to prevent the sole
legitimate representative
of the people, the Patriotic
Front, from resolving the fate of its people. The recently
held rigged elections were part and parcel of that policy.
They were staged by the Smith regime and took place in
an atmosphere of terror directed against those who are
struggling for genuine freedom for their people. They
also took place in a situation of sharp escalation of acts of
aggression by the rigime against neighbouring independent African States.

70. A just solution of the Rhodesian problem can and
should only be obtained through the ,immediate elimination of the minority regime and the prompt transfer of
power in Zimbabwe to the genuine representatives of the
African majority, the national liberation movement, that
is to say, the Patriotic Front. In order to achieve that, it is
essential for all States consistently to implement all the
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly and it is just as essential for all States to apply
all the sanctions against the Smith regime and its ally, the
apartheid regime of South Africa.

66. Speaking before the Security Council, the representative of the Patriotic Front, Mr.Ndlovu,
said the
following:

71. In view of the continued manoeuvring by the racist
regime and its allies, we support, as representing the
necessary minimum, the proposal by the African Group
at the United Nations that the Security Council should
once again reaffu-m that the so-called elections conducted
under the aegis of the illegal racist regime and their results
are null and void. All States should be called upon not to
recognize any representatives or organ established as a
result of that process and mandatory sanctions against
Southern Rhodesia should be strictly enforced.

“Those elections were neither free nor fair because,
before they took place, thousands of opponents of the
Smith regime were thrown into prison following the
banning of the Zimbabwe African People’s Union and
the Zimbabwe African National Union in September
1978. The arrest and detention of opponents of the
regime cleared the way for elements sympathetic to the
so-called internal settlement to have free run throughout the country, backed by the armed forces which
burnt and destroyed homes of people opposed to the
so-called
internal
settlement.” ’ [2242nd meeting,
para. 20.1

72. Mr. MILLS (Jamaica): Mr. President, on behalf of
my delegation, I pay a tribute to you for the very manner
in which you have been conducting the affairs of the
Security Council during this month. You have done this
with the judicious mixture of firmness and good humour
for which you are so well known in the United Nations,
and this has greatly facilitated the work of the Council.

67. Obviously, in those circumstances there could be no
pretence even of any transfer of power to the majority in
the country. That possibility was excluded by the entire
policy of the racists and indeed by the constitution itself
which was adopted by the white minority to maintain its
political, economic and social domination in the country.

73. I also take the opportunity of expressing to Ambassador Harriman of Nigeria our appreciation for the skilful and effective manner in which he guided the work of
the Council during the month of March, which proved to
be a very active one for the Council.

68. The so-called internal settlement of the Rhodesian
problem and all the actions undertaken by the racists
which stem from the plan are as illegal as the regime itself.
As such they have been soundly repudiated by the people
of Zimbabwe and by the overwhelming majority of the
Members of the United Nations. The Security Council, in
its resolutions 423 (1978) and 445 (1979), unequivocally

74. The Council is again meeting to discuss the situation in Rhodesia in circumstances that are most unusual
and in fact critical. But the truth is that nothing that is
really new or unexpected has happened. In the face of the
overwhelming
and strongly expressed position of the
7

international community and in the face of the specitic
and clear decisions of the Security Council, the racist
&gime of Ian Smith has proceeded with the pretence of
an election. On the basis of this fraudulent manceuvre, the
r+gime has launched a campaign, particularly in the United States and the United Kingdom, for recognition and
support.

79. There is a particular aspect of the situation in Zimbabwe to which reference has been made in this debate
and in the press. It is the matter ofthe offer of substantial
military and economic aid by South Africa to-the new
regime which it is proposed to install ,in Zimbabwe following the so-called elections, and of the South African
concept of a constellation of States, including South
Africa and Rhodesia. All of this was fully confirmed in a
television interview screened yesterday, in which Bishop
Muzorewa declared under questioning that he wouId
readily accept such aid from South Africa. It is my belief
and the belief of my delegation that that entire interview
served to underline the tragedy facing’the people of Zimbabwe and the great risk of the betrayal of their interests
and their hopes.

75. One cannot escape the feeling in this matter of
Rhodesia that the situation is more than grotesque. What
we have here is the spectacle of an illegal regime that has
ruled for 14 years on a basis of white minority domination of the black population and that has deceived all who
have attempted to negotiate acceptable approaches to
independence on a basis of majority will and majority
rule turning around and asking the world to accept the
result of a managed election held under most extraordinary circumstances in order that a government of some
sort may be formed under a constitution which is itself an
instrument of continuing white minority domination.

80. In the view of my delegation, any action.by any
member of the international community which lends credence or gives comfort to such regime as may be installed
will merely contribute to this tragedy and make more
certain the continuing and increasingly bitter military
conflict which seems quite unavoidable in that unhappy
country.

76. The events of the past few weeks, culminating in the
carefully stage-managed so-called elections, represent
nothing more than a movement from a number of unwarranted and unacceptable assumptions to a foregone and
equally unacceptable conclusion. The only thing that
might be regarded as new, and it is not really all that new,
is the possibility that this latest trick of Ian Smith’s may
work; to the extent that some credence may be given to it
in some quarters.

81. Mr. LA1 Ya-li (China) (interpreration from Chinese): Mr. President, today is 30 April, the last day of the
month of April. However, I am pIeased to extend, on
behalf of the Chinese delegation, our warm congratulations to you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the current month. At the same time,
my congratulations also go to Ambassador Harriman for
the outstanding manner in which he performed his functions as President for the month of March in most complicated_. circumsta.nces. .’ ?,..,,..y. ,,(..<, ‘” 1 “I --1* .”

77. The position of Jamaica on this matter is simple and
fundamental. Along with the vast majority of the internat
tional community, we have rejected totally the notion of
such an election as the Smith regime planned to undertake, In this respect, Jamaica,in March of this year, voted
with other members of the Council in favour of resolution 445 (1979) which rejects any manoeuvres by the
Smith regime aimed at perpetuating racist minority rule
and preventing the accession of Zimbabwe to independence and majority rule. Jamaica fully endorsed the call
in that resolution to all States to refrain from according
any recognition to any representatives or organ established by way of the proposed elections.

82. The farce of sham parliamentary elections stagemanaged by the racist regime of Southern Rhodesia has
come to a close. Although Ian Smith and his company
have shouted themselves hoarse to describe the elections
as free and fair, they are in fact sheer phoney elections
conducted at ,bayonet point, as has been rightly pointed
out by the representative of the Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe and many African representatives in their
statements.
83. As is known to all, the so-called elections were
conducted entirely under the threats and blandishments
of the Smith authorities. Over a long period, Ian Smith
took a series of military measures and brazenly imposed a
nation-wide curfew in order to protect the sham elections
in pursuance of his programme for “internal settlement”.
During the elections, the racist authorities dispatched.
over 100,000 troops and armed police to force the voters
to go to the polls and brutally to suppress and arrest the
blacks who were opposed to the elections. At the same
time, they repeatedly invaded such front-line States as
Zambia and Mozambique from the air and the ground,
carried out barbarous armed attacks on the Zimbabwe
refugee and guerrilla camps in those States and even
launched a wanton sneak attack& Lusaka, the capital of
Zambia, in an attempt to kill a leader of the Patriotic
Front of Zimbabwe. The commander of the armed forces
of the Smith regime even brazenly clamoured that the

78. My delegation supported the request by the Group
of African States for this series of meetings of the Security
Council, not because there was any need to make new
assessments or new pronouncements on the issue, but in
order that the Council could reaffirm in strong termsthe
position and the decisions already expressed on the illegality of the Smith regime, the total unacceptability of
the sham elections and their results, and the necessity of
all States’ observing the mandatory sanctions against
Rhodesia. Such reafftrmation has become necessary particularly in the.iight of reports which seem to i.ndicate the
possibility that some credence may be given to the elections and their results. My delegation has therefore joined
in sponsoring the draft resolution just introduced by the
representative of Kuwait [S/Z3282l, and hopes that itwil1
receive the support of all members of the Council.
8

1

_.

: ;1

87. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): Mr. President,
first of all I should like to welcome you as President of the
Security Council for the month of April. You have done
much this month that has been useful, and I hope that this
meeting will conclude with the adoption of a useful resolution which will resolve the problem of Southern
Rhodesia.

military actions they took at home and abroad were
aimed at ensuring “the right atmosphere’* for the
elections.
84. The phoney elections engineered single-handedly
by the Smith authorities were staged at a time when those
authorities were in the grip of political and economic
crises at home and extreme isolation abroad. The reactionary authorities of Southern Rhodesia met with
increasingly strong condemnation from the Zimbabwe
people and world opinion following Ian Smith’s unilateral declaration of his determination to go ahead with his
fraudulent “internal settlement’* in February last year
and the subsequent hasty rigging-up of a so-called transitional government. With the support of the African
States and people and the people of the whole world, the
Zimbabwean people have found themselves in a more
favourable situation in their struggle for national independence and liberation. The armed struggle grows
stronger, spreading to many places, including the rural
areas of Zimbabwe. In order to save itself from its tottering reactionary rule, the Smith regime, defying universal
condemnation, has again resorted to political gimmicks
and stage-managed the latest bogus elections while intensifying armed repression in an attempt to legalize its
reactionary rule and enable the whites, who comprise
only 4 per cent of the population, to continue the absolute
power of minority rule over the whole of Southern
Rhodesia. But this is only the wishful thinking of a handful of racists. The bogus elections stage-managed by the
Smith rkgime can in no way help the racists. It will be
repudiated and condemned unanimously by the people of
Zimbabwe and all other African States and by the international community as a whole. Furthermore, it reveals
once again the recalcitrance of Ian Smith and his company, who will never lightly give up their reactionary
racist rule over the Zimbabwe people. The perverse acts
of Ian Smith and his company will cause the Zimbabwe
people to get further united for more resolute struggle
and hasten the destruction of the racist regime and the
triumph of the people.

88. I take this opportunity to express the hope that
relations of good neighbourliness and fruitful cooperation between the Soviet Union and Norway will
continue to develop in the interests of our countries and
peoples and in the interest of strengthening peace and
security in Europe and, indeed, throughout .the world.
89. On behalf of the delegation of the Soviet Union, I
should like also to express our gratitude to the representative of Nigeria, Mr. Harriman, who accomplished a
great deal of work in guiding the Council during March.
In doing so, he demonstrated his outstanding diplomatic
qualities, which are so widely known in the United
Nations.
90. It is not quite two months since the Security Council
last took up the question of the situation in Southern
Rhodesia, but once again the Council is compelled to
revert to that question. I recall that on 8March, the
Council adopted resolution 445 (1979), in which it decisively condemned the aggressive actions of the Smith
rkgime against neighbouring African States as well as all
attempts and manceuvres by the illegal regime aimed at
preventing the accession of Zimbabwe to independence
and genuine majority rule. The Council then declared
that any elections held under the auspices of the illegal
racist regime and the results thereof would be null and
void and that no recognition would be’accorded by either
the United Nations or any Member State to any representatives or organ established by that process.
91. Much has been said about the situation in Southern
Rhodesia since the recent rigged elections. Now what is
that situation at the present time? Despite the condemnation by the Council and the fact that any so-called internal settlement under the auspices of the racist regime of
Smith has been declared illegal and unacceptable, only a
few days ago Southern Rhodesia completed the farce of
the so-called elections. These were carried out in order to
perpetuate the colonial and racist’rtgime in that country,
to maintain de facto colonialist rule and to prevent the
genuine representatives of the people of Zimbabwe under
the Patriotic Front from coming to power.

85. The Chinese Government and people firmly support the Zimbabwe people in their just struggle for
national independence and liberation under the leadership of the Patriotic Front. We firmly support the views
expressed by the African States and the Patriotic Front.
We hold that the Security Council should strongly condemn the Smith authorities for their stage-managed sham
elections and reaffirm that they are illegal and null and
void. The Council should also consider the strengthening
and expansion of sanctions against Southern Rhodesia.
We are deeply convinced that, with the support and
assistance of the African States and people, the Zimbabwe people will overcome super-Power meddling and
sabotage, strengthen their unity for intensified struggle
and attain a truly independent and free Zimbabwe.

92. But the farce dreamt UP by Smith and his puppets
does not deceive anyone, either in the United Nations or
outside it. We are not deceived by it. The so-called eiections were conducted on the basis of the internal settlement agreement that was condemned by the United
Nations but signed by Smith and a group of collaborators
and.ln accordance with the so-called constitution, which
was rigged up by the white settlers of Southern Rhodesia.
That shameful document merely strengthened the domination of a liandful of racists over the majority of the

86. On the basis of the foregoing position, the Chinese
delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution
contained in document S/i3282 sponsored by Bangladesh and six other non-aligned Member States.
9

*-

indigenous population. In accordance with Smith’s “constitution”, the Europeans-who form only one twentieth
of the population-would
have about one third of the
seats in Parliament and the right of veto as well. In the
cabinet of ministers, the whites are guaranteed more than
one quarter of the seats, and they keep all key levers of
power-the army, the police and the judiciary. So the real
goal of this new stratagem of the racists is to create the
mere semblance of the transfer of power to the people of
Zimbabwe.

regarding sanctrons against the Southern Rhodesian
racists, a number of international companies have continued to provide support to the illegal racist regime at
Salisbury. Large monopolies such as Shell, British Petroleum, Mobil Oil and Caltex-according
to data printed in
the Western press and in United Nations documentscontinue to supply the racists with petroleum products
that are vital to their economy and to their waging a
punitive war against the people of Zimbabwe and neighbouring States.

93. How the sham elections were conducted is well
known to everyone. They took place in conditions that
were admitted by the Smith regime to be those of martial
law-an extraordinary situation-under
the muzzles of
guns of the army and the military units in an atmosphere
of mass arrest and intimidation
of the population by
threats of dismissal from employment and corporal
punishment.

98. An important role in supporting the illegal regime
in Southern Rhodesia and in promoting its survival is
being played by the racist regime in South Africa. It is
known to everybody that South Africa is the main channel through which sanctions against Southern Rhodesia
are violated. The question of putting an end to such
actions by South Africa has been raised in the United
Nations many times. The majority of Member States
favour the most stringent sanctions against South Africa
under Chapter VII of the Charter, but the adoption of
such measures has been countered by certain well-known
Western Powers.

94. The representative of the Patriotic Front spoke here
and before the Committee of 24 at Belgrade about how
the elections were conducted. They were not elections;
they were not a farce; they were the Devil knows what.
The campaign of intimidation
carried out within the
country was accompanied by provocations and aggressive actions against neighbouring sovereign States by the
Southern Rhodesian racists.

99. In the Final Document2 of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, adopted at its Belgrade meeting on 27 April this year-a very new document-we
have a direct appeal to the Western permanent members
of the Security.Council to promote the adoption of effective measures against South Africa under Chapter VII of
the Charter. A request is also contained therein for the
Council immediately to examine the question of sanctions against South Africa.

95. All these facts and many others made clear in the
Security Council and, a little earlier, in the Committee of
24 by the representatives of the Patriotic Front and African countries, fully show up the machinations of the
Smith regime to continue white minority domination in
Zimbabwe and to strengthen the neo-colonialist regime
in Southern Rhodesia. These elections are not legal. The
new regime must not be accorded recognition by any
State that respects the principles of the United Nations.

100. .The importance of the economic and strategic
interests of certain Western Powers explains their policy
of connivance at the actions of the Smith clique and the
racist regimes of southern Africa. The holding of
so-called elections in Southern Rhodesia was yet one
more link in the chain of measures to subvert the national
liberation movement and to resolve the problem of
Southern Rhodesia in a neo-colonialist fashion.

96. It is clear that the fraud perpetrated by the Smith
clique could not have been carried out without the de
facto agreement of powerful forces in certain Western
countries which do everything they can to maintain the
domination of their transnational monopolies in that
part of Africa. The imperialist circles of those countries
are trying to preserve their right to manage the rich
natural resources and to use the neo-colonialist regimes
as gendarmes to combat the national liberation movements in that part of the continent and the independent
young States of Africa.

101. That purpose is also served, as is quite obvious
now, by steps such as the hatching of various plans for
settlement in Rhodesia, including the involvement of the
United Nations, the circumvention of economic sanctions and the reception of Smith, the head of the Southern
Rhodesian racists, and his accomplices in the United
States. That aim is further served by the stage-managed
campaign to depict the farce played out by Salisbury as
democratic, just elections, to prepare the ground for the
legalization and recognition of the puppet regime created
by Smith and to create the moral conditions in which
certain Western Powers could lift the sanctions decided
on by the Security Council against Southern Rhodesia.

97. Maintaining the racists in power under the guise of a
multi-racial government would give the Western monopolies certain guarantees for the protection of their interests, their property and their right to continue their
exploitation and to grow rich at the expense of the indigenous population. And they certainly have plenty to
protect. According to data cited in United Nations
bodies, in documents and in the Western press, more than
80 per cent of the mining enterprises in Rhodesia are
controlled by Western monopolies. Union Carbide atone
has invested half a billion dollars in the extraction of
chrome. Notwithstanding
Security Council resolutions

102. The connivance at the actions of the Smith regime
by a number of NATO countries which try to maintain
‘See Official Records of the General Assembly,
Supplement No. 23, chap. VIII, para. 12.

10

Thirty-fourth

Session.

their economic and strategic interests in southern Africa
is the main reason why the people of Zimbabwe are still
;teld in the stranglehold of colonial racist oppression.
African States and all freedom-loving peoples should, in
these circumstances, exercise maximum vigilance and
should actively work to put an end to the policy of
placating the racist rtgimes in southern Africa. The Salisbury plot must be condemned. Attempts to implement it
should be decisively repudiated. The answer to the racist
manceuvre must be firm, decisive support for the national
liberation movement of Zimbabwe, the Patriotic Front,
in its just struggle for genuine independence for the
country.
103. The Soviet Union advocates the immediate
transfer of power to the people of Zimbabwe; the genuine
transfer of power to the indigenous population.
104. We are convinced that the best way to resolve the
problem of Southern Rhodesia is in joint compliance
with decisions taken by the General Assembly and the
Security Council. The strict, unswerving observance of
all sanctions against the Smith regime and its ally, South
Africa, would be the effective way to put a speedy end to
the domination of the illegal Smith regime in Southern
Rhodesia.
105. The Soviet delegation is ready to support a proposal whereby the Security Council would decisively condemn the so-called elections conducted by the Smith
regime in Southern Rhodesia, and recognize that they are
completely null and void as the so-called government
resulting from them is also null and void. I should also
say that we would be ready to support a more decisive
resolution calling for more effective measures against the
Southern Rhodesian racist regime.
106. Mr. AHSAN (Bangladesh): Mr. President, allow
me first of all to extend to you our warmest congratulations on your assumption of office as the President of the
Council and for the dedication and wisdom which you
have brought to bear in the conduct of our work during
this month.
107. My delegation also wishes to express its warm
tribute to Ambassador Harriman of Nigeria for so ably
presiding over the Council’s deliberations during the difficult month of March.
108. As we meet aaain to consider the situation in
Rhodesia, it is pertine&o
recall that during the sessions
held two months ago the Council took cognizance of two
specific factors: the escalation of armed attacks by the
Salisbury regime against neighbouring States and the
announcement of the holding of so-called elections under
the spurious internal settlement constitution. In condemning these measures, the Council reaffimed the illegality of the regime as well as the unacceptability of any
internal settlement or of elections held under its auspices.
The Council indeed condemned all attempts and manceuvres by the illegal regime aimed at retaining its hold
over Zimbabwe and at preventing its accession to independence and genuine majority rule. Subsequent devel-

opments have borne out the apprehensions expressed by
the Council. The fraudulent elections, anticipated and
rejected in advance as null and void by the international
community in March, are but symptomatic of a deteriorating situation. That those elections were flawed, contrived at gunpoint, and had gross irregularities, about
which much has been said in the Council itself, is not the
issue at stake. The elections and the internal settlement
constitution under which they were held are no more
legal or valid than the constitution that followed the
unilateral declaration of independence, which the internal settlement constitution purported to replace. The
rkgime they produce cannot be any more representative
than that currently in power at Salisbury. What is at issue
is the challenge,posed to the United Nations, to Africa
and to the people of Zimbabwe by the illegal regime and
its defiance of the wishes of the international community.
109. The situation in Rhodesia remains ,a threat to
international peace and security. The civil war that has
been raging threatens to expand in even greater violence
and intensity. Rhodesian planes now regularly bomb sites
in neighbouring countries in an attempt to contain the
liberation struggle. The entrenched minority is seeking
desperately to legitimize its hold through pretence and
subterfuge on the one hand and undisguised military
alliance with the forces of racism and colonialism in
Africa on the other. The haste with which the illegal
r&gime has espoused the South African Prime Minister’s
proposal for the so-called “fortress southern Africa
alliance’*, is a pointer to this.
110. The Security Council cannot abdicate its responsibility. In the view of my delegation, silence on its part at
this crucial juncture would be tantamount to appeasement or at least to a weakening of its resolve in this
matter. It would be a betrayal of the trust reposed in the
Council by the whole international community, by Africa
and by the people of Zimbabwe.
111. My delegation believes that the Council must resolutely condemn all attempts and manmuvres by the illegal
&gime aimed at preventing the accession of Zimbabwe to
independence and genuine majority rule. It must reaffirm
its rejection of the so-called elections as invalid and reiterate that no recognition can be accorded to any representative or organ established by that illegal process.
Bangladesh believes that mandatory sanctions imposed
by the Council should be strengthened and that due
vigilance must be exercised to ensure their full implementation by all States.
112. Bangladesh stands fully committed to strengthening its solidarity with and support for the liberation
struggle and for the realization of the legitimate aspirations of the people of Zimbabwe.
113. Mr. McHENRY (United States of America): This
meeting of the Security Council and the consideration of
the draft resolution before us [S/13282] come against the
backdrop of recent elections in Rhodesia and the desire of
the international community to express its views on the
effect of those elections on the long search for a settlement in Rhodesia.

119. I should like to make an observation. In a very
real sense the situation in Rhodesia today is the same as it
was before the recent elections: the search for peace continues. Peace will come to Rhodesia only.when all the
parties to this tragic conflict can be brought to political
accommodation. It is only then that this tragic situation,
which has brought so much death and destruction to
Rhodesia and its neighbours, will be finally resolved. For
our part, the United States will continue to work with all
Governments which seek a peaceful solution to the
crisis.

114. The efforts which my Government and the
Government of the United Kingdom have undertaken
over the last 18 months to bring about a peaceful settlement in Rhodesia are a matter of public record; it is not
necessary to go into them today in any detail. The United
States continues to be prepared to work with all parties to
achieve a peaceful settlement. We continue to believe that
the proposals embodied in the plan developed by the
United Kingdom and the United States provide the best
and fairest solution to this problem. That a peaceful
solution is an urgent necessity is beyond doubt. The
mounting toll of lives and property which the tragic
events in Rhodesia are taking demonstrates more clearly
than anything we could say here that a settlement must be
found.

120. Mr. BLANKSON
(Nigeria): I extend to you, Sir,
the congratulations of my delegation on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the month of April.
Even though today is the last day of the month and the
Council has had few formal meetings so far, I am delighted at this opportunity .to commend the able manner in
which you have conducted the business of the Council.
Furthermore,
Norway, the country you represent,
belongs to that family of Nordic countries which have
been in the vanguard of the Western countries in their
support for the liberation struggles in southern Africa.

115. The position of the United States on the current
situation in Rhodesia was clearly stated by Secretary of
State Vance on 17 March. At that time he said:
“Both sides should take a first and significant step: to
accept the principle of United Nations-supervised elections in Rhodesia and to agree to negotiate the conditions for holding such elections. The proposals we and
the British have previously put forward convey our
view of such a process. But we recognize that election
arrangements must be negotiated to the satisfaction of
the parties themselves. The crucial point is the acceptance of the principle of internationally supervised elections as the only way to avoid protracted and damaging
war.”

121. I would also acknowledge, on behalf of Ambassador Harriman, the many kind words expressed not only
about his presidency during March but also regarding
Nigeria’s contributions to the search for universal peace
and justice.
122. At this crucial point in the developments in Southern Rhodesia, and as Ian Smith, his black puppets and
their conservative supporters in some Western countries
attempt to perpetuate white minority domination, Nigeria has joined the African Group in calling on the Security Council to reafIirm its position and its commitment in
respect of that war-torn Territory.

116. As the Secretary of State made clear, we believe
that a broader solution, based on elections supervised by
the United Nations, is required if peace is to come to
Rhodesia. We hope that the parties will be prepared to
co-operate in the efforts needed to reach agreement on
the conditions for such elections. And while we recognize
that this will not be easy, we believe that the effort must
be made. The need for the parties to take that “first and
significant step” of which the Secretary of State spoke is
clearer today than ever before.

123. Since 1968. the Securitv Council has held that the
situation in Southern Rhodesia is a threat to international peace andsecurity. One of the important factors in
that determination was, and still is, the rebellion against
the British colonial authority by a handful of whites led
by Ian Smith. The rebellion stopped short the internationally recognized process of decoionization in that Territory; consequently, the people of Rhodesia, particularly
the black majority, have been unable to exercise their
right to self-determination. _

117. As members of the Council are aware, the President of the United States is required, under United States
law, to make a determination as to whether the recent
elections in Rhodesia were free and fair. The President
will issue his determination on the basis of a complete
analysis of the situation in Rhodesia, taking fully into
account the international obligations and responsibilities
of the United States. Pending that determination,
it
would not be appropriate for us to take a position on the
draft resolution now before the Council, and accordingly
the United States’will abstain on the draft when it comes
to a vote.

124. The rebellion and the seizure of power by Ian
Smith have led to a war of liberation in Southern Rhodesia. Many attempts-and I will not bore you by citing all of
them-including
the Anglo-American proposals to restore the Territory to legality and create an atmosphere
conducive to the holding of free and fair elections which
would thereafter lead Rhodesia to majority rule and
genuine independence, have so far been unsuccessful. I
would not, as I said, wish to dwell on the reasons why
these attempts have not produced results.

118. I now turn to the draft resolution itself. In the view
of the United States, the draft resolution is not mandatory and does not give rise to binding obligations. The
same is true of resolution 445 (1979), which is referred to
in the fourth and eighth preambular, paragraphs of the
current draft. In our view, the references to the responsibilities of Member States concern the enforcement measures previously decided upon by the Council.

125. The recent developments, including attempts and
manceuvres by the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia
which culminated in the April elections, have, I wish to
repeat, not contributed in any way to the restoration of
12

?.-

legality in that Territory. As previous$peakers have said,
power is still vested in the hands of the tllegal regime even
though there is a semblance of a change ofguard. There is
still a war situation in Southern Rhodesia, a situationthat
takes its daily toll of human life. A major and internationally recognized movement, the Patriotic Front, was
excluded from the electoral process. One can only conclude that the whole process is a design to perpetuate
white minority rule in that Territory, using a few handpicked Africans. In fact there is every reason to believe
that the recent developments will only aggravate the
situation and lead to the intensification of the armed
struggle.

Ifi_. The elections just arranged in Rhodesia by the
illegal Government of Ian Smith do not satisfy these basic
principles. Suffice it to say that the elections took place in
a situation in which a major part of the Territory had
been placed under martial law and where press and other
media were censored. The political conditions were such
that a major political force-the Patriotic Front-did not
participate in the electoral process, which was held onthe
basis of a constitution prepared and adopted by a minority of -4per cent of the people. That constitution preserves
political minority control in Rhodesia for the next 10
years.

126. I would repeat once more that these elections will
not bring peace to Southern Rhodesia. Peace and stability can be achieved there only if and when Rhodesia as a
whole participates in the electoral process. As long as the
Patriotic, Front is excluded from that process, the liberation struggle in Rhodesia will continue.

132. In its resolution 445 (1979), the Council stated that
under such circumstances the international community
must regard the elections in Zimbabwe as null and void,
that the-results thereof should be subject to no recognition and that mandatory sanctions must be maintained.
It is the view of my Government that the Council should
uphold that position. Thus we shall vote in favour of the
draft resolution now before us.

127. In its resolution 445 (1979) the Security Council
condemned all attempts and mancevres by the illegal
regime, including the April elections aimed at perpetuating racist white domination in Southern Rhodesia. It
also stated that no recognition should be accorded to any
representatives or organ established by that process. That
is as valid today as it was when that resolution was
adopted early in March. That is also the position of my
Government. Nigeria joins the international community
in denouncing the fake election in the strongest possible
terms. For our part, we shall continue to support the
Patriotic Front and to provide it with all necessary
assistance.

133. The Norwegian Government hopes that renewed
efforts will be made to achieve an internationally acceptable settlement. My Government has on previous occasions expressed its support for the Anglo-American
proposals for a negotiated and peaceful settlement of the
conflict in Rhodesia. Those proposals contain fundamental principles which would allow for free and fair elections under satisfactory international control. I would on
this occasion like to repeat my Government’s support for
those proposals, and I would urge all parties to enter into
talks on that basis without preconditions and without
further delay.
134. I now resume my functions as PRESIDENT
Council.

128. In conclusion, it may be pertinent here to strike a
note of warning. The safari to Rhodesia undertaken by
some conservative elements in some Western countries to
observe these fake elections does not confer upon the
latter any sort of legitimacy. These observers should not
ignore the weight and importance of the African position
nor that of the international community with regard to
the situation in Southern Rhodesia. They should not
underestimate the determination of those fighting forces
of the Patriotic Front who are sacrificing their lives to
free their country from the racist regime of Ian Smith.
They should not for a moment forget that independent
Africa is unflinching in its support for the people of
Zimbabwe and will continue to be so until genuine independence is achieved.

ofthe

135. It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to vote on the draft resolution sponsored by
Bangladesh, Bolivia, Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria
and Zambia [S/13282]. I now put that draft resolution to
the vote.
A vote was taken by show of ham?.
In favour: Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zambia
Against: None

129. The PRESIDENT: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of NORWAY.

Abstaining: France, United Kingdom-of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America

130. The Norwegian Government has on numerous
occasions stated that in its view an internationally acceptable solution to .this conflict in Rhodesia must be based
on the following two principles: first, free and fair elections must be held under international supervision and
control; secondly, conditions must be created which
allow for the equal and full participation of all political
forces in that country.

The draft resolution was adopted by 12 votes to none,
with 3 abstentions. 3
136. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of the United Kingdom wishes to be allowed to speak after the vote.
I now call upon him.
‘See resolution 448 (1979).
13

..i-,
:

.._...,.__

_..~...

.I

-.

I.

,.-.

:,

.~

--_

-

137. Mr. RICHARD
(United. Kingdom): Mr. President, I would start by saying how pleased I am to see you
as President of the Council if only for another six-and-aquarter hours. You have had a difficult month. It has not
always been public, but, speaking for the United Kingdom, I would say how much we appreciate the way in
which you have handled your task in this difficult month.
138. I would also take this opportunity to express our
appreciation to Ambassador Harriman of Nigeria for the
way in which he handled the affairsofthecouncil
during
March.
139. The British Government’s position on the elections in Rhodesia wasgiven in our explanation of vote on
resolution 445 [2122ndmeering], when we stated that the
elections which were then envisaged for Rhodesia, and
which have in fact now been held, were in the opinion of
the British Government unlikely by themselves alone to
provide a sufficient basis for the peaceful attainment of
full majority rule. It was made clear that, in the opinion of
the British Government, whatever the circumstances in
which those elections took place, and whatever their
outcome, it would still be necessary to work for comprehensive negotiations, involving both the internal and the
external parties, out of which a peaceful, orderly and
universally accepted transfer of power could emerge.
That remains the assessment of my Government. While
the elections, in terms of all that has happened since 1965,
represent a step in the right direction, my Government
has made clear that they do not regard them as the
threshold for recognition or for the lifting of sanctions.
To return to this issue now is, as I stated during our
consultations, most ill-advised and untimely.

141. In the same explanation of vote, I also made it
clear that the British Government had to preserve the full
freedom of the British Parliament-which
has the ultimate responsibility for bringing Rhodesia back to legality
under arrangements which will guarantee genuine majority rule-and to judge for itself the circumstances which
obtain in that Territory and the true wishes of its people.
Accordingiy, I said on that earlier occasion that it was a
matter of principle for us that we could not’accept language which sought to circumscribe the functioning of
our parliamentary democracy. We could not and we
would not accept that the British Parliament could be
fettered in discharging its responsibility-a
responsibility, I would say, which the Council has itself recognized
and indeed emphasized--for Khodesra and we could not
and we would not acquiesce in the adoption of a resolution which would have the effect of limiting Parliament’s
ability to discharge that responsibility. It was for this
reason, among others, that my Government was obliged
to abstain in the vote on resolution 445 (1979) and it is for
this reason that we have abstained in the vote on the
resolution today. The resolution which the Council has
just adopted contains certain expressions of opinion and
recommendations to Member States. My Government
does not regard them as binding and could not accept
them while at the same time maintaining, as we must
maintain, the freedom of judgement and action of the
British Parliament in the exercise of its responsibilities. I
must make clear that we do not regard anything in the
present resolution as circumscribing
that freedom of
judgement and action.
142. The war in Rhodesia, with its tragic effects on the
civilian population, is intensifying. I said on behalf of my
Government in the Council last month that the fighting
was likely to continue and that the need for negotiations
would remain. I added that the British Government
believed that after any elections were held there would be a
need to bring the internal and external leaders together
around a negotiating table. The British Government will
pursue its efforts to achieve a settlement which will bring
an end to .the war and command the acceptance of the
international community.

140. Since the elections, the Prime Minister has
announced the British Government’s intention to send
Mr. Ciedwyn Hughes to Africa to follow up his previous
mission in December and to advise whether it would be
appropriate to convene a meeting, under his chairmanship, of the parties both inside and outside Rhodesia to
negotiate a cease-tire, which is what is urgently needed,
and the holding of internationally supervised elections.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.

sus.

1.50

79-70002-February

1982-2350
