VIII,

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

197

2. The income from staff assessment shall be credited to the Tax Equalization Fund in accordance with
the provisions of General Assembly resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955;
3. Direct expenses of the United Nations Postal Administration, services to visitors, catering and related
services, television services and the sale of publications, not provided for under the budget appropriations, shall
be charged against the income derived from those activities.
110th plenary meeting
21 December 1977
32/203.

Use of experts and consultants in the
United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision of 18 December 197 4, 55 taken
at its twenty-ninth session, by which it outlined principles and guidelines for the use of experts and consultants in the United Nations, and its decision of
17 December 197 5, 56 taken at its thirtieth session, in
which it reaffirmed the aforesaid principles and guidelines, which should be implemented promptly, fully
and effectively,
Recalling further its resolution 31 /205 of 22 December 1976, in which it. reaffirmed the decision taken
at its twenty-ninth and thirtieth sessions and requested
the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session, through the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, a report on the implementation of the aforementioned decisions,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 57
Expressing the view that the above-mentioned report
does not adequately respond to the requirements of the
relevant decisions of the General Assembly and still
reflects deficiencies in the implementation of the principles and guidelines on the use of experts and consultants,
Taking note of the assurances of the SecretaryGeneral that future reports will fully and adequately
reflect the existing practice in the use of experts and
consultants in the United Nations,
l. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-third session a full and
comprehensive report, showing his efforts to eliminate
existing deficiencies in the implementation of principles and guidelines on the use of experts and consultants in the United Nations;
2. Requests further that such a report should contain detailed comparative data as well as a statement
evaluating the status of implementation of the principles and guidelines set by the General Assembly.
110th plenary meeting
21 December 1977
32/204.

Organizational
Secretariat

nomenclature

in

the

The General Assembly,
Emphasizing the need for logical and coherent organizational nomenclature in the Secretariat in the in55 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Supplement No. 31 (A/9631), pp. 136 and 137,
item 73.
56 fbid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 34 (A/10034),
p. 145, item 96, para. (t).
57 A/C.5/3217.

terest of a more rational and functional hierarchical
structure,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the reports of
the Secretary-General58 and of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions 59
on the question of organizational nomenclature in
the Secretariat;
2. Endorses the general direction of reform in
nomenclature proposed by the Secretary-General in
his report and encourages him to proceed expeditiously
with the application of the measures envisaged, taking
into account the observations made by the Advisory
Committee and the views expressed in the Fifth Committee;
3. Welcomes the intention of the Secretary-General
to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-third
session on the application of the measures proposed
in his report;
4. Decides to consider this question at its thirtythird session on the basis of the report to be submitted
by the Secretary-General;
5. Urges intergovernmental bodies to avoid recommendations giving particular designations to organizational units or their heads which may not be in conformity with the nomenclature proposed by the
Secretary-General.
110th plenary meeting
21 December 1977
32/205.

Arabic language services in the United
Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/159 of 21 December
1976, in paragraph 18 of which it decided to include
Arabic among the official and working languages of
the machinery of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, particularly all sessions of
the Conference, the Trade and Development Board
and its main committees,
Noting that the rules of procedure of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 60 the
Trade and Development Board61 and some of its main
committees have already been amended accordingly,
Recalling that, in section VIII of its resolution
31 /208 of 22 December 1976. it approved the organizational arrangements proposed by the Secretary-General in his report to the General Assembly at its thirtyfirst session 62 with a view to providing an initial target
level of Arabic language services to the United Nations
5 8 A/C.5/32/17.

50 Official Records

of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 8A (A/32/8/ Add.1-30). document
A/32/8/ Add.5.
60 TD/63/Rev.1
(United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.68.I.17) and Amend.I and 2.
0 1 TD/B/16/Rev.2 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.73.II.D.11 and Corr.I and 2) and Amend.!.
62 A/C.5/31/60 and Corr.I.

198

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

Conference on Trade and Development while simultaneously alleviating some of the chronic problems
facing the provision of such services to the Assembly
and its Main Committees,
Noting, however, that, as far as Arabic translation
services are concerned, the Secretary-General in his
progress report 63 makes it clear that those organizational arrangements have not sufficiently achieved their
purported objectives with regard to the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development and to the
General Assembly and its Main Committees, while admitting the uncertain nature of their future prospects,
Recognizing the great importance which the Arab
States Members of the United Nations attach to the
work of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development as well as their expressed need for
having its documentation issued in Arabic in time to
enable their delegations to participate constructively in
its deliberations and activities,
Convinced that an efficient, timely and less costly
provision of Arabic translation services to the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development can
be achieved only by the installation of an adequately
staffed service at its headquarters,

Bearing in mind the magnitude and urgency of the
efforts needed to enable such a service to meet adequately the Arabic translation requirements of the
fifth session of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development. to be held in 1979,
1. Takes note of the progress report of the Secretary-General63 concerning Arabic language services
in the United Nations;

2. Requests the Secretary-General, while continuing the speedy implementation of the organizational
arrangements contained in paragraphs 15 to 21 of his
report, 62 to replace the present arrangement set out
in paragraph 25 of his report by establishing, as from
1 January 1978, on a permanent basis, an Arabic
Translation Section in the United Nations Office at
Geneva primarily to serve the bodies of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development and,
as an initial step, to provide the staff requirements for
the biennium 197 8-1979 for this Section by transferring to it the posts already established under section
VIII of General Assembly resolution 31 /208, with
the addition of a post of Chief of Section;

3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, in
close consultation and co-operation with the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, proposals aimed at the full implementation of Conference resolution 86 (IV) of
28 May 1976, 64 endorsed by the General Assembly in
paragraph 18 of its resolution 31 / 159, and to submit
those proposals to the Assembly at its thirty-fourth
session;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue his search for and to apply adequate methods,
including advance translation of appropriate documentation and provision of temporary assistance when
necessary, to ensure the timely provision of Arabic
63 A/C.5/32/9.
64 See Proceedings

of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publica,tion, Sales No. E.76.II.D.10
and corrigendum), part one, sect. A.

translation services to the General Assembly and its
Main Committees, and to report on the results to the
Assembly as appropriate.
J 10th plenary meeting
2 I December 1977
32/206.

Recommendations of the Committee for
Programme and Co-ordination

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the Economic and Social Council, in
the annex to its resolution 2008 (LX) of 14 May
1976, set out the terms of reference of the Committee
for Programme and Co-ordination, in paragraph 2 (a)
(ii) of which it is stated that the Committee shall
recommend an order of priorities among United Nations programmes as defined in the medium-term plan,
Recalling also paragraph 10 of General Assembly
resolution 31 /93 of 14 December 1976 on the mediumterm plan,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 2098
(LXIII) of 3 August 1977 ·dealing with the recommendations of the Committee for Programme and Coordination at its seventeenth session, 611
Ta king note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the implications of the recommendations of the
Committee for Programme and Co-ordination66 and
the relevant comments of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 67

I
l. Confirms that the Committee for Programme
and Co-ordination, by virtue of its review of both the
medium-term plan and the programme aspects of the
programme budget, is the main subsidiary body of the
Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly for planning, programming and co-ordination with
the perspective necessary to make recommendations
on the relative priorities of United Nations programmes;
2. Urges subsidiary bodies to refrain from making
recommendations on the relative priority of the major
programmes, as outlined in the medium-term plan;
3. Requests such bodies to propose, through the
Committee for Programme and Co-ordination, relative
priorities to be accorded to the various subprogrammes
within their respective fields of competence;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to give all assistance to the Committee for Programme and Coordination in its work, inter alia in connexion with the
recommendation in paragraph 2 of the report of the
Committee on its seventeenth session, 65 in particular
to enable the Committee to assess the implications of
its recommendations;

II
1. Notes the methodology described by the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination in paragraph
3 of the report on its seventeenth session 611 for improving its determination of relative growth rates;
65
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtysecond Session, Supplement No. 38 (A/32/38).
66 A/C.5/32/26 and Corr.I.
67 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtysecond Session, Supplement No. 8A (A/32/8/Add.1-30),
document A/32/8/ Add.14.
