SECURITY COUN·CIL
OFFICIAL
.

RECORDS

SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS
DEUXIEME ANNEE

. No. 'i8

143rdand 144th meetings.
20 June 1947

Lake Success
New York

( 26 p.)

_--------_.__

.......
_

143em.e et 144eme seances
20 juin 1947

"rp-.,

war·

~·mr··-"rr-Z_.. "·--'--·¥m#t-·l-ibtnrft·t
-..-

...............

_---

...............

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES

Hundred and forty-third meeting

Cent-quarante-troisieme seance
Fc;ge

, Pages

176. ProvUnonal agenda
1043
1044
177. Adoption of the agenda
178. Procedure concerning the discussion of
the appointment of the governor of
Trieste .....•.................•••.. 1052
179. Continuation of" the discussion on the
special agreements under Article 43 of
the Charter and the organization of the
lJnited ~ations armed forces
1053

176. Ordre du jour provisoire
1043
177. Adoption de l'ordre du jour
1044
178. Procedure relative a la discussion concernant la nomination du gouverneur de
Trieste
1052
179. Suite de la discussion sur les accords
speciaux prevus a l'Article 43 de la
Charte et sur l'organisation des forces
armees des ~ations lJnies
~
1053

Hundred and forty-fourth meeting

Cent-quarante-quatrieme seance

180. Official communique

""

< ••••

1064

180. Communique officie!.

1064

Documen~s

Documents

The following documents relevant to the hundred
and forty-third. meeting appear as follows:

Les documents se rapportant a la cent-quarantetroisieme seance figurent dans les publications
suivantes:

Official Records of the Security Council~ Second
Year~ Special Supplement No. 1:
Letter dated 30 Apri11947 from the Chairman
of the Military Staff Committee·to the Secretary-General, and enclosed report on general
principles governing the organization of the
armed forces made available to the E-ecurity.
Council by Member nations of the lJuited
~ations (document S/336).
Official Records of the Security Council~ Second
Year~ No. 43:
Letter dated 30 April 1947 from the deputy
representative of the lJnited States on the
Security Council to the Secretary-General
(document S/338).

Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement special No 1: '
Lettre, en date du 30 avril 1947, adressee au
Secretaire general par le President du Comite" .
d'eta'.-major, et rapport, joint a cette lettre,
sur's princlpes generaux regissant l'organisation des forces arme~s mises a la disposition du Conseil de securite par les Etats
Membres des ~ations lJnies (document
S/336).
Proces-vet'baux officiels du Conseil de securite,
Deuxieme .Annee, No43:
•
Lettre, en date du 30 avril 1947, adressee au
Secretaire general· par ie representant suppIeant des Etats-Unis au Conseil de securite
(document S/338).

p .....

NATIONS UNIES

UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY'
C 0 U N·C I L

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PRO·CES.VERBAUX OFFICIELS
No. 46

SECOND YEAR·

DEUX&EME ANNEE

No 48

HUNDRED·~ND FORTY-THIRD MEETING

CENT·QUARANT~. TROI5IEME· SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Friday, 20 June 1947, at 10.30 a.m.

T enue a Lake Success, N ew...Y ork,
le vendredi 20 juin 1947, a 10 k. 30.

President: Mr. A. PAROD! (France).

President: M.'A. PAROD! (France).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Australia, Belgiu:rn, Brazil, China,
Columbia, FraI;lce, Poland, Syria, Union of
Soviet 'Socialist' Republics, United Kingdom,
United States of America.

Presents : Les representants des pays suivants
Australie, Belgique,Bresil~Chine,
Colombie, Etats~Unis d'Amerique, France,
Pologne, Royaume-Uni, Syrie, Unioz,. des Republiques socialistes sovietiques.

176. Provisional agenda
~document 5/378)

176. Ordre du iour provisoire
. (document 51378)

1. Adoption of .the agenda.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

2. Appointffient of a governor of the Free Territory of Trieste.

2. Nomination d'un gouverneur. du .Territoire

(a) Letter dated 13 June 1947 from the
representative of the United Kingdom
to the President of the Security Council
(document S/374).1

libre de Trieste.
a) Lettre, ell date du 13 juin 1947, adressee
au President du Conseil de securite par
le representant du ~oyauIne,:,Uni (doculnent S/374)1.

3. Special agreements. under Article 43 of the 3. Accords speciaux preyus a l'Article 43 d~ la
Charte et organisation de la force armee des
Charter and the organization of the United
Nations Uni,es.
Nations armed force.
' . '.
a) Lettre, en date du 30 avril, 1947, adres(a) Letter dated .30 April 1947 from the
see au Secretaire general par le, represendeputy representative of the United States
1The following is the text of the letter:,
[Original text: English]
United Kingdom Delegation
to the United Nations
. 18 June 1947
Sir,
With reference to the resolution of the Security Council
of Ul January last approving the Permanent Statute and
the Instrument' for the Provisional Regime of Trieste and
accepting its. responsibilities. thereunder, I have the honour
to request that you will be so good as to fix a date during
the coming week for the discussion by the Security Council
of the question of the appointment of a governor of the
Free Tel'l'itoryof Trieste, in accordance with article 11
paragraph 1,0f the said Statute. .
(Signed) Alexander CwocAN

1Voici le texte de ceUe lettre:
[Texte' original en anglais]
Delegation du Royaume-Uni
aupres des Nations Vntes
Le 18 juin 1947
Monsieur le President,
Me referant a la resolution du Conseil de securite, en
date du 10 janvier dernier, approuvant le Statut permanent et 1'Instrument relatif au regime provisoire du Territoire libre de Trieste, et acceptant pour le C9nseil de
securite les responsabilites qui er. decoUlent, j'ai l'honneur'
de vous demander de voUloir bien fixer a une date de la
semaine prochaine la discussion par le Conseil de secarite
de la nomination d'un gOuverneur du Territoire libre de
Trieste; conformement' a l'article 11, paragraphe premier,
dudit Statuto
(Signe) Alexander, CADOGAN.
o

....,.'." -"n" . b4IIIIII

...........-........

on the Security Council to the Secretary-.
General (document 8/338).1
,
(b) Letter dated 30 April 1947 from the
Chairma.ll of the Military Staff Committee. to the Secretary-General,. and enclosed report on general principles.·governing the organization of the armed
forces made available to the Security
Council by Member nation of the Ur.iited
Nationa (document 8/336).2

taIit suppIeant des Etats-Unis au GonseR
de securite (document S/338 )1.
b) Lettre, en date
30 avril1947,adressee
au· Secretaire general par le President du
Comite d'etat"major,et· rapport, joint
cette lettre, sur les principes generaux regissant l'organisation des forces armees
mises a la disposition du Conseil de seeurite par les EtatsMembres des Nations
Unies (t.locument S/336)2.

177. Adoption af the agenda
The PRESIDENT (translated from French) :

177. Adoption de I'ordre du iour

The first item on our agenda is the adoption of
the provisioIial agenda which has been circulated
to the members oi the Couilcil. Are there any
comments?

du

a

a

Le PRESIDENT : Le premier point
notre
ordre du jour est l'adoption de l'ordre du jour
provisoire, qui a ete distribue· aux membres
du(Jonseil. Qttelqu'un a-tail des observations
presenter? .

a

Mr. GROMYKO Jnion of Soviet Socialist Re- '
M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiquessoeiapublics) (tratislated from Russian)·:. I have al- liStes soyietiques)( traduit du russe) : J'ai deja
ready had an opportunity to express the views of eu l'occasion d'exposerl'attitude de la delegation
the delegation ~f the Union of Soviet Socialist del'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques
Republics on item 2 of the agenda. Some days '& l'egardclu point 2 de l'ordre clu jour.I1 y a
ago, I drew the Security Council's attention to que1ques jours, j'ai fait observer au Conseil de
the fact that the Council cannot discuss the securlte. qu'il ne pouvait examiner la question
nomination of the governor of Trieste. until the de la nomination du gouverneur de Trieste
Italian peace· treaty has been ratified. I cannot tant que le traite de paix avec l'Italie ne serait
therefore aglt:e to this item being put on the pas ratifie. Par consequent, je nepui,s accepter
Security Council's agenda. I do not need to que ron inscrive cette question a l'ordre du jour
remind you that without preliminary agreement du Conseil de securite. Inutile de rappeIer qu'a
between the representativ~ of the four Powers moinsd'un accord prealable sur cette question
who took part in the· decision. of the Council of entre les representants des quatre Puissanees
Foreign MiniSters of12 December 1946, it would dQnt les Mifiistres des Affaires etrangeres ont parn~turally be a waste of time for the Security ticipe a la decision du 12decembre 1946, l'exa~
CJuncil to discuss· this question, since no decision men de cette question au Conseil de securite
can be taken unless there is agreement between constituerait,pour ainsi dire, nne perte de temps,
, the reprcsent~tives of the four Powers.
puisqu~il est impossible de prendre une decision
si les representants' des quatre Puissances ne sont
pas d'a,ccord.
That is the additional comment I wanted to
make today in connexion with the discussion of
, item 2 of the agenda.
'
Sir·Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom):
I should like to say a few words, since it was my
Government which requested the inclusion of
this item in the Council's provisional agenda.

Voila la remarque complCmentaire que je tenais a· faire aujourd'hui a propos de l'examen
du point 2 deJ'ordre dujour.
Sir Alexander· CADOGAN

(Royaume-Uni)

(traduit de l'anglais): Jevoudrais prendre brievement la parole,puisque c'est mon Gouvemement .qui a demande l'inscrj,ption de ce pomt a
l'ordre du jour provisoire du Conseil.

11 faut se rappeler que, des l'entree en vigueur
It must be remembered that certain responsidu
traite de paix, certaines responsabilites inbilities fall upon the governor immediately upon.
the entry into force of the treaty. Therefore, it combent au gouvemeur. 11 est done indispeniscssential that we should have agreement on sable que nous nous soyons mis d'accord sur le
choix du gouverneur a cette date.
the.choice of governor by that date.
The· USSR representative observed that the , LerepreSsentant de l'URSS a fait remarquer
CounCil could not discuss this matter before the que le· Conseil ne pouvait discuter cette question
ratification of the Italian peace treaty, but I do avant que le traiteS de paix avec 1'Italie ne fo.t rasais sur quel argumentil s'ap. not know from where he draws his argument. I tifieS, mais je
am unaware of any provision of that kind, of any puie. A ma connaissance, il n'existe pas de disprohibition on the Council, or of any bar to dis- position eri ce sens;rien n'interdlt au Consell.,.....
, de se saisir de la question,rien ne l'efupeche d'en
c'l.IssIon of this question.
discuter.

ne

1 See

Official Records of the Security Council, Second

Year, No. 411.
11 Ibid., Special SupplelIlent No. 1.

~ Voir les Proces-verbau" officiels. du Conseil de seeuritC,
Deuxieme Annee, No 1I9,
S Ibid., Supplement Special No 1.

.0iiIIl

It is perfectly true, of course, if that is whathe
meant, that the appointment cannot actually be
made until the treaty comes into force; but to
say that the Council cannot discuss it with a
view to reaching agreement on a candidate is~ I
think, really absurd and contrary to all I know
of the provisions. I certainly know of no provision that would bar the Council from such a
discussion.

nest, bien entendu, parhitement exact si c'est l.a ce lu'il a vouludire.-.qu'il ne peut
etre pl'ocede effectivement a cette nomin.ation
avant l'entree en 'lligueur dll traite~ mais pretendre que le Conseil ne puisse en discuter pour
se mettre d'accord sur un candidat serait, je
pense, reellement absurde et contraire a tout
ce que je sa~ des dispositions du traite. Aucune
disposition, a ma connaissance, n'empeche le
Conseil d'engager une telle discussif'n.

The USSR representative added as a second
reason that it would be a waste of time for the
Council to discuss this before previotls agreement
had been reached among the four Powers. I do
not think that is so. We have wasted a gre~t deal
of tillleamong the four Powers since last January
or very early February, if I am correct, and we
still have not reached· an agreement. I am afraid
that this is apt to happen. We see it in other
cases. We saw it, in pa~ticular, quite recently in
connexion with. conventional armaments, where
the procedure was adopted of asking the five
Powers to get together to produce ~ unanimous
report. They could not, and the result was that
a majority report and a minority report had to
go to the full Commission for Conventional
Armaments, which was able. to take a decision
alter .a few sittings.1

Le representant de l'URSS a· fait valoir, en
second lieu, que le ConseiI pel'drait son temps
s~il examinait ce probleme avant que les quatre
Puissances ne se missent d'accord. Je ne part<l.ge
pas ~on point d~· vue. Si je ne me trompe, les
quatre Puissances, depuis janvier demier ou les
les I.out premiers jours de fevrier, ont perdu
beaucoup de temps et ne sont toujours pas arrive~sa se mettre d'accord. Je crains que ce ne
soit la une eventualite possible. La. situation
s'est deja. presentee en d'autre cas. Nous c,"1
avons eu unexemple, en particulier tout rec~m~
ment, a proposdes armements de type classique,
quand il a· ete decide de df'..mander auxcinq
Puissances de se reunir pour presenter un rapport unanime. Elles n'ont pu le faire et il a ft..illu,
en o:msequenee, saisir la Commission pIeiliere
des armemernts· de type classiqued'un rapport
de la majorite et d'un rapport de. la minonte,
la Commission pIeniere, au bout de que1ques
seances, est enfin parvenue a une decision1 •

Therefore, I think that, in view of.the difficulty
hitherto experienced in obtaining unanimity
among the four Powers on the question of the
governorship of Trieste, it would be very well for
them to sit with the other members of the Council
to see whet.,;'er, with· the help of those members,
they could arrive at a satisfactory, .unanimous
decision in regard to an appropriate candidate.
The Council would.then be in a position formally·
to appoint that candidate on short notice when
the time came.

J'estime done qu'en raison des difficultes qui
se sont presentees jusqu'a present pour obtenir
l'unanimite des quatre. Puissances sur laquestion de la nomination du gouverneur de'rrieste, il serait bon que leurs representants deHberassent avec les autresmembres du Conseil de
securite afin de voir si, avec l'aide de ces derniers, Us nepourraient parvenir a une decision
satisfaisante, unanime, quant au choix d'un candidat repondant aux conditions voulues. Le
Conseil serait alol's en mesure denommer officiel~
lement ce candidzLt, a bref delai, quand le
moment en serait venu.

Therefore, I do hope the· Council will agree to
this suggestion that the Council with all its members should meet as a Council ior this purposeI should hope, in private, because we should be
dealing with personalities-in order to try to
reach unanimous agreement. Such a procedure
would save time, not lose it.

Je souhaite donc vivementque le Conseil
approuve ma. suggestion de se reunir au complet pour examiner cette question -.- en seance
privee, je l'espere, car il sera question de person
nalites- afin d'essayer de parvenir a un accord
unanime. Cette Pl'ocedure nous ferait gagner du
temps, et non en perdre.

Colonel HODGSON (Australia)·: The Austral~
ian delegation at Paris maintained that the selection of the governor of Trieste should be made
not by the Security· Council, but by a special
body consisting of representatives of the four
major Powers together with those of three other
States chosen by· the Conference.

Le colonel HODGSON (Australie)( traduit de
I'anglais): A Paris, la delegation de l'Australie
a soutenu qu'il n'appartenait pas au C6nseil
de securite de choisir le gouverneur de Trieste,
mais a un organe special compose des representants des quatrePuissances principales et des representants de tro~ autres Etats choisis par la
Conference.

The Australian representative drew attention
at that time to the way in which the veto had
caus~d a deadlock for weeks in the. appointment
of, a Secretary-General for the United ·Nations,

Le representant de l'Australie a faitremarquer a ce moment comment l'exerdce du droit
de veto avait retardepeIidant plusieurs semaines
la designation du Secretaire general des Nations

. 1

b

See documents S/C.3/12 and 8/387.

u

1

Voir les documents 8/C.3/12 et 5/387.

. 44 .

i046

.:S.i4

Q'I\llIlI~~'~_!U!l.,!t"'$

V!

-~-,

and warned that a. sllnilar .deadlock would be Unies; il a averti qU'il. e~aitvr~emblable que
likely in the appointment of a govemor of Trieste l'on aboutit a la meme nnpasse pour la designa_
if that appointment were made by. the Security tion du gouverneur de Trleste, si c'etait le
Council. The fact that, after some months of ConseQ de securite qui devait procedei' a cette
informal .discussions between the permanent designation.. Que les membres permanents du
members of the Security Council, no agreement Consei1 de securite, apres plusieurs mois de dis.
has been reached between them on the question cussions officieuses, n'aient pu se mettre d'accord
of the governorship, demonstra~es the correctness sur le choix du gouvemeur de Trieste, ce1a prouof tb.e Australian view. Had the course suggested ve que le representant de l'Australie avait 'VU
by the Australian delegation been adopted, the juste. Si l'on avait adopte la procedure propo.
present stalemate would have been avoided. This .see par la delegation de.!'Australie, on anrait
is one further illustration of the way in which 6vite l'impasse Oll l'on se trouve actueUement.
veto keeps intrudi'Dg itself to _Cette situation illustre, une fois de plus, la
the spectre of
delay or obstruct the Security Coun~il froIll mak- maniere dont le spectre du veto ne cesse de se
fug a decision on matters to which the veto power manifester pour retarder ou paralyser l'action du
could not have been intended to apply.
Conseil desecurite dans des domaines Oll l'on ne
pouvait avoir eu l'intention d'appliquer ce droit.

the.

Far from achieving unanimity, this proc,edure
in regard' to the Trieste govemorship is an example of the way in which the veto tends to
block almost any decision. 'Such situations are
grievously damaging to the prestige ahd the effectiveness of the United Nations; and, in this
particular 'case, one result is the indefinite con..
tinuance of conditions of econon;lic and political
insecurity in the Trieste area.

Loin de favoriser l'unanimite, la proc~dure
adoptee pour le choix du gouverneur de Trieste
montre comment le droit de veto tend a para·
lyserpresque completement l'action du Cotl!leil.
De telles situationscompromettent gravement
l'efficacite clu travail et le prestige de l'Organisation des Nations Unies et auront notamment
pour effet,_ dans ce cas particuli~r, de prolonger
indefiniment dans la region de Trieste l"instabilite
economique et politique.

Because the Australian Governnient considered.
that the Security .Council had no jurisdiction
under the Charter to accept the obligations contemplated under the peace treaty with Italy and
its annexes,1 the Australian repre~entative on the
Security Council strongly opposed approval by
the Security Council of the Statute and other
instruments. The Australian representative abstained2 from voting on the resolution of 10 January, to which reference is made in the letter from
the Unitc::d Kingdom 'represent~tive.s However,
the Council, by ten votes, decided to approve the
three relevant annexes to the Italian treaty. The
Australian Government signed the treaty of
peace and will, when the treaty has been ratified,
be bound by all its provisions, inclUding those
referring to. the duties of the' Security Council in
relation to Trieste.

Comme le Gouvernement de l'Australie esti·
me que le Conseilde securite n'est pas ~abi1ite par la Charte a accepter d'assumer les obligations prevues au traite de paix avec l'Italie et a
sesannexesl, sonrepresentantaupres duConseil
de securite s'est fermement oppose a ce que le
Conseil de securiteapprouvat le Statut et les
autresinstruments. Le representant de l'Australie
s'est a'bstenu de voter sur la resolution du 10
janvier, a laquelle le representant du Royaume·
Uni a fait allusion dans sa lettre3 • Toutefois, le
Conseil a, par dix voix, decide d'approuver les
trois annexes du traite de paix avec l'Italie qui
se rapportent ala question~ Le Gouvemement de
l'Australie .a signe le traite de paix, et, quand
celui-ci aura ete ratifie, l'Australie. sera liee par
toutes' sesdispositions, y compris celles qui ont
trait aux obligations du Conseil de securite concemant Trieste.

La delegation de l'Australie se preoccupe
The present concern of the Australian delegation is, therefore, an attempt to give effect to the donc actuellement derealiser les intentions du
.intention of the treaty and to endeavour t9 ensure traite et dechercher a s'assurer que l'action du
that the established machinery, imperfect as we mecanisme etabli, si imparfait· qu'il nollS semfeel it is, shall not be obstnicted or delayed. The ble, ne sera ni retardee, ni paralysee. Le Conseil
immediate task of the Council is to make ar- 'a le devoir immediat de prendre des mesures
rangements for the appointment of the appro- pour designer legente de gouvemeur qui conpriate kind of gove~or of Trieste, who can -vienne a .Trieste et. qui puisse assumer ses oJ>liassume his responsibilities in the manner and at gations.de la maniere et aU!p-oment.prevus.
the time required. .
The USSR representati've contends tb.at no
action can be taken by the Council until the
peace treaty enters into force. None of the arguments he has advanced in support of his <;oiltention is valid. He is advancing two main

Le represenhnt de l'URSS· pretend que le
Conseil de securite ne peJlt prendre de decision avant l'entree en vigueur du traite de pai:x:
Aucun des argumen-q; qu'il a presentes a l'appm
de cette allegation n"est valable. Il invoq1.le deux

1- See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No, I, Annex 2.

1 Voir Ies Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de seeurite,
Deuxieme Annee, SuppIemettt No I, A~nex.e 2.
2 Ibid., No 3, page ~l.
.
a Voir la note 1.

"'Ibid" ri~';:-7ge~k.~, c''": --_, .-:J see fOOtnote 1.
- ..

~~

arguments. He ~lainls that ~e Security ~otmcil
should not· consider the question of. appomtment
until agreement has been reached among the
permanent members. The AUstralian delegation
cannot for a moment accept that contention. The
. informcl discussions which have been held between the permanent members have not only
been sterile, but have no legal basis whateyer.
There is no decision of the Security Council, and
no provisioIl in the peace treaty or any of its
annexes, which gives a mandate to the pe1;IDanent
members to decide or.even to discuss the matter.
What they have taken upon themselves to do has
been done entirely on their own initiative. The
~atter is outside the orbit of consideration by the
Conncil.

considerations principales en premier lieu, le
Conseil de securite nedoit pas, seIon lui, examiner la question de la nomination tant que les
membres permanents ne se seront pas misd'accord. La delegation de l'Australie ne peut absolument pas' accepter cette maniere de voir. Les
membres permanents· ont procede a des. discus-.
sions officieuses qui, non seulement n'ont donne
aucun resultat, mais encore etaient ~enuees de
toute base juridique. Aucurie decision du Conseil de securite, aucune disposition du traite de
paix ou de ses annexes, ne donne aux membres
permanents mandat de trancner,. ou meme de
di'lcuter, cette question. Ce qu'ils ont pris sur
eux de faire, i1s l'ont fait entierement de leur
propre initiative. Le Conseil n'a pas a s'occuper de cette question.

The Council has undertaken the responsibility
of appointing a governor. There is no particular
caucus or junta or cal-al which must make the
decision, but the Council itself.

Le Conseil de securite a assume l'obligation
de designer wlg01.lVerneur. n n'appartient pas
a que1que cli!fue, factionou coterie de prendre
cette decision, mais au Conseil lui-meme,

In the second place, the USSR represtntative
contends that the Council cannot discuss the
qllestion of appointment until the .treaty has en. tered into force. If he had said that there could
be no fornlal appointment, there would be some
merit in his contention.

En second lieu, le representaI)t de l'URSS.
pretend que le Conseil ne .peut ·discuter de la
nomination du gouverneur avant que le traite
de paix ne soit entre en Vigueur. S'il avait dit
que le -gouverneu" ne peut etre officiellement
nommes son argumentation aurait eu quelcjpe
tr -.dement.
.

To determine the legal position, it is necessary
Pour juger de l'aspect juridique de la question,
to look at the combined effect of the peace treaty, il faut examiner.I''effet combine du tTaite de
the Instrument for the P:roviSional Regime, and paix, de I'Instrument reIatif au regime provithe Perma.'lent Statute. Until the treaty comes . soire et du Statut permanent. Jusqu'aumoment
into force and article 21 becomes applicable, the ou le traite entrera en vigueur et ou l'article 21
Free Territory will continue to be administered deviendra applicable, le Territoire librecontiby the Allied military cominands within their nucra d'etre administre par les -commandements
/ respective zones. Immediately after the treaty militaires allies, agissant chacun d~_ sa zone
enters into force, Italian sovereignty will be propre~ La .souverainete de l'Italie ·prendrafin'
ternlinated and- the Free Territory will be gov- des l'entree en vigueur du traite et le Territoire
erned in accordance with the Instrument for the ,libre sera administie co~ormement aux disP9Provisional Regime, which will remain in force sitions de l'Instrument relatif au regime proviuntil such date as the Security Council shall fix soire, lequel demeurera en vigueur jusqu'a la
for .the coming into force of the Permanent date que le Ccnseil de securite fixera pour l'enStatute.
tree en vigueurdu Statut permanent.
In the· third place, article 1 of· the Instrument
for the Provisional Regime 1 provides the following: "The Governor shall assume office in the
Free Territory at the earliest possible moment
after the coming into force of the present Peace
Treaty. . ." The right of the Security COlmcil
to appoint a governor is derived from article 2
of the Instrument for the Provisional Regime
which provides that H. • • all other provisions of
the Permanent Statute sh~n be applicable during
the period of the provisional regime as and when
these pro"isions prove to be applicable and in
so far as they are not superseded by the present
Instrument. . ."

En troisieme .lieu, l'article premier de l'Instrument reIatif au regime provisoire1 dhlpose
que: '~Le Gouverneur entrera en fonctions dans
le Territoire libre le pluS tat possible apres l'entree en vigueur du present traite de paix •.."
Le droit du Conseil de securite de nommer un
g()Uvemeur decoule de l'article 2 de I'Instrument
relatif au ret.me provisoire, qui stipule que
" . . . toutes les autres dispositions du Statut permanent seront applicables pendant la. duree
du r~gime provisoire, a IIlesure que ces dispositions se reveIeront applicables et pour autant
qu'elles ne soient pas remplacees par celles du
present Instrument'''.

One of the provisions of the Permanent Statute

L'une des clispositioDs du Statut permanent
du Territoire libre de Trieste applicable au·regime provisoire, et que I'Instrument n'ap~
remplacee, est celle de l'artide 11 qui porte :
"Le Gouverneur· sera nonune par le -Conseil

fo~ the Free Territory of Trieste which is. ap-

plicable to the provisional regime and not superseded by it is artiCle 11, which provides that "the
Governor shall be appointed by the Security

I

1 For full text of Instrument, see Official· Rtlcords uj ihe ,
i Vok te text~ complet de l'Instrument dam les Proces&ui!4r#y Councii,8econd Year, Supplement No. I, pages verbau" ofjiciels du Comeil de securite, DeuxU:me Annee,
12 to 14.
'_
Supplement No I, pages 12 a 14.

IIIIiii.o.....

lU':i'O

".~

Council after consultation with the Governments
of Yqgoslavia. and Italy. He shall not,be a ci~en
of Yugoslavia or Italy or of the Free Territory ..•"

de securiteapres consultation avec les Gouverne_
ments de Yougoslavie et d~Italie. Il ne devra
ctre ressorili'sant ni de la Yougosla,.vie, ni de.
l'Italie1 ni du Territoire libre.... "

Therefore, it seems c1ear,first,that it is not
necessary for the Permanent Statute to conie
into' force before the appointment of the 'governor, and, secondly, that it is necessary for the
Instrument for the Provisional Regime to come
into force before the governor is formally appointed.

Il semble done clair, d'une part qu'il n'est pas
necessaire que le, Statut permanent entre en vigueur avant la nominationdu gouverneur, et,
d'autre part, que l'Instrument relatif au regime provisoire, doit necessairement entrer en vigueur avant la nomination officielle du gouvetneur.

However, the Security, Council is. not concerned at the moment with the formal appointment ,of a governor.. All it ~ concerned with is
making the selection and deciding who the governor shall be, so that the formal appointment
can be made immediately after ,the treaty enters
into force. If the Council does not take that
anticipatory action, the .assumption of office by
the governor will be indefinitely delayed; and;
until h~ assumes office, 'the Free ,Territory will
continue to be administered by the Allied military commands within their ,respecti~e zones.

Toutefois, le Conseil de securite n'a pas, pour
l:instant,a nommer officiellement de gouverneur. Il n'a qu'a examiner les candidatures et a
se mettre d'accord sur un nom, pour ctre en
mesure de procederofficiellement a cette nemination des que le traite de paix sera entre en vigueur. S'il ne prend pas cette mesure prealable,
l'entree en fanctions du gouverneur sera indefmiment retardee et, tant que le gouvemeur .
ne sera pas entre en fonctions, le Territoire libre
continuera d:ctre administre par les commandements militaires allies, agissant chacun dans sa
zone propre.

Le Conseil de'securite devrait se preoccuper
It should be the objective of the Security
CoUncil to give effect to the clear intention of de mettre a execution ce que le traite a manifesthe treaty: namely, to terminate the military tement voulu realiser, a savoir : mettre fin a
administration and to establish the Civil adminis- l'administration militaire et instaurer une adtration by the governor at the earliest possib!e ministration civile sous l'autorite du gouvermoment after, the ~ntry into force of the treatY. neur le plus tot possible apres l'entree en vigueur
It is essential, therefore, that the Security Council du traite. :ij est done absolument necessaire que
, should proceed at once to discuss possible candi- , le Conseil' de securite discute immediatement
des candidats possibles au poste de gouvemeur.
dates for the governorship.
I would add these two ob~ervations. You will
J'aimerais presenter encore deux observations.
recall, Mr.'President, that"when the questions of Vous vous rappellerez, Monsieur le President,
the admission of Italy and Hungary came before que lorsque le Conseil a examine les demandes
this Council,! the Australian representative ob- , d'admission aux Nations Unies de l'Italie et de
jected to those items being placed on the "\genda la Hongrie1, le representant de l'Australie s'est
because the peace treaties had not been ratified; oppose a ce que ces points fussent inscrits a l'orhe consid~redthat, under the Charter, those items dre du jour, alleguant que les traites de paix
could not be examined by this Council, since n'avaient pas ete ratifies; il estimait qu'en vertu
the basis for membership was the sovereign equal- de la Charte, le Conseil ne pouvait examiner
ity of the States, and the two countries were not ces points, etant donne que l'Organisation est
yet sovereign" and that nothing could be done fondee sur le principe de l'egalite souveraine
until the treaty: was ratified. The USSR repre- des Etate et que ces deux pays ne disposaient pas
sentative refused to accept that argument and encore de leur souverainete; il avait doncconvoted for the inclusion of these items ,in the tIu que l'on ne pouvait rien faire tant que le
agenda: Now he endeavours to use the same traite ne serait pas ratifie. Le representant de
argument in the other direction when it suits his l'URSS refusa de se rendre ~cet argument et
purpose.
vota en faveur de l'inscription de ces deux
points a l'ordre du jour. Maintenant, il cherche
a se servir du meme argument, mais dans le sens
contraire, parce que cela lui convient.
My second observ~tion is the following. I also.
r ·11 to mind the observatioIlsof the USSR repre-

sc;t..ative a short time ago that there were some
questions on which even the Security Council
must act by common sense. If ever there was, a
question requiring the application of common
sense, this ~. one. Therefor~, we are going to vote
-{(id1ie adoption of the provisional agenda.

see

1
Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Nos. 42 and 88 respectively.

Ma seconde remarque est la suivante : je me
rappelle eg~ement que le representant de
l'URSS a declare, il y a peu de temps, qu'il y
avait des questions que mcme le ConseR de
securite devrait considerer a la lumiere du bon
sens. S'il en est uI:le qui exige que l'on fass~
.appel an bonsens, c'est. bien celle-ci. Je voter~
done pour l'adoption de l'ordre du jour proVlsoire.
1 Voir les Proces-verbaux 'officiels du Conseil de st!curite,
Deuxieme Anm!e, Nos 42 et 88 respectivement.

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
The representatives of the U~ted Kingdom and
Australia .have expre<;sed views regarding the
subiect under discussion with which I agree in a
ve . :arge measure. There would seem' to be no
utiuty, therefore, in my repeating the able arguments which they have presented to refute the
claim of the USSR repreeentative that the Council has no right to discuss this matter at the
present time:
I shall state, however, that in the view of the
delegation of the United States, there Is nvthing
in the Charter of the United Nations, in our
rules of procedure, in the still, pending treaty with
Italy, or in the Statute for Trieste, which would
act as a legal bar to discussion of th;3 matter in
the Council.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais) : Je me rallie dal1s une tres
large mesure aux vues que viennent d'exprimer
les representants du Royaume-Uni et de l'Australie. n ne semble done pas utile queje r~­
prenne les ::Jxguments judicieux qu'ils ont presentt~s pour refuter l'allegation du representant
de l'URSS, seIon laquelle le Conseil desecurite
n'aurait pas le droit dediscuter cette question
en ce moment.

Je dec!arerai cependant que, de r avis de la
delegation des Etats-Unis, il n'y a, ni clans la
Cha",t,e, ,ni clans notre reglement int€rieur,ni
dam. le traite de paix avec l'Italie qui attend
encore d'etre ratifie, ID dans le Statut de Trieste,
de disposition qui, du point de vue juridique,.
interdise au Conseil de discuter cettc question.

a

Obviously, no appointment of a governor can
be made until the treaty is ratified. However, it
is the plain intent of the treaty, and of all the
related instruments, that the governor of Trieste
shall enter into the exercise of his functions as
soon as possible after the treaty comes,into effect.

Il est evident (ne l'un ne peut proc€der la
nowiT.lation d'un gouverneur tant -que le traite
de paix n'aura pas ete ratifi€. Toutefois, le traite
et tous les instruments connexes ttablissent clairement que le gouvemeur de Trieste devra entrer
en fonctions aussit6t que possible apres l'entree
en vigueur du traite,

Furthermore, article 11 of the Statute provides
that Yugoslavia and Italy must be consulted by
the Security Council concerning the appointment
of· the governor. All of those measures require
time.

En outre, I'article n du Statut stipule que le
Conseil de securite doit consulter les Gouvernements de Yougoslavie et d'Italie sur lanomination du gvuverneur. Toutes ces mesuresdemandent du temp3.

The representative of Australia made, I think,
one of the most cogent argument'5 which h,we
been presented: that is, t.l:lat it is a matter of
common sense for the Council to make possible
the appointment of the Governor as soon as possible following the entry into force of the treaty
and its ratification.

A mon a'vis, le i'epresentant de l'Australie a
fait valoir l'un des arguments les plus convaincants quand i1 a dit que c'etait, de la part du
Ccnseil, temoigner de bon sens que de veiller ace
que le gouverneur put etre nomme le plus tOt
possible apres la ratification du traite et son
entree en vigueur.

The attitude of, the USSR representative is
particularly surprising when one recalls t.1}e Protocol of the Council of Foreign Mmisters of 12
December 1946, which was published and which"
with your permission, I shall read:

L'attitude du representant de l'URSS est
d'autant plus surprenante quand en se rappclle
les termes du Protocole du Conseil des Ministres
des Mfaires etrangereS, en date du 12 decembre
1946,qui et ete publie etdont, avec votre permission, je vais donner lecture :

"Les representants des Etats-Unis d'Ameri"The representatives of the United States of
America, France, the United Kingdom of Great que, d~ la France, du Royaume-Uni de GrandeBritain and Northern Ireland, and the Union of Bretagne et d'Irlande du Nord, et de l'Union
Soviet Socialist Republics,' assembled on Decem- des Republiques socialistes sovietiquec, reunis
ber 12 IS46 at New York as the Council of le 12 decembre 1946, a New-York, en Conseil
Foreign Ministers, have agreed that their Govern- des Mi.'listres des Mfaires etrangeres, sont convements will' take all possible, steps to secure the ' nus que leurs Gouvernements feront toute dilidesignation of the Governor.of the Free Territory gence pour assurer la designation du Gouverneur
of.Trieste at the earliest possible date under the du Territoire libre, de Trieste aussi rapidement
conditions laid down in the' draft Permanent que possible et dans les conditions prevues au
Statute so as to ensure his appointment by the projet de statut permanent, en vue cl'assurer sa
~ecudty Council simultaneously with the. entry nomination par le Conseil de, securite a la date
mto force of the Peace Treaty."
de l'entree en vigueur du Traite de Paix."
How it would be possible for the Security
Council to ensure the appointment of the governor to coincide with the entry into force of the
peace treaty unless we discuss possible candidates
and agree in the Council on a designee before
that time-that is a situation which I cannot
imagine.
'

Je ne puis imaginer comment le Conseil de
securite pourrait faire coincider la nomination
du gouverneur avec l'entree en vigueur du traite
de paix, si, avant cette date, il n'a pas examine
lescam:lidatw'cs possibles et ne§~eSfpasrnis
d'accord sur un nom.

The United States also is aware that the endeavours which have been made since last Febru-

Le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis se rend
compte, lui aussi, que les efforts entrepris de-

Itrn

ary by the permanent members of the Security I puis feVrier dernier par les membres permanents

~

Council to reach informal agreem"e.:.'lt 'J'n a nominee were not successful, and, therefore, that it
would be Jlighly useful for the non-permanent
members of the Security Council to propose
candidates and to enter into the discussion. The
United States delegation will therefore vote for
the adoption of this item on the agenda; and it
feels that it is the duty of the Council to take
action at once in this matter.

du Conseil de securite pour se mettre officieusement d'accord sur le cho~ d'un candidat n'on:
pas ete couronnes de succes, et qu'il serait done .
d1un grand int&et que les membres non permanents du Conseil de securite proposent des candi.
dats et participent a. la discussion. La delegation
des Etats-Unis votera donc pOUf l'adoption de
ce point de l'ordre du jour, et e1le estime qu'il
est du deVOir du Conseil de prendre immediatement une decision sur cette question.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): The USSR
Government is as anxious as all the other Governments concerned to have a governor of the Free
.Territory of Trieste appointed immediately after
the peace treaty with Italy has come into force.
But in discussing this question, we should follow
the normal procedure, the normal method, as
envisaged by the decision of the Council of
Foreign Ministers.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sodalistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Le Gou,vernement de l'URSS, comme les autres Gouvernements interesses, est desireux que le
gouverneur du Territoire libre de Trieste sait
nomme aussitot apres l'entree en vigueur du
traite de paix avec l'Italie. Mais pour examiner
cette question, il faut suivre la procedure nor~
male, ·l'ordre normal, prevus par la decision du
Conseil des M~tres des Mfaires etrangeres.

The Australian repres(".ntative has tried to point
to an alleged mconsistency in the USSR representative's attitude. He recalled that, when the
question was considered of putting the Italian
Government's application. for Italy's admission
to the United Nations on the Council agenda, the
V§SR representative voted for its inclusion, but
now that the United Kingdom representative's
letter is being considered, the Soviet representative objects to its inclusion in the agenda. This
accusation of inconsistency is, of course, fallacious.

Le representant de I'Australie s'est efforce de
prouver que l'attitude du Gouvemement de
I'URSS etait illogique. n a rappele que lorsqu'il
etait question d'inscrire a. l'ordre du jour du
Conseil de securite la demande d'admission
adressee par le Gouvernement italien a. I'Organisation d-es Nations Unies, le representant de
I'URSS a vote en faveur de cette inscription
mais que, a present, lorsqu'il s'agit de l'examen
de la lettre du representant du Royaume-Uni,
ce .memerepresentant s'oppose a. ce qu'elle sait
inscrite a. l'ordre du jourdu Conseil. n va sans
dire que cette accusation d'illogisme n'est pas
fondee.
_

1 should like to remind 'you that, when. the
inclusion in the Council's agenda of the Italian
Government's application for admission of Italy
to the United Nations was being discussed, I said
that the application in question should be considered jointly with similar applications from
other countries with whom peace treaties were
being made, and that Italy's application, like
those of the other countries mentioned by me,
should be considered when the peace treaty with
Ital~ was ratified and came into force.

Je vous rappellerai qu'au moment OU nous
discutions le point de savoir s'il fallait porter a
l'ordre du jour la demande d'admission adressee
par le Gouvernement italien a.I'Organisation des
Nations Unies, j'ai dit qu'il faudrait examiner
cette demande en meme .temps que celle des
autres pays avec lesquels on etait en train de
conclure des traites de paix, et que l'examen
de la demande de I'Italie, ainsi que des demandes
sourruses par les pays dont je viens de pader, devrait avoir lieu apres la ratification et l'entree en
vigueur du traite de paix avec l'Italie.

I would have no objection to putting on the
agenda the question raised by the United Kingdom representative if, in placing it on the agenda,
we decided to discuss or consider it only after the
treaty with Italy comes into force. I would agree
to the question being put in this way since this is
exactly the position taken by the USSR representative. when we considered the question of
placing Italy's application for admission to the
'United Nations on our agenda.'

Je ne m'opposerais pas a. ce que la question
soulevee par le representant du Royaume-Uni
!Ut inscrite a. l'ordre du jour si, ce faisant, nous
decidions d'examiner cette question apres l'entree en vigueur du traite de paix avec I'Italie.
J'accepterais cette solution, car eUe est entierement conforme a I'attitude ad.optee par le representant de l'URSS a:u cours des debats sur
l'inscription de la demande d'admission adressee par l'Italie a. l'Organisation des Nations
Unies.

As you' see, there is no inconsistency but complete consistency.

Vous voyez done qu'il n'y a la. aucune inconsequence et que mon attitude est logique.

The .PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Are there any further cOInJ:r.en;.s? I shall have one
to make myself, but I shall first call on the United
Kingdom representative.

Le PRESIDENT: Y a-t-il d'autres observations?
J'en aurai moi-meme une a. presenter,mais, allparavant, je donne la parole au representant
du Royaume-Uni.

1II£&------------1'ft16~5'i_r_------------.Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom):
I should merely like to say one word in relation
to what the USSR representative has just said.
When I on the instructions of my Government,
request;d inclusion of this question in the agenda,
it was of course· with the view to its immediate
discussion, and I must still press for that.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Roya,ume-Uni)
(traduit de l'anglais) : Je voudrais simplement
ajouter un mot a propos de la declaration que
vient de faire le representant de l'URSS. Lorsque, me conformant a~ instructions de mon
Gouvernement, j'ai demande l'inscription de
cette question a l'ordre du jour, c'etait, bien entendu, pour que l'on en discutat immediatement, et jecontinue d'insister pour qu'il en soit
ainsi.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Here is what I wanted to say.

Le PRESIDENT: Void l'observation que je voulais presenter.

I think we all agree that the appointment of .
Je crois que nous sommes unanimes a cousithe governor of Trieste can be made only afteI derer que la nomination du gouvemeur -de
the peace treaty has been ratified. I believe we Trieste ne peut prendre effet qu'apres la ratimip'ht even agree that such appointment pre- fication, du traite de paix. J e 'pense meme que
suppos~ that the treaty has been ratified.
nollS pourrions etre d'acccrd sur ce point que
la nomination suppose que la ratification a eu
lieu~

I would remind you that, under article 11 of
Je rappelle que, d'apres l'article 11 du Statut
the Statute of Trieste, no appointment shall be de Trieste, la nomination ne peut intervenir,
made, as' has just been pointed out, until the ainsi qu'on la souligne tout a l'heure, qu'apres
Governments of Yugoslavia and Italy have been consultation des Gouvernements de Y ougo;;laconsulted. This being so, if I have understood the vie et d'Italie. Dans ces conditions, si j'interUnited Kingdom representative's proposal cor- prete .bien la propositioD. du representant du
rectly-and I will ask him to confirm my under- Royaume-Uni -'- ce que je lui demanderai de
standing-in his opinion, all we need do at th~ bien vouloir me confirmer - il ne, s'agirait,
moment is to have a preliminary exchange of , pour le moment, dans sa pensee, que d'un echanviews between the members of the Security Coun- ge de vues prealable entre les membres du Con~
cil, in order to widen the exchange of views seil de' sec~te, ayant pour objet d'eIargir les
which certain members of the Council have had echanges de vues que, tres correctement d'ail·
-and quite properiy have had-on this question. leurs, certains membres du Conseil ont pu
avoir sur ("~tte question.
If I understand Sir Alexander correctly, all we
need do, then, would be to have a preliminary
discussion about the various candidatures which
have been put forward. We would have a quick
disctL.<lSion and see also whether any others might
ppsSibly be considered. Naturally, there would
be no question of taking a decision at present.

Si j'interprete bien la pensee de Sir Alexander,
il ne s'agirait done e,ntre nous que cl'une conversation tres preliminaire, 011 seraient envisagees
les differentes candidatureS qui ont pu ctre proposees. 'Nous les examinerions rapidement, et
verrions aussi si d'autres candidatures peuvent
ctr~ eventuellement envisagees. Bien entendu,
il ne saurait etre question de prendre une decision maintenant.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom):
The President's interpretation seems to be entirely
correct.

Sir . Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume.;Uni)
(traduit de l'anglais) : L'interpretation du President me parait tout a fait juste.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Thank you.

Le PRESIDENT: Je vous remerde.

If there are no further remarks I shall put the
adoption of the agenda to the vote. I shall ask
you to vote item by item. on this adoption. As
item 1 is the adoption of the agenda itself, I shall
begin by asking you to vote on items 2 and 3 of
the provisional agenda.

S'il n'est pas presente d'auttes observations,
je vam mettre aux voix l'adoption de l'ordre du
jour. Je vous demanderai, Messieurs, de VOllS
prononcer, point par point, sur cette adoption.
Le point 1 etant l'a,doption meme de l'ordre
du jour, je VOllS consulterai d'abord sur le point
2, .puis sur le point 3 de l'ordre du jour provi.
SOIre.

Are you in favour, then, of including in our
agenda item 2 of the provisional agenda: "Appointment of a governor of the :Free Territory of
Trieste"?

J e soumets done a votre appropation I'inscription a l'ordre du jour du point 2 de l'ordre du
jour provisoire : "Nomination d'un gouverneur
du Territoire libre de Trieste."

.Iiit·

wil>. 0=

~ ~.~ ,~
.•

.••..

..

1052

Le vote a lieu a main levee, ettJinscription a
A, vote was taken by sltow of handsJ and item
2 of tlte provisional agenda was adopted by nine tJordre du jour du point 2 de l'ordre du jour
provisoire est decidee par neuf voix contre uneJ
votes to one with one abstention.
avec une abstention.
Votes for:
Votent pour
Australia
Belgium
Brazil
China
Colombia
Poland
Syria
United Kingdom
United States of America

Votes against:
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

Australie
Belgique
Bresil
Chine
Colombie
Pologne
Syne
Royaume-Ulli
Etats-Unis d'Amerique

Vote contre:
Union des Republiques socialistes sovi6.
tiques

Abstention:

S'abstient :

France

France

The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
shall now ask you if you approve of the inclusion
in the agenda of item 3, which is a continuation
of our earlier discussion on the application of
Article 43 of the Charter.

Le PRESIDENT: Je soumetsmaintenant a votre approbation l'inscription a l'ordre du jour
du point 3, qui comporte la suite de notre discussion precedente concernant l'application de
l'Article 43 de la Charte.

A vote was taken by sltow of Itands, and it was
Le vote cl lieu cl main levee, et l'inscription a
unanimously decided to include item 3 of the l'ordre du jour du point 3 de l'ordre du jour
provisional agetlda in tlte agenda.
provisoire est decide.e cl l'unanimite.
118. Procedure concerning the discussion
of the appointment of the governor
of Trieste

178. Procedure relative Cl la discussiGn
coneernant la nomin~tion du gouveneur de Trieste .

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):

Le PRESIDENT: Je dois vous consulter au sujet de la methode que nous allons employer
pour examiner le point 2 de notre ordr~ du jour,
c'est-a-dire la question de la nomination du go~­
verneur du Territoire libre de Trieste. '

I should like to consult you on how we, should
proceed for the consideration of item 2 of our
agenda, that is, the appointm~nt,of the governor
of the Free Territory of Trieste.
It has been suggested, at least unofficially, that
this matter should be discussed in private. Now
a decision of the Security Council is necessary if
a private meeting is to be held. I leave it to you,
therefore, to decide on the proposal that this item
be discussed in private session.

Il a ete propose - officieusement, tout au
moins - que ce point £fit discute en seance privee; or, il faut une decision du Conseil de securite pour qu'une seance soit tenue a huis clos. Je
soumets done a votre appreciation la proposition
visant a ce que ce point soit discute en seance
privee.

If it were so decided, I would suggest that this
item should be taken up only when we meet this
afternoon, and that we now proceed with the
discussion of item 3 of our agenda.

Si une decision en ce sens etait prise, je vous
proposerais de ne proceder a l'examen de ce
point qu'au cours de la seance que nous tiendrions eet apres-midi, et d'aborder maintenant
le point 3 de l'ordre du jour.

Are there any comments? As there are none,
Y a-t-il des observations? Puisqu'il n'y en a
I shall put to the vote the proposal that item 2 pas, je vais mettre aux voix la proposition selon
of the agenda be considered in private session.
laqueHe l'examen du point 2 de l'ordre du jour
aura lieu en seance privee.

Le vote a lieu cl main levee, et la proposition
A vote was taken by show of hands, and the
proposal to consider in private the question of visant cl examiner en seance privee la question
appointment of a governor of Trieste was ap- de la nomination du gouverneur du Territoire
proved by nine votes, with two abstentions.
libre de Trieste est adoptee par neuf voix, avec
deux abstentions.
Votes for:

Votent pour:

Belgium
Brazil

Belgique
Bresil

China
Colombia
France
Poland
Syria
United ~gdom
United States of America
Abstentions:
Australia
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : As

Chine
Colombie
France
Pologne
Syrie
Royaume-Uni
Etats-Unis od'Amerique
S'abstiennent :
Australie
Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques.

be taken up only at this afternoon's meeting. We
shall now pass on to the examination of item 3.

Le PRESIDENT: Conformement· a la proposition que je viens de faire, nous n'examinerons ce
point 2 de I'ordre du jour q~'a la seance de cet
apres-midi, et nous allons passer immediatement
a I'examen du point 3.

179. Continuation (if the discussion on the
special agre';)ments under Article 43
of the Charter and the organization
of fhe United Nations ar",ed forces

179. Suite de la discussion sur les accords
speciaux prevu5 Ca l'Article 43 de la
.Charte et sur I'organisation des
forces armees des .Nations Unies

The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
meeting to ask the Military Staff Committee to
Clarify articles 5 'and 6 of the report it submitted
to us. 1

Le PRESIDENT: Je vous rappelle qu'au cours
de notre derniere seance, il avait ete decide de
demander au Comite d'etat-major de vouloir
bien eclaircir pour nous le sens des articles 5
et 6 du rapport qu'il nous a soumis1 •

I have consulted the Military Staff Committee
on these points and have received from'its Chairman an answer to only one of the questions. That
is the Australian representative's question which
is recorded in the record of our hundred and
forty-second meeting in the following terms:

J'ai consulte le Comite d'etat-major sur ces
points et j'ai re~u de son President une reponse
concernant seulement 1'une des questions posees:
il s'agit de la question du representant de l'Australie qui figure en ces termes au proces-verbal
de notre cent-quarante-deuxieme seance:

1 The following is the text of the relevant letters from
the President of the Security Council to the Chairman of
the Military Staff Committee (document S/380) :
[Original text: French]
19 June 1947
Sir:
At the request of the representative of Australia, the
President of the Security Council begs the Chairman of
the Military Staff Committee to let him know urgently,
and if possible before the next meeting of the Security
Council (Friday, 20 June):
(1) The Military Staff Committee's interpretation of
articles 5 and 6 of the report of the Military Staff Committee"to the Security Council on the organization of the
armed forces of the United Nations;
(2) .The action at present being taken by the Military
Staff Committee in connexion with the estimate of the
overall strength of the armed forces made available to the
Security Council.
.
(Signed) A. PARODI
President of the Security Council

1 Voici les textes des lettres ·adressees a re sujet au President du Comite d'etat-major par le President du Conseil
de securite (document S(380) :
[Texte original en franr;ais]
Le 19 juin 1947
Monsieur le President,
A la demande du representant de rAustralie, le President du Conseil de securite prie le President du Comite
d'etat-major de voulo~ bien lui faire connaitre dans les
plus brefs deIais et si possible avant la prochaine seance
du Conseil de securite (le vendredi 20 jtiin):
1. L'interpretation du Comite d'etat-major en ce qui
concerne les articles 5 et 6 du rapport du Comite o'etatmajor au Conseil de securite relatifs a l'organisation des
forces armees des Nations Unies;
2. L'activite actuelle du Comite d'etat-major relative a
revaluation de la pUissance d'ensemble des forces armees
mises a la disposition du Conseil de securite.

[Original text: French]
19 June 1947

[Texte original en franr;ais]
Le 19 juin 1947

I have just suggested, item 2 of the agenda will

will remind you that it was decided at our last

Sir:
I have the honour to communicate to you below an
extract from the verbatim record of the hundred and
forty.second meeting of the Security Council held at Lake
Success on Wednesday, 18 June 1947 (S/P.V./142, 'page 92) :
"The representative of AUSTRALIA: My quesuon is: is
!he .Military Staff Committee giving consideration, or will
It. gtv~ consideration to articles agreed to unless there is a
dlfectlon from this Council?
"The PRESIDENT: As I pointed out, the question has now
been asked and a reply will be forthcoming, possibly at
our next meeting."
I should be obliged if you would let me have a reply
to the questions of the representative of Australia as soon
as possible, if possible by Friday, 20 June.

•

.
(Signed) A~ PARODI
President of the Security Council

(SignC) A. PARODI
President du Conseil de securitc

Monsieur le President,
rai l'honneur de vous communiquer ci-dessous un
extrait du compte rendu de la cent-quarante·deuxieme
reuniol1 du Conseil de securite, tenuea Lake Success le
mercredi 18 juin 19~~7 [S/P.V./142, page 92 (texte anglais) ].
"Le representant de rAUSTRALIE: Ma question est la suivante: le Comite d'ctat-major examine-t'll, ou examinera-til de nouveau des articles qU'il a deja acceptes s'il ne
re<;Qit pas d'instructions du Conseil de securite a cet effet?
lLePRtsIDENT: I_a question a ete posee, et, comme je
1ai indique tout al'heure, il y sera repondu, si possible, a'
notre procbaine reunion:'
Je 'Vous serais' tres oblige de mefaire parvenir une
reponse aux questions posees par le representant de
I'Australie aussitOt que possible, et si possible le vendredi
20 juin.
.
(Signtf) A.PARODI
President du Conseil de securitt!

$.------..

_...•.•••I--L.S.I...

...---------------_.~

:---1-m~5~'

"Is the Military Staff Committee giving consideration, or will it give consideration to articles
agreed to unless there ,is a direction from this
Ccuncil?"l

"Le Comite d'etat-major examine-t-il, ou
examinera-t-il de nouveau, des articles qu'il a
deja acceptes s'il ne re~oit pas d'instructions du
Conseil de securite a cet dfet1 ?"

Here is the reply from General McNarney,
Chairman of the Military Staff Committee: 2

Void la reponse du general McNamey, Pre.
sident du Comite d'etat-major2:
'

[Original text: English]

[Texte original en anglais]
Le 19 juin 1947

19 June 1947
"Sir:
In reply to your letter of 19 June 1947, requesting a reply, to the question posed by the
Australian delegation at the one hundred and
forty-second meeting of the Security Council,
18 June 1947, as indicated in document S/P.V.
142, page 92, I have the honour to submit the
following:

"Monsieur le President,
"En l'eponse a votre lettre en date du 19 join
1947, dans laquelle vous me demandez une re·
ponse au~ questions posees par le representant
de l'Australie au cours de la cent-quarante.
deuxieme seance du Conseil de securite, tenue
le 18 juin 1947, et qui figurent au document
S/P.V. 142, pages 21 et 22, j'ai I'honneur de
vous faire part de ce qui suit:

"First, the Military Staff Committee is not now
reconsidering the ~ording or meaning of articles
of the general principles which have been agreed
to; and, second, the Military Staff Committee
has no present intention of reconsidering any of
the articles of the general principles which have
been agreed' to without s~cific direction to that
effect from the Security Council."

"En premier lleu, le Comite d'etat-major ne
procede pas, pOUf le moment, a un nouvel exa·
men. du texte ou du sens des articles ayant trait
aux principes generaux et qui ont ete acceptesj
en second lieu, le Comite d'etat-major n'a pas
actuellement l'intention d'examiner a nouveau
l'un quelconque des articles ayant trait aux principes generaux et qui ont ete acceptes, sans
avoir, au prealable, re~u du Conseil de securite
d'instructions precises a cet eUet."

(Signed) Joseph T. McNARNEY,
General, USAAF,
Chairman, Military Staff Committee

(Signe) Joseph T. McNARNEY
General de l'armee de l'air des Etats-Unis,
President du ComiM d'etat-major

I have not yet received a reply to the other
questions asked.

Je n'ai pas encore re~u de reponse aux autres
questions posees.

At the present stage of our discussion, I could
Au point ou en est notre discussion je puis,
ask you either to continue the examination of soit vous demander de continuer l'examen des
articles 5 and 6 and, if possible, reach a decision, articles 5 et 6 pour arriver, si possible; a une
on them-I would point out that I have had no ~ decision en ce qui les concerne - je ferai remar
motion to amend these articles-or ask you quer que je n'ai ete saisi d'aucune proposition
whether you thought we should, .on the other tendant a. modifier ces articles - , soit voUB
hand, wait .for' the Military Staff Committee's demander si vous estinlez qu'au contraire DOUB
reply, in which case we could proceed to discuss devons attendre la reponse du Comite d'etat·
the next· articles of the repdrt.
major, et, dans ce cas, passer a l'examen des
articles suivants du rapport.
n

Mr. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgium) (translated
M. VAN LANGENHOVE (Bt:1gique): Je sou·
.from French): I should like to make some addi- haiterais pouvoir presenter des remarques comtional obs,ervations on article 6, but these would pIementaires ausujet de l'article 6, m~ ces
not call for reconsideration by the Military Staff
Committee.

remarques ne necessitent pas de reexamen par
le Comite d'etat-tnajor. ,

Le PRtsIDEJ\lT:Dans ces conditions, il me
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
This being the case, I think we should ask the semble que nous devons demander au repre.
representative of Belgium to submit his observa- sentant de la Belgique de nous presenter imme'diatement ses observations.
tions immediately.

offer are intended to make what I said at the
last. meeting rather clearer and will not, as I
have just stated, involve referring this question
back to the Military Staff Committee. It is, I
. think, for the Security Council itself to judge of
their relevance. My remarks aim at making the

M. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgique): Les
remarques que je voudrais presenter, et qui tendent a apporter un peu plus de clarte sur celles
que j'ai deja formuIees a. la seance precCdente,
ne comportent pas, comme je viens de le dire,
un renvoi au Comitc.d'etat-major. C'est, en effet,
au Conseil de securite lui-meme qu'il appar~
tient, a mon avis, d'en apprecier la pertinence.

1 See" Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 47.
'
'
-Document 5{880.

1 Voir les Proces-verba"" officiels du Conseil de st!eurilt!,
Deuxieme ann~J No 47.
u Document 5/880.

Mr. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgium) (translated
from French) : The observations I should like to

IIJS

1055

terminology used in the report clearer and bringing it into line with that of the Charter.

Ces remarques tendent a preciser la terminologie employee dans le rapport et a la mettre en
harmonie avec celle qui est employee dansla
Charte.

According to Article 43 of the Charter, it is
SeIon l'Article 43 de la Charte, il incombe au
the Security Council~~ duty to take "the initia- Conseil de' securite de prendre "l'initiative" de
tive" in negotiating spedal agreements between la negociation d'accords speciaux a conclure
itself and the Member States. I stress the word entre lui et les Etats Mcmbres. J~ souligne le mot
initiative, which is the one used in the Charter. initiative, q ..d est celui qu'on emploie dans la
Under these agreements, the Members of the Charte. En vertu de ces accords, les Membres
United Nations will have to hold certain armed des Nations Unies auront l'obligation de tenir en
forces in reserve, which they thus undertake to reserve certaines forces armees, qu'ils se seront
make available to the. Security Council "on its engages a mettre a la disposition du Conseil
call," that is, in a clearly defined hypothetical "sur son invitation", c'est-a-dire dans une hypothese bien determinee.
situation,
Such a hypothetical situation would arise when
Cette hypothese se realise lorsque le Conseil
the Council called for the armed forces and formule l'invitation a mettre a sa di(;pdsition les
facilities compulsorily held in reserve for that pur- forces armees et facilites obligatoirement tenues
pose under the special agreements. The Council en reserve a cette fin en vertu des accords specould make such a call only "in accordance with ciaux. Le Consei! ne peut faire' cette invitation
special agreements" duly concluded. Therefore, que "conformement a des accords speciaux" qui
the obligation to make armed forces available se trouvent avoir ete dument conclus. L'obligato the Security Council pr~supposes ,not only the tion de mettre des forces armees a la disposition
conclusion of special agreements but also a call . du Conseil presuppose donc, non seulement la
from the Security Council. Unti! such a call is conclusion d'accords speciaux, mais en outre une
made, there are within the meaning of the invitation du Conseil de securite. Tant que cette
Charter no armed forces "made available to the invitation n'a pas eu lieu, il n'y a pas, ausens
Council;" there are only armed forces which de la .Charte, de forces armees "mises a la dishave to be held in reserve in anticipation of the position du Conseil"; il n'y a que des forces
possibility-which might never arise-that the armees tenues obligatoirement en reserve, en
Security Council would call on Member States llrevision du cas, qui pourrait ne jamais se proto make them actually available.
l'uire, ou le Conseil inviterait des Etats· Membres
a les mettre effectivement a. sa disposition.
This distinction is one of practical importance.
La distinction est pratiquement importante:
Before a call is made by the Security Council, avant l'invitatioIl du Consei1, les forces armees
the armed forces envisaged in the special agree- visees par les accords speciaux restent sous le
ments remain under the orders of the country to commandement des Etats dont elles relevent;
which they beyong; they can come under the elles ne peuvent passer sous l'autorite du ConSecurity Council's authority only after the latter sell de secufite qu'apres que celui-cl a requis
has asked for them to be made available. That leur mise a sa disposition. Ce n'est la qu'une
is merely one of the effects of this distinction; des consequences de cette distinction; on peut
there may conceivably be others at least equally en concevoir d'autres, au moins aussi imporimportant.
tantes.
In a word, the distinction between these two
Bref, la distinction entre les deux phrases,· celle
phases, the one that precedes the "call" of the qui precede "l'invitation" du Conseil et celle
Council, and the one which follows that call, is qui suit cette invitation, vaut d'etre respectee.
one that should be respected, particularly in a Elle doit surtout l'etre dans un document te1
document such as the Military Staff Committee's que le rapport du Comite d'etat-major, SuI' les
report, on the various parts of which we have to dif£erentes parties duquel nous avons anous
decide.
.
.
prononcer. '
The expression "armed forces made available
Or, dans certains articles du rapport, l'expresto th~ Security Council" is used in certain articles sion "forces armees mises a la disposition' du
of the report to describe forces which are not at . Con,,,:il de securite" est employee pour designer
the Security Council's disposal, but which are still desces qui ne seAlt pas a 'la disposition du
only compulsorily held in reserve in case of such Conseil de securite, mais qui nesont encore que
a possibility.
tenues obligatoirement en reserve en vue de
cette hypothese.
C'est apparemment le cas pourl'article 6
This apparently is the position with regard to
article 6, which the Council is now discussing. dont le Conseil discute en ce moment. n y est,
The reference there is to providing. a force of en e£fet, question de prevair urie force suffisante'
sufficient strength to enable the Council to take pour permettre au Conseil d'agir "en tout
action "in any part' of the world," that is, to point du glolJe", c'est-a-dire pour lui permettre
enable it to cope when necessary with any con- de faire face, si elle se produit, a une eventuaIite
crete situation wherever it may arise. The refer- concrete, ou qu'elle se produhe. n s'a~t donc de
ence is, therefore, ttl forces compulsorily held in forces a tenir obligatoirement en .reserve a cet

b\

..

----------------IIlIIIIIl""'4

-

..._'fi"05510l!J'·

reserve for such a purpose, and not to forces
-l-o:ady "made available to the Security Council,"

c....: ..:ile Charte,r interprets' this expressio~. I should
like to suggest therefore that article 6 be amended
as follows, or that it be redrafted to say the same
thing. Here is the wording I propose:

"'The armed forces specified in the special
agreements'and'which are to be made available
to the Security Council at its request by the
Members of the United Nations shall he of a
. strength sufficient ..."

effet, et non pas de forces deja. "mises a. ladis.
position du Conseil de securite" seIon le sens
que la Charte attache a. cette expression; Aussi
crois-je devoir propDser que 1'ari'J.cle 6 soit
amende comme suit, ou regoive' une nouvelle
redaction .de portee equivalente. Je donne lee.
ture du itexte que je propose:
"Les forces armees designees dans les accords
speciaux et quidoivent etre mises, sur son invi.
tation,a. la &~position du Conseil. de securite
par les Etats ~J.embres des Nations Urees seroilt
suffisantes •.."
.
Le reste du texte n'est pas modifi6.

The rest of the text stands.
I reserVe. the right to subqlit similar amend~
ments to other articles of the report, as they come
up for examination by the Council.

J e me reserve de presenter des amendemllnts
de meme nature concernant d'autres articles du
rapport, a. mesure que le Conseil abordera leur
examen.

I feel sure that the Council will appreciate
that it is better not to use the same expression in
the report to convey two different meanings, one
of which is not the sense in which it is used in
the Charter..

Le Conseil reconnaitra, j'en suis sur, l'interet qu'il y a a. ne· pas employer dans le rapport
une meme expression dans deux sens. differents,
dont l'un ne correspond pas a. celui dans lequel
cette expression est u~ee dans la Charte.
.

The PRESIDENT: (translated from French) :
I should like to thank the Belgian representative
for having clarified and enlarged his earlierob~
serva,!ion, the exact meaning of which, I must
confess, had escaped me. The point which he
raised appears to me to' be the most interesting
and important of all the points discussed during
the consideration of articles 5 and 6 of the re~
port; it certainly merits our serious considera~
tion. I do not know whether you feel you can
discuss .it ..forthwith. In any case, I should like
to hear any observations which members of the
Council may want to make on the Belgian
representative's statement.

Le PRESIDENT: J e remercie le ,representant
p,e la :aelgique cl'avoir bien voulu preciser et
developper une observation qu'il avait deja. presentee et dont-- jedois le reconnaitre et je m'en
excuse - le st;ns exact m'avait. un peu echappe.
Le point qu'il souleve me parait etre le plus interessant et le plus important de tous ceux sur Ifsquels notre attention ait ete appeIee au co'urs de
la discussion des articles 5 et 6 du rapport; il
merite certainement· d'etre serieusement exa- .
rnli.e. J e ne sais si vous estimerez etre en etatde
le discuter des aujourd'hui. Je souhaiterais,
en· tout cas, entendre les observations que' la
declaration du representant de la Be1gique peut
inspireraux membres du Conseil. '

.,

Le representant de la Belgique a donne a. sa
proposition la forme d"un amendement preciS
dont je vais donner de nouveau lecture. n
demande que l'article 6 soit redige comme su~t:
"Les forces armees designees dans les accords
"The armed forces specified in the special
agreements and which are to be made available' speciaux et qui doivent etre mises, .sur' son invito the Security Council at its request by the tation, a. la disposition du Conseil. de securite
Member nations of the United Nations shall be par les Etats Membres des Nations Unies seront
of a strength sufficient to enable the .Security suffisantes .pour permettre au Conseil d'entreCouncil to take prompt action in any part of the prendre une action rapide en tout point du
world for the maintenance or the restoration of globe pour le maintien pll le retablissement de
international peace and security as envisaged in la paix et de la securite internationales, comme
Article 42 of the Charter."
prevu a. l'Article 42 de la Charte."
.
The Belgian representative has submitted his
proposal in the form of a definite amendment,
which I shall read again. He wants article 6 to
be' redrafted as follows:

"

Mr. GRO:MYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Re~
publics) (translated from Russian): I am not
clear as to the intention of the Belgian amendment, and the explanations given do not help
to make it any clearer. Article ~ as approved by
the Military Staff Committee seems to me' to be
clear.

M. GROMYKO (Union des'RepubliquessoCiaIistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Je ne
comprends pas tres bien le sens de l'amendement
beIge; les explications qu'on nous a fourniesne
contribuent pas' a. en prec~er le sens. Il me semble que l'artide 6, te1 qu'il a ete adopte par le
Comite d'etat-major, est parfaitenient clair.

The PRESIDENT: (translated from French) :
, If I have correctly understood-the Belgian repre. sentative's amendment, he has, firstly, offered a
particular interpretation of Article 43 of the
Charter; and, secondly, on the basis of this in~
terpretation he has pointed out that, in the case

Le PRESIDENT: .Si j~ai bien compris l'amendement soumis par le representant de la Belgique, il a, d'une part, presente une cettaine interpretation de l'Article 43 de la Charte; d'autre ,
part, s'appuyant sur cette interpretation, il a
souligne qu'en ce qui concerne les troupes mises

~

. .-------....--..---

1IIU···-----------~i6~5~7,.of th~ armed forces at the disposal of. the .Security Council, there are two successive stages and
two different degrees in the process by. which
these troops are made avaPable to the Security
Council: There'is a preliminary stage where the
forces are, as our Belgian colleague puts it, held
in reserve, and a stage where the forces are actually made available to the Security Council in
the sense that the Security Council decides on
their utilization. I believe I have interpreted the
Belgian amendment con-ectly.

a la disposition du Gonseil de secunte, i1 y a
deux etapes successives, deux degres diff&ents
dans le processus suivant lequel ces troupes sont
mises a la disposition du Conseil de securite: une
etape prealable,. ou les troupes sont, seIon
I'expression de notre collegue beige, mises en
reserve, et une etape ou les troupes sont reellement mises a la disppsition du Conseil de securite, en. ce sens que le Conseil decide lem mise
en action. Je crois interpreter exactement le sens
de l'amendement belge.

Comme je I'ai indique tout a I'heure, mon
, A<.;I have just stated, I feel that both the remarks and the amendment submitted by the, impression est que la remarque qui a ete faite
Belgian representative deserve careful study by ~t I'amendement qui a ete propose par le repreUl! and. perhaps longer reflection. I think there- sentant de la Belgique meritentune etudeattenfore that, in order to allow mo~e time for reflec- tive'de notre part et plus longue reflexion. Dans
tion, and possibly to, allow some of us to consult ces conditio11&, je pense que pour vous permettre
our country's representatives on the Military Staff d'y reflechir davantage et, peut-etre, pour cerCommittee, I should not put this amendment to tains d'entre nous, d'en discuter avec les reprethe vote now.. Therefore, if no objection is raised, sentants de nos pays au Comite d'etat-major, il
I shall hold over the vote on this question. ,
ne convient pas que je mette cet amendement
aux voiximmediatement. Done, si vous n'y
avez pas d'objection, j'ajoumerai le vote sur ce
point.

..

Mr. VAN UNGENHOVE (Belgium) (translated
from French) : I have, of course, no objection to
this adjournment, and I am at my colleagues'
disposal for any additional explanations they may
desire.
'

M. VAN UNGENHOVE (BeIgique): Je n'ai,
bien entendu, aucune objection a faire a . cet
ajournement et je me tiens a la disposition de
mes collegues qui souhaiteraient des eclaircissements complementaires.

I should, however, like to suggest a small correction to the English text of the proposal, which
has just been circulated, which would bring it
into line with the Charter. The words at its
refjuestin the text should be J:'eplaced by the expression at its call, which reproduces the term
of the Charter.

J'aimeraiS cependant signaler que l~ teXte
anglais de ma proposition, qui vient d'etredistribue,appelle une petite rectification pour mettre ses termes" en harmonie avec ceux de la
Charte.. En effet, i1 y aurait lieu de remplacer
l'expression at its· request par les mots at its
call, pour reprendre les termes de la Charte.

The PRESIDENT: (translated from French) :
As no objection has been raised,to the procedure
I have suggested, we shall now proceed to examine the next articles of the report.

Le PRfSIDENT: Aucune observation n'etant
formulee quant a la methode de travail que j'ai
proposee, nous alIons passer maintenant a I'examen des articles suivants du rapport.

In accordance with the procedure hitherto
adopted, I propose to pass over articles 7 and 8
of chapter HI, on which the Military Staff Committee failed to agree.

En ce qui conceme le chapitre Ill, et conformement a la procedure suivie jusqu'a present, je
laisserai de cote les articles 7 et 8, au sujet desquels l'accord n'a pas ete realise au sein du
Comite d'etat-major.

Colonel HODGSON (Au~tralia): D,oes that
mean that you are reserving article 5 as well?

Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
l'anglais): Voulez-vous dire que VOllS reservez
aussi l'article 5?

q

The .PRESIDENT:. (translated from French) :
Yes, that is so.
Chapter IV deals with the contribution of
armed forces by Member nations; it contains six
articles on which agreement was reached in the
Military Staff Committee and three articles
which are not agreed to.
.
The President read articles 9, 10, 12, 13, 14
. and 15, upon which agreement had been reached
by the Military Staff Committee. He reminded
the Council that no agreement had been reached
on articles 11, 16 and 17.

LePRfsIDENT: Oui, i1 en est bien ainsi.

•

~IU3'8

The PRESIDENT~ (translated from French):
Are there any remarks on the articles which I
have just read?

Le P~SIDEl\1T:. Y a-t-il d~ observations a
presenter au.. sujet des articles, dont je viens de
donner lecture?
'

Mr. VAN_ LANGENHOVE (Belgium) (translated
from French): ¥y remarks on article 6 apply
~also to articles 10 and 13, which we are now'
discussing. The expression "armed forces made
available to the Security Council" is again used
in a sense different from that given it in the
Charter. In the latter, I repeat, this expression
implies a call by the Council. This is not the case
in articles 10 and 13.

M. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgique): L'obstrva.
tion que j'ai formuIee au sujet del'article6
s'applique egalement aux articles 10 et ,13 -que
nous examinons en ce moment. L'expression
"forces mises a la disposition du Conseil de
securite" s'y trouve, de meme, employee dans
un sens different de celui qu'elle a dans la Charte.
Dans celle-ci, je le repete; cette expression suppose une invitation du Conseil. Ce n'est pas
l'hypothesedans laquelle se placent les articles
10 et 13.

The -PRESIDENT: (translated from French) -:
The remark we have just heard links up with the
one made about article 6. Articles 10 and 13
should, therefore, be reserved since they deal
with the same question. 1 shall ask the Belgian
representative-to submit at one of our next meetings the written text of his amendments to articles
10 and 13 corresponding to the amendment he
proposed to 2rticle 6.

Le PRESIDENT: 'La remarque qui vient d'etre
faite se rattache a celle qu'on a presentee en ce
qui conceme l'article 6. Les deux articles -10 et
13 doivent done etre reserves, puisque c'est la
meme question qui est soulevee. Je prierai le
representant de la Belgiquede bien vouloir redi.
ger, pour une prochaine seance, les ,modifications qu'il y aurait lieu d'apporter a ces arti.
cles 10 et 13 en relation avec l'amendement a
l'article 6 qu'il a presente.

Are there any other remarks? As there is no
Y a-t-il d'autres observations? Aucune remarresponse, I consider the articles which have been que n'etant presentee, jeconsidere les articles
read to have been adopted by the Security Coun- dont il a ete donne lecture comrrie adoptes par
cil, subject to any consl1quential effect which the le Conseil de securite, sous r~ervl ~ de la reperdecision on the Belgian amendment to, articl~ 6 'cussion qu'aurait sur lesarticles 1C) et 13 la
may have on articles 10 and 13.
decision prise con~emant l'amendement beIge
a l'article 6.

Articles 9,.10,12,13,14 and ISo/the report
Aveccette reserve,les articles 9, 10, 12, 13,
were adopted with this reservation.
,14 et 15 _du rapport sont adoptes.
, The PRESIDENT: (translated from French):
Le PRESIDENT: Je passe au chapitre V, qui
I shall now take up chapter V, which deals with traite de l'utilisation des forces armees.
the employment of armed forces.

,

The President read articles 18, and 19 (chapter

V); he pointed out that no agreement had been
reached on articles 20 and 21.

Le President donne lecture des -articles 18 et 19
(chapitre V); il indique que les articles 20 et
21 n'ont pas donne lieu a un accord,

The PRESIDENT: (translated from French):
As there are no remarks, I consider articles 18
and 19 adopted.

Le PRESIDENT: En l'absence d'observations,
je considere les articles 18 et 19 comme adoptes.

Chapter VJ deals with the degree of readiness
of armed forces.

Le chapitre VI conceme le degre de preparation des forces armees.

, The President then read articles 22,.23 and'
Le President donne lecture des articles 22, 23
24; he pointed out that no agreement had been et 24; il indique que l'article 25 qui concerne
reached on article 25, which concerns air force les _forces aeriennes n;a pas donne lieu a un
contingents.
accord.
The PRESIDENT: (translated from French) :
Are there allY observations?

Le PRESIDENT: Y a-t-il des observations?

Mr. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgium) (translated
from French): My earlier remarks apply to article 22 as well.

M. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgique) ~ Mes
remarques anterieures s'appliquent egalement
a l'article 22.

The PRESIDENT: (translated from French):
If there are no further remarks, articles 22, 23
and 24 are adopted with the reservation made
, by the Belgian delegation, which will be discussed
later.

Le PRESIDENT: S'il n'y a pas d'autres obse~·
vations, les articles 22, 23 et 24 seront COnslderes comme adoptes,avec la reserve faite par
la delegation beIge, qui fera l'objet d'un examenulterieur.

The

Australian representative has just asked
to be allowed to speak, so I call upon him.
_ " " '••Nilliif""'tillioli"Z.-

...
' _
. ......

•

.

t

'

Mais le repr~entant de l'Australie vient de
me demander la parole, et je la lui donne. ~....1
......._

~--_.~_._ _""__...,_.~,~~~.,,.>O~~,,_._._._ ~,. ~-"""'"'

._ _

..

. .

._.

p-~----""""

- ----"117ii05W9-:----------.......~-

Colonel HODGSON (Australia): I should like.
to comment on the wording of article 23, which
I do' not underst"and. The ,article reads: ". • .
, should be maintained at a level which.wi11 enable
these forces to start in good time with the fulfilment of the Security Council measures. . . " I
should like an explanation from one of the five
permanent members as to how the armed forces
can start.with a fulfilment of the measures. I
can .understand how they might start to fulfil
'the measures.
'

Le colonel'·HoDGsoN (Australie) (traduit de
l'anglais): Je desire presenter une observation'
a propas de la redaction de l'article 23,que je
ne comprend3 pas. Cet article, est ainsi con~u:
". . . sera maintenu a ll..l1niveau tel qu'il permettra a ces forces de commencer en temps
voulu l'accomplissement des mesures ordonilees
par le Coilseil de securite..•" Je voudrais que
l'un des cinq membres permanents m'expliquat comment les forces armees peuvent commencer l'execution des mesures; je pourr~
comprendre ~orsce que signifie cette phrase.

The PRESIDENT: (translated from French) :
The dbservation applies specifically to the English
text· it does not affect the French text, to which
I p~ona11y have no objections.

Le PRESIDENT: L'observation vise sp~dale;'
ment le texte anglais; eUe ne s'applique pas,
par voie de consequence, au texte fran~ais,
lequel ne me choque pas personnellement.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom):
I suggest that it would at least make better English if that article read: ". . . should be maintained at a level whith will enable these forces
to act in good time with a view to the fulfilment ..." That, according to my understanding, conveys the sense which is inten.de~. If that
wor~g is acceptable, it. would certainly look
nicer in an EngliSh text.

Sir AlexanderCADoGAN (Royaume-Uni)
(traduit de l'anglazs): Il me semble qu'on ameliorerait le texte en disant: ". .. sera maintenu
a un niveau tel qu'il permettra aces fcJrces de
prendre des mesures en temps opportuD.,en vue
de l'accomplissement ..." Cette redaction. respecte, a man avis, le sens de la phrase. Si vous
l'acceptez, vous aurez certainement ameliore
la redaction du texte anglais.

The PRESIDENT: (translated from French) :
Is this proposal agreeable to our Australia:p. colleague?

Le PRESIDENT: Notre collegue australien'
accepte-t-il cette proposition?,

Colonel HODGSON (Australia) : Yes, Mr. President.

Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
l'anglais): Qui, Monsieur le President.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): The Russian text of this article is perfectly clear and cannot be misunderstood. If you think it useful, we
could translate the Russian text into English. If
the English and Russian versions w(:re brought
into line, the agreed text would read as follows:
"To start in good time to fulfil the Security
Council's measures, etc."

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sodalistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Le texte
russe de cet article est parfaitemerit clair et ne
donne lieu a aucun malentendu. Sic'etait utile,
on pourrait traduire cet article du 'russe en
anglais. 'Si on' faisait ,concorder le texte anglais
et le texte russe, l'article se lirait comme suit:
To start in good time to fulfil the Security
Council's measures, etc. '

Colonel HODGSON (Australia) : That wording
is quite acceptable to me.

Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
l'anglais) : Je trouve ce texte parfaitement acceptable.
.

The PRESIDENT: (translated from French) :
We have before us two proposals to amend this
text, both of which are acceptable to the Australian representative. If there is no objection, I
would suggest retaining the Russian modification, which corresponds exactly to the French
translation of the text. But if Sir Alexander
Cadogan so desires, I shall put his modification
to the vote.

Le PRESIDENT: Nous sommes saisis de deux
propositwns en vue d'ameliorer Cl';: texte, l'une et
l'autre acceptees par le representant de l'Aus-"
tralie. S'il n'y a pas d'opposition, je proposerai
de retenir la modification russe, laquelle corres:'
pond exactement au texte de la traduction en
fran~ais. Mais \si Sir Alexander Cadogan le
desire, je mettrai aux voix la modification qu'il a
lui-meme proposee.

.

.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom) :
Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni)
No, sir. I slightly prefer my wording but, since (traduit de l'anglais): Non, Monsieur le Presithat proposed by the USSR rep~'esentativebrings dent, je marquerais une Iegere preference· pour
the two texts exactly into ac<::ord~and that is a . la redaction que j'ai proposee, mais puisque
gr~at virtue-I agree to the text he suggested.
celle qu'a presentee le representant de l'URSS
assure une parfaite concordance avec le texte,
fran~ais - ce qui est. un grand avantage - je
suis dispose a l'accepter.
The PRESIDENT: (translated from Fre~ch):' Le PRESIDENT: La modification suggeree par
The ame.ndment suggested by the representative lIe representant de I'URSS sera done inscrite dans _
of the USSR will therefore -be inserted in the text. le texte.

b_......__

lOoU
Colonel HODGS()N (Australia) : With reference
Le colonel HODGS()N (Australie) (traduit de
to article 24, I should like to· ask the reason for. l'anglais) :En ce qui concerne I'article 24
the wordfug, "These ared forces should be either j' aimerais savoir pourquoi, dans le texte anglais'
maintained . .." All through the text of the re- c'esf le mot should qui est employe: Thes~
port, weinvariably see,shall. I sp.ould like to know. armed forces should be either maintained . . ,
why the text should not read: "These armed Dans tout le reste du rapport, nous voyons inva.
forces shall~be either maintained ...': Why devi- riablement shall. J'aimerai savoir pourquoi le
texte ne porterait pas:These armed forces .fhall
ate from the mandatory shall?
be either maintained. .. Pourquoi ne pas garder
le mot shall,. quia un sens imperatif?
.
Mr. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgium) (translated
M. VAN LANGEKHO~ (Be1gique): Je desire
from French): I only wished to point out that simplement signaler que la proposition du repre.
the Australian representative's proposal would- sentant de l'Australie tend it mettre le texte
bring the English text exactly into line with the anglais en exacte. concordance avec le texte
French text.
fran~ais.
The PRESIDF,1\1T: (translated from French) :
Le PRESIDENT: Je me rejouiraisparticulie.
I should greatly welcome such conformity, but if rement de cette conformite, mais, si je me per.
I may make a remark about the English tex4 mets d'intervenir en ce qui concerne le texte
I should like to point out that the word should anglais, c'est pour signaler que le terme shou,ld
appears in other articles in. this chapter. I draw se retrouve dans d'autres articles du meme cha·
the Australian representative's attention to this pitre. J'appelle sw' ce point l'attention du repre.
point, as I cannot myself say what exactly should sentant de l'Australie, car je suis .incapable
be done. Shall we accept shall or should?
d'apprecier exactement ce qu'il cOllvient de faire.
Accepterons-nous shall ou should?
Colonel HODGSON (Australia): I noticed that
Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
discrepancy myself and that is why I asked the l'anglais): J'ai egalement remarque cette con,
reason for it in this particular article. It appears tradiction, et c'est pourquoi j'en ai demande la
to my delegation that this is one of the cases raison en ce qui concerne l'article en question.
where the text should read shall.
n semble it ma delegation que c'est la un des
cas ou I'on devrait employer shall.
The PRESIDENT: (translated from French):
Le PRESIDENT: Alors, Messieurs, je crois que
So we agree to use the word shall.
ce sera le mot shall qui sera employe.
Articles 22, 23 and 24 were adopted, with the
Les articles 22, 23 et 24 sont adoptes avec la
suggested modification, the word shall replacing modification de forme proposee, le mot shall
the word should in the English text.
remplafant le mot should dans le texte anglais de
{,'es articles.
The PRESIDENT: (translated from French):
Le PRESIDENT: Le chapitre VII, qui traite de
We shall now take chapter VII,'which deals with l'assistanceet des facilites, y compris les droits
the provision of assistance and facilities; includ- de passage, pour les forces armees, ne contient
ing rights of passage, for armed forces. As there aucun article sur leque1 l'accord ait ete realise,
is no article in chapter VII which has been Je passe donc au chapitre VIII, qui traite des
agreed upon, we shall pass on to chapter VIII, besoins logistiques des forces armees.
which deals with the logistic support of the armed
forces.
Le President donne lecture des articles 29 et
The President read articles 29 and 30, pointingout that no agreement had been reached on 30; il indique que l'article 31 n'a pas donne lieu
a un accord.
article 31.
Le PRESIDENT: Puis-je considerer les articles
The PRESIDENT: (translated from French):
May we consider articles 29 and 30 as adopted? 2~ et 30 commeadoptes?
M. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgique): La remarMr. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgium) (translated
from French): The only remark I have to make que que j'ai it presenter est de pure forme. Dans
is on a point of wording. The expression sur sa le texte fran~ais est employee l'expression "sur
demande 1 appears in the French text, whereas sa demande1", alors que I'expression employee
the Charter uses the words sur son invitation. dans la Charte est "sur son invitation". J e crois
I think it would be better to bring the te~t before qu'il serait preferable de mettre le texte qui noUS
est soumis en harmonie avec celui de la Charte.
us into line with that of the Charter.
D'autre part, je profite de cette occasion pour
I should also like to take this opportunity to
sigI?aler
que I'expression "placee it la dispo:
point out that the expression "placed ... at the
disposal of the Security Council" is used here in sition du ConseU de securite" est employee iCl
the same sense as in the Charter, which is not the conformement au sens qu'elle a dans la Chart~,
case in the articles previously mentioned ~y me. contrairement it ce qui est le cas pour les artIcles que j'ai mentionnes precedemment.
1 The

English text uses on its call throughout the report.

1 L'expression on its call ("sur son invitation") est employee partout dans le texte anglais.

k

IJIS

•

• aR4

;

-

1061

The. PRESIDENT: (translated from French) :
As the English text of article 29 reproduces the
actual wording of the Charter, the French text
should be sitnilarly worded.
Articles 29 and 30 were adopted with the correction called for in the French text.

Le· PRESIDENT: Puisque le texte anglais de
l'article 29 reprend l'expression meme employee
dans la Charte, il est necessaire de faire de meme
en ce qui conceme le texte fran~ais.
Les articles 29 et 30 sont adoptes, avec la. rectif~cation qui a ete demandee pour le texte fran-

fats.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Chapter IX· deals with the generallocatiqn of the
armed forces. No agreement was reached on
articles 32, 33 and· 34. Only article 35 was
unanimously' adopted by the Military Staff
,Committee.

Le PRESIDENT :Le chapitre IX conceme
l'eIIlplacement general des forces armees. n n'y
a pas eu accord en ce qui conceme les articles
32, 33 et 34. Seul, I'article 35 a ete propose unanimement par le Comite d"etat-major.

The President read article 35 of chapter IX,
replacing the word demande in the French text
by the word invitation, as was done in the case
of article 29; and article 35 was adopted as
amended.

Le President donne lecture de l'article 35, en
remplafant dans le texte fran~ais le mot ~.demande" par le mot "invitation", ainsi qu'il a ete
fait pour l'article 29. L'article 35, ainsi modifM,
est adopte.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Chapter X deals with the strategic direction and
command of the armed forces; articl~ 41 was not
unanimously approved.

Le PRESIDENT: Le chapitre X traite de la
direction strategique et du commandement des
forces armees. L'article 41 n'a pas ete propose
d'une maniere unanime.

The President read articles 36 to 40, which
were adopted.

Le President do,!!,ne lecture des articles 36
40, qui sont adoptes.

a

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Le 'PRESIDENT: Nous avons ainsi termine
We have thus concluded the first reading of the certe premiere lecture du rapport du Comite
Military Staff Committee's report and have d'etat-major et adopte les articles qui ne preadopted the articles which presented no difficv~ty. taient pas a difficulte. Parmi ceux-ci, deUx ont
Decision on two of these have been reserved,and ete reserves, deux ou trois autres l'ont ete egatwo or three others have also been put aside lement par'suite de la decision a prendre en ce
because of the decision that has· to be taken on qui concerne l'amendement belge a I'article 6.
the Belgian amendment to article 6.
I have just received an answer from the Chair-man of the Military Staff Committee to the other
questions he was asked. ThLe; letter will now be
read to you: 1

Je re~ois a l'instant la reponse du President
du Comite d'etat-major aux autres questions
qui lui avaient ete posees. Voici le texte de cette
lettre, qui va vons ctre donne en lecture1 :

[Original text: English]
20 June 1947

[Texte original en anglais]
Le 20 juin 1947

"Sir:
"In reply to yourletter of 19 June 1947, I have
the honour to inform you that at the forty-seventh
meeting of the Military Staff Committee, on
20 June 1947, the Chinese, French, United Kingdom, and United States delegations agreed to
the following replies to your two questions:

"Monsieur le President,
"Repondant a votre lettre du 19 juin 1947, j'ai
l'honneur de vous informer qu'a la quaranteseptieme reuaion du Comite d'etat-major, le
20 juin 1947, les delegations de la Chine, de la
France, du Royaume-Uni et des Etats-Unis se
sont mises d'accord pour repondre comme suit
a vos deux questions:

" (a) 1. Article 5 is an article pertaining to the
overall strength of all the forces to be made
available to the Security Council in the special
agreements, and not to the size of any forces that
may be called upon for action in 'any specific
operation. It must be considered in connexion
with the other articles in chapter HI dealing with
the overall strength of the armed forc;es. Actually,
this article states but one of the factors which
the Military Staff Committee believes should be
taken into consideration in estimating the overall
strength of the forces which should be made
available to the Security Council by. Member

"a) 1. L'article 5 est un article qui se refere
a la puissance d'ensemble de toutes les forces qui
doivent etre mises a la disposition du Conseil
de securite en vertu des accords speciaux, et non
pas a I'importance des forces qui peuvent etre
appeJees a intervenir en vue d'une operation
particuliere. Cet article doit etre pris en consideration en liaison avec les aun CB articles du
chapitreIII, qui a trait a la puissance d'ensem- .
ble des forces armees. En fait, cet article n'enonce que run des facteurs dont le Comite cl'etatmajor estime qu'il y a lieu de tenir· compte pour
evaluer la puissance d'ensemble des forces qui

-

.

1

Document S/380•

---~

1

Document 8/380.

~

doivent ctre mises a la disposition du Conseil
de se~urite par les F.tats Membres aux termes des
accords speciauxpasses en application de l'Article
43 de la Charte.
2. L'article 6enonce egalement un facteur qui
"2. Aiticie .6 also states a factor which the
Military 'Staff Committee believes should be de I'avis du Comite d'etat-amjor,doit ctre p~
taken into consideration in estimating the overall en consideration lors de l'evaluation de la puisstrength of the forces which should be made sance d~ensemble des forces qui doivent ctre mises
available to the Security Council by Member a la disposition du Conseil de securite par les
nations in accordance with the· special agree- Etats Membres, en vertu des accords speciaux
ments under Article 43 of the Charter. It signifies passes aux termes de l'Article 43 de la Charte. n
that, while they shall be of a strength sufficient veut dire que ces forces, tout en presentant une
to enable the Security.Council to take prompt puissance suffisante pour permettre au Conseil de
action in any part of the world for the main- securite d'entamer une action rapide, en tout
tenance or the restoration of intemational peace point.du globe, pour le maintien ou le retablisseand security, as envisaged in Article 42 of the ment de la paix et de la securite intemationales,
comme il est prevu a l'Article 42 de la Charte,
Charter, they shall not be unlirillted.
ne seront cependant pas illimitees.
" b) Le Sous-Comite du Comite d'etat-major
"( b) The Military Staff Committee's SubCommittee on Overall Strengt.h and Composition pour la puissance d'ensemble et la composition
has been conducting informal discussions for ap- a poursuivi ses discussions officieuses durant
proximately three weeks. During these discus- environ trois semaines. Au cours de ces discussions, tw,p methods of approaching the problem sions, deux methodes d'aborder le probleme de
of estimating overall strength and composition l'evaluation de la puissance d'ensemble et de
have been suggested. These methods are presently la composition ont ete pro!1osees. Ces methodes
under consideration by the several delegations. sont en cours d'etude par les &y~rses delegaThe Suh-ComnUttee on Overall Strength and tions~ Aux termes du manuat qu'~l a rc~u du
Composition, in. its terms of reference from the Comite d'etat-major, le Sous-Comite pour la
Military Staff Committee, was directed to report puissance d'ensemble et la composition a ete
its progress to the Military -Staff Committee by invite a rendre compte au Comite d'etat-major: .
30 June 1947.
le 30 juin 1947, de l'etat de ses travaux.
"The USSR delegation was not prepared to
"La delegation de l'URSS n'a pas ete en
take part in the discussions at which the above mesure de prendre p¥! a la discussion au cours
answers were agreed to by the other four delega- de laquelle les reponses ci-dessus ont recueilli
tioP..5, since the USSR delegation stated that it l'accord des quatre autres delegations; la deledid not consider that yow: letter was conveying gation de I'URSS a en effet declare qu'elle n'estidecisions of the Security Council as a whole, mait pas que votre lettre notifiait des de,..;~ions·
which they regarded as essential.
du Conseil de securite en tant que corps constitue, ce que la delegation de I'URSS estimait
essentiel.
"The other four delegations accepted the rul- '
"Les quatre autres delegations ont accepte la
ing of the Chairman that the matter was one of decision du President, decision selon laquelle la
procedure ~d not of substance and therefore question est une question de procedure et non pas .
that c&..;assion should proceed. The USSR dele- une question de substance, et que, par consegation. thereupon. withdrew."
quent, la discussion devait se poursuivre. La
delegation de I'URSS s'est alors retiree."
(Signed) Joseph T. McNARNEY
(Signe) Joseph T. ¥cNARNEY
General, USAAF,
General de l'armee de l'air des Etats-Unis,
Chairman, Mili~ary Staff Committee
President du Comite d'etat-major
Le PRESIDENT: Deux de nos collegues ont
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):.
Two of our colleagues have asked to speak. They demande. la parole: le representant de l'Ausare the Australian representative and the USSR tralieet le representant de I'URSS.
representative.
Nous devons nous reunir de nouveau eet
As agreed, we shall meet again this. aftenoon
in private session, and one member has asked apres-midi en seance 'privee, comme nous venons
that the aftemoon meeting should terminate by de le decider, et l'un de nos collegues m'a
5 p. m. Accordingly, I would.propose to adjourn demande que la reunion de cet apres-midi ne se
any discussion we may have of the. letter you prolongeat pas au deIa de 17 heures. Mon intenhave just heard read and of the Belgian amend- tion serait, "dans ces conditions, d~ajoumer la
~ent until we meet again to discuss the Mili~ary discussion eventuelle de la lettre dont il vient
Staff Committee's report; that should be next de vous ctre donne lecture et de l'amendement
week. If you all agree, I propose to follow this beIge a la' prochaine reUnion que nous tiencourse.
drons sur la discussion du rapport .du Comite
d'etat-major, celle-ci devant avoir lieu la semaine prochaine. Si vous n'y voyez pas d'meonvenients, c'est ainsi que je procedcrai.
nations in accordance with the special ..gree-

men~'" tinder Article 43 of the Charter.

I shall now call upon the Australian representati\(e, and shall ask l-Jm to confine his remarks
primarily to the question of the adjournment.

Je donne la parole au representant de l'Australie et le prierai de bien vouloir parler,. de pre,.
ferenc- sur l'ajournement.

Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
Colonel HODGSON (Australia): In connexioIi
with that matter, I have submitted an amend- l'anglais): J'ai presente un amendement qui a
ment. As the representative of Australia, I am trait a '- tequestion. En qualite de represenvery grateful for what the Military Staff Com- tant de I'Australie, je' remer.cie tres vivement le
mittee has done in giving that interpretation be- Comite d'etat-major de nous avoir donne· cette
cause as we read it, the function of the Military interpretation, cat', seIon nous, le Comite a'pour
Staff' Committee is to· advise an~ asSist, not tache de nous conseiller et de nous aider et non
merely to act in case of a specific direction. pas seulement de prendre des mesures lorsqu'il
Otherwise, what is the point of the Military Staff a re~u des instructions precises. A quoi servirait-il
Committee being here at all, if it is not prepared en effet de disposer du Comite d'etat-niajor s'il
to ~ist? But the Committee has given us that n'etait pas pret a nous aider? Mais le Comite
interpretation, and we are very grateful, as it nous a donne cette interpretation, et nous lui en
indicates what we have stated. There was a grave sommes tres reconhaissants, car· il confirme ce
doubt about article 5, and we have therefore que nous avons soutenu. L'article 5 pretaitgransubmitted that amendment to cla.t1fy the situa- dement a confusion, et nous avons done presente
timi. We ask the President to consider the amend-- cet amendement. pour rendre la situation plus
ment of the Australian delegation, together with 'elaire. Nous demandons au President d'examithe Belgian amendment, at the next meeting.
ner, lors de la prochaine seance, l'amendement
de la delegation de l'Australie, ainsi que celui
de la delegation de la Belgique.
The PRESIDENT (translated· from French):
I now call upon the USSR representative, and
ask him to speak first on the question of adjourning the meeting.

Le PRESIDENT: Je vais donner la parole au .
representant de I'URSS, en lui demandant de
bien vOuloir d'abord donner son avis sur la
question de l'ajournement de ~a seance.
11.5 r.!n~,r..,.Y.~ (Um"--- ..3 __ n ~ Ll:
·s-~:~
~Jf.. (21)'''....
(TJn;nn nf Sn,';"" Sn";.,.l;,,.. 12 "_
.ioU•• ,-,nu...J.",r.u
un ue;,
U\;IC2,publics) (translated from Russian): I think we listes sovietiques) (traduit du russe) : II faudrait,
ought to agree on how: we are to apply to the me semble-t-il, nous entendre sur l'ordre dans
Military Staff Committee. I feel that there .is lequel nous nous adresserons au Comite djetatsome misunderstanding. We gave 'no instructions- major. Je crois qu~il s'est produit un,malentendu.
to the Military Staff Committee. The Australian Nous n'avons charge le Comite d'etat-major
representative put a number of questions. These d'aucune mission. Le represen,tant de l'Austraquestions were not altogether clear, and it was lie a pose un certain nombre de questions. Ces
difficult to understand what the Australian rep- questions n'etaient pas tout a. fait c1aires, et il
resentative wanted. In any case, these were etait difficile de comprendre ce que lerepre\ questions put to the Military Staff Committee sentant de I'Australie· voulait au 'j~te. En tout
by the Australian representative, and not ques- cas, les. questions adressees au Comite d'etattions put by the Security Council. The Military major emanaient du repr~..sentant de l'Australie
Staff Committee, as a body, works under the et non du Conseil de securite.Le Comite d'etatdirection of the Security Council, and shl.luld major, en tantqu'organe constitue, tl'availle
help and give any necessary advice to the Security conformement aux instructions du Conseil. C'est
Council as a body. I want to stress that. The au Cons~, en tant qu'organe constitue~ je le
Security Council did not adopt any decision to repete, que le Comite doit accorder son aide et
¥k the Military Staff Committee's opinion; what donner les conseils necessaires. Le Conseil de secuwas referred to the Committee were the Aus- rite n'a pris aucune decision en
de demander
tralian representative's questions as formulated· l'avis du Comite d'etat-major; Cequi a ete
in his speech; they were not questions referred communique au .Comite, c'etaient les questions
by the Security Council as a body to the Military que le representant de l'Australie avait formulees
Staff Committee as a body.
au cours de son intervention; ce n'etaient pas
des questions adressees par le Ccinseil de securite, en tant que Conseil, au Comite d'etatmajor, en tant que Comite.
;,I.,........

_

...""li.a. V17'''
... ~ _

. . . . .&..1._......

_.&.

_ _ ii.i._,.,

_ _ ""... ~"

.&.~_

~'-'CPUOllqUe;,

vue

I

Le Comite'd'etat-major n'avait doncriena.
There was, therefore, nothing for the Military
Staff. Committee to examine, since it had no in- examiner, car il n'avait sur ce point aucune insstructions or inquiries from the Security Council. truction ni aucune requete du Conseil de secuThere was, therefore, Liotlllng for the Military rite. Les representants de I'URSS au Comite
Military Staff Committee said : "When we re- d'etat-ml:!,jor ont declare a. ce propos: "Quand
ceive an inquiry from the Security Council, w(: nous aurons une requete du Conseil de securite,
shall study it and carry out our task,' but so far nous l'etudierons et nous accomplirons la tache
no inquiries have. been received from the Security qui nous aura ete confiee. Jusqu'a px:esent; le
~ouncil apart from the Australian representa- . Comite d'etat-major n'a re~u du Conseil de .secutive's questions." Possibly these questions merit rite aucune requete, a. l' e~ception des questions
.' consideration, but the Security Council sho.uld du representant de l'Australie." Peut-etre ces

ttr,

......

1064

apply tp the Military Staff Committee and give
it the necessary instructions.

questions mentent-elles d'etre ~tudiees, mais II
faut pour cela que le Conseil de securites'adresse
au Comite d'etat-major et qu'il le charge· de
cette etude.

The USSR representatives on the Military
Staff Committee are, of course, not bmmd by
the answer given by the delegations of other
countries to the Australian representative's questions.

n va sans dire que les representants de l'URSS
au Comited'etat,:major ne sont pas lies par les
reponses que les representants des autres pays
ont donnees aux questions du representant. de
l'Australie.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I had asked the representative· of the USSR to
speak primarily on the adjournment of the
meeting.

Le PRESIDENT: J'avais demande au representant de I'URSS de vouloir bien s'exprimer de
preference sur l'ajournement de la seance.

If there are no remarks, we will adjourn the
discussion to a meeting to be held next week,
the date of which will be announced later.

S'il n'y a: pas d'observations, la suite de la discussion sera renvoyee a une seance qui se tien~
dra la semaine prochaine et dont la date serll
indiquee ~rieurement.

The CoUncil will meet this afternoon in private
session at 3 p. m. in Conference Room No. 5.

Le Conseil se reunira cet apres-midi en seance
privee a 15 heures, dans la salle de conference.
No 5.

The meeting rose at 1 :30 p·.m.

La seance est levee a 13 h. 30.

HUNDRED AND FORTY.FOURTH MEETING

CENT·QUARANTE.QUATRIEME SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Friday, 20 June 1947, at· 3 p.m.

Tenue a Lake Success, New-York,
le vendredi20 juin 1947, a 15 heures;

President: Mr. A. PARODl (France).

President: M. A. PAROD! (France).

Present: The representatives of the following
Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Australia, Belgium,' Brazil, China, .Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of France, Pologne, Syrie, Union des Republique~
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom, socialis~es sovietiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis
United States of America.
d'Amerique.
co~ntries:

180. Official communique
The following communique was issued by the
Security Council after the 'meeting:
.

180. Communique officiel
A l'issue de la seance, le Conseil de securitl (Z
public le communique suivant:

Le Conseil de securite s'est reuni aUjourd'hui
The Security Council held a private meeting
today at 3 p.m. to discuss the question of the a 15 heures,en seance privee, pour discuter de la
appointment of the governor of the :Free Terri- nomination d'un gouvemeur pour le Territoire
'libre de Trieste.
tory· of Trieste.
Apres avoir procede a un echange de wes, les
The members of the Council exchanged views
and decided to meet on that matter in a few days. membres du Conseil ont decide d'examiner de
•
notlveau la question dans que1qu.es jours.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

La seance est levee a17 heures.

SALES AGENTS OF UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
.

.

.

DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UN1E
Argentina-Argentine
Editorial Sudamericana
S.A.
Alsina 500
BUENOS AmEs

Australia-Australie
H. A. Goddard Pty. Ltd.
255a George Street
SYDNEY

Belgium-Belgique
Agence et Messageries de la
Presse
14-22 rue du Persil
BRUXELLES

Bolivia-Bolivie
Librerla Cientffica y
Literaria
Avenida 16 de Julio, 216
Casilla 972
LA PAZ

Canada
The Ryerson Press
299 Queen Street West
TORONTO

Chile-ChiU
Edmundo Pizarro
Merced 846
SANTIAGO

China-Chine
The Commercial Press Ltd.
211 Honan Road
SHANGHAI

Costa Rica-Costa-Rica
Trejos HermaL JS
Apartado 1313
SAN JOSE

Cuba
La Casa Belga
Rene de Smedt
O'Reilly 455
LA HABANA

Czechoslovakia
T checoslovaquie
F. Topic
Narodni Trida 9
PRAHA 1

Denmark-Danemark
Einar Munskgaard
~orregade 6

KJOBENHAVN

Dominican Republic
RepuhUque Dominicaine
Librerla Dominicana
CaII~ Mercedes No. 49
Apartado 656
CIUDAD TRUJILLO
Printed in the U. S. A.

Ecuador-Equateur
Muiioz Hermanos y Cia
Nueve de Octubre 703
Casilla 10-24
GUAYAQUIL

Egypt-Egypte
Librairie "La Renaissance
d'Egypte"
9 Sh. Adly Pasha
CAIRO

Finland-Finlande
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa
2, Keskuskatu
HELSINKI

New Zealand
N ouvelle-Zelande
Gordon & Gotch
Waring Taylor Street
;WELUNGTON

Norway-Norvege
Norsk Bokimport AjS
Edv. 'Storms Gate 1
OSLO

Philippines
D. P. Perez Co.
132 Riverside

,SAN JUAN

Sweden-Suede

France
Editions A. Pedone
13, rue SoufHot
PARIS, V e

Greece-Grece
"Eleftheroudakis"
Librairie internationale
Place de la Constitution
ATHh;ES

Guatemala
Jose Gouba1.ld
Goubaud & Cia Ltda.
Sucesor.
5a Av. Sur No. 6 y 9a C. P.
GUATEMALA

Haiti-Haiti
Max Bouchereau
Librame "A la CaraveIIe"
Boite postale 111-B
PORT-AU-PRINCE

India-lnde
Oxford Book & Stationery
Co.
Scindia House
NEW DELHI

Iran
Bangahe Piaderow
731 Shah Avenue
TEHERAN

Iraq-lrak
Mackenzie & Mackenzie
The Bookshop
BAGHDAD

Lebanon-Lihan
Librairie universeIIe
BEYROUTH

AB C. E. Fritzes Kungl
Hofbokhandel
FredsgataJrl 2
STOCKHOLM

Switzerland-Suisse
Librairie Payot S. A.
LAusANNE,GENEVE, VEVEY
MONTP.EUX, NEUCl<4TELj

BERNE, BASEL
Hans Raunhardt
Kirchgasse i 7
ZURICH I

Syria-Syrie
Libl'airie universelle
DAMAS

Union of South Africa
Union Sud-Africaine
Central News Agency Ltd.
Commissioner & Rissik Sts.
JOHANNESBURG

United Kingdom
Royaume-Uni
H.M. Stationery Office
P.O. Box 569
LONDON, S.E. 1
.
and 'at H.M.S.O. Shops at
LONDON, EDINBURGH,
MANCHESTER, CARDIFF,
BELFAST and BRISTOL

United States of America
Etats-Unis it'Amerique
International Documents
Service
Columbia University Press·
2960 Broadway
NEW YOI}K 27, N. Y.

Yugoslavia-Yougoslavie
Netherlands-Pays-Bas
N. V. Martinus Nijhoff
Lange Voorhout 9
S'GRAVENHAGE

Drzavno Preduzece
Jugoslovenska Knjiga r
Moskovska UI. 36
BEOGRAD

Price in the United States: 20 cents

.'II'~.l',"'~'Jf~%;~lmii,~~~~~~·;:~~~;k1~~-::~!i~~~~~!.,~lW~JJ'E!i~

__ ¥t:tiiliJ, _~::~~.~" ..

4 February 1948
