S/2023/331

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 May 2023
English
Original: French

Letter dated 8 May 2023 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
In the presidential statement of 23 March 2022 (S/PRST/2022/1), the Security
Council requested that I provide a brief report, at least 30 days in advance of its next
meeting on the cooperation between the United Nations and the League of Arab States,
on the implementation of the presidential statement and on further ways to strengthen
institutional relations and cooperation between the two organizations. I would also
like to draw attention to my report on cooperation between the United Natio ns and
regional and other organizations (A/77/277-S/2022/606, paras. 90–99) and General
Assembly resolution 77/17 on cooperation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States. This letter is a response to the request for a brief report
covering the period from 23 March 2022 to 7 May 2023.
Cooperation with the League of Arab States, as with other regional and
subregional organizations, on matters relating to the maintenance of international
peace and security, and consistent with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, serves to enhance collective security and augment our actions through joint
efforts. I firmly believe that renewed and expanded cooperation is critical to
revitalizing the multilateral system, which has come under severe stress in recent
years.
During the reporting period, I met with the Secretary-General of the League of
Arab States, Ahmed Aboul Gheit, on numerous occasions, including on the margins
of the opening of the General Assembly in New York in September 2022 and at the
Summit of the League of Arab States in Algiers in November 2022. More recently,
we spoke by phone on 16 April 2023 to discuss the unravelling situation in the Sudan,
in particular the impact of the fighting on civilians. Days later, on 20 April 2023, we
participated in a virtual summit organized by the African Union on developments in
the Sudan. We condemned the fighting and called for a cessation of hostilities to allow
civilians trapped in conflict areas to get assistance and supplies or evacuate.
The Summit also brought together leaders from the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and the European Union, as well as foreign ministers and seni or
officials of several countries. It demonstrated the relevance of trilateral cooperation
and coordination among the United Nations, the League of Arab States and the
African Union, along with other relevant regional organizations.
The League of Arab States also continued to support United Nations efforts in
Libya, including by calling for progress in the political process, for reforms in the
economic and security sectors and for adherence to international humanitarian law.
The Libya Quartet (the African Union, the European Union, the League of Arab States

23-08920 (E)

150523

*2308920*

170523

S/2023/331

and the United Nations) should continue to engage in the Berlin process and the
Libyan political dialogue facilitated by the United Nations.
Our ongoing engagement has been critical in terms of strategic guidance for our
cooperation, particularly in the area of peace and security. It has also been focused on
intensifying and accelerating common efforts to prevent conflict, encouraging
multilateral dialogue, advancing the political settlement of disputes, fostering
collective security and promoting just and lasting peace across the Arab region and
beyond.
As you are aware, our cooperation with the League of Arab States is based on
an agreement signed in 1989 and renewed in 2016 by a protocol of amendmen t. In
the protocol, the parties called on the Secretary-General to establish a United Nations
liaison office to the League of Arab States in Cairo, which opened in 2019, for more
effective cooperation, dialogue and collaboration, in particular on peace and security
issues. The liaison office, supported by the Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, is making significant efforts to enhance the strategic and operational
partnership between the United Nations and the League.
In many cases, regional organizations such as the League of Arab States are
closer to and have special insights into conflicts, including their root causes, bringing
nuance and specificity to United Nations efforts. In order to capitalize fully on these
comparative advantages, the liaison office regularly coordinates substantive and
technical meetings between United Nations officials, including special envoys and
representatives of the Secretary-General, and League of Arab States officials. These
and other meetings with Arab and foreign diplomats, United Nations entities and other
partners enhance the exchange of information and consultation, as well as follow -up
mechanisms, thereby strengthening cooperation and partnership between the United
Nations and the League of Arab States.
As an illustration of our shared commitment to joint efforts on peacebuilding
and strengthening resilience, the United Nations and the League of Arab States
collaborated on a joint conference on drought, food security and climate resilience in
Somalia in December 2022. I also delivered a video message to the “Jerusalem:
Resilience and Development” conference convened by the League in February 2023.
Similarly, in order to capitalize on synergies, League of Arab States officials
participated in a meeting of mediation support entities of international, regional and
subregional organizations, co-organized by the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs and the European External Action Service, in March 2023, and
in the informal dialogue on strategic risks for peace and security, organized by the
Department of Peace Operations and the Permanent Mission of Austria to the United
Nations, held in April 2023. League officials have also participated, together with
other regional organizations, in the consultation process for the development of the
New Agenda for Peace.
The implementation of the youth and peace and security agenda, including
Security Council resolution 2250 (2015) and the relevant subsequent resolutions, was
also the focus of significant joint efforts during the reporting period. The liaison office
led a technical support team with the Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Population
Fund and the Folke Bernadotte Academy, which supported the League of Arab States
Department of Demographic Policies and Department of Youth and Sport in
developing an Arab regional youth and peace and security strategy. The team
supported the League in organizing consultations on the draft strategy with member
States and youth representatives in September 2022. The consultations included an
innovative online youth dialogue on peace and security that allowed nearly 300 young
people from 13 countries across the Arab region to voice their opinions and contribute
2/5

23-08920

S/2023/331

to the development of the strategy. The draft strategy is currently with the Council of
Arab Youth and Sports Ministers for its endorsement and is expected to be presented
at the upcoming League of Arab States Summit in Riyadh at the end of May 2023.
The liaison office is also working to raise awareness about the strategy among youth
and peace and security focal points within the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, the Department of Peace Operations and United Nations field
missions across the Arab region, and to promote their respective roles in supporting
its implementation. As part of these efforts, the liaison office also held a training
session on the youth and peace and security agenda for League staff in March 2022.
Recognizing the need to continue enhancing capacity-building for the League
of Arab States in relevant areas, UNLOLAS organized several initiatives throughout
the year, including briefings by United Nations peace operations personnel in the Arab
region on advancing the women and peace and security agenda for League staff, the
Arab Women Mediators Network and gender focal points from States members of the
League in April 2022. With support from the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, the liaison office facilitated the participation of League
officials in training events on ceasefire mediation in May 2022 and on actionable
conflict analysis in November and December 2022. With the Department of Peace
Operations, it organized training on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
for League of Arab States staff and member State representatives, which took place
in December 2022. Work is currently under way to organize additional training for
League staff on women and peace and security and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, as well as on topics such as strategic foresight and advisory, operational
and transactional issues (with the Department of Operational Support). Cooperation
on electoral matters between the secretariat of the League and the United Nations,
principally through the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs as the
United Nations system-wide focal point for electoral assistance matters, has increased
in recent years, and the two organizations continue to work on new electoral capacity
development initiatives for member States.
Work has also been under way in support of League of Arab States eff orts to
implement Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and relevant subsequent
resolutions, as well as the regional women and peace and security action plan. The
League of Arab States and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) are aiming to advance the implementation of
women and peace and security commitments and transparency and accountability
frameworks in conflict and post-conflict areas in the Arab region, including through
the operationalization strategy for the Arab Women Mediators Network, adopted in
2022. The Network was endorsed by the Council of Ministers of Foreign Affairs of
the League in 2020 to support and facilitate women’s meaningful part icipation in
peace processes at all levels and falls within the framework of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000).
While encouraging enhanced efforts to promote women’s economic
empowerment and the elimination of poverty in the Arab region, in line with broader
efforts to prevent and resolve conflict through the women and peace and security
agenda, UN-Women and the League of Arab States are also developing a programme
to support countries in increasing women’s participation in the labour force by 5 per
cent. This large-scale programme is expected to be rolled out in the first quarter of
2023.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict met with the League of Arab States Assistant Secretary-General for Social
Affairs in September 2022 and agreed to strengthen cooperation for the full
implementation of the League’s Executive Action Plan “Protection of Arab Women:
Peace and Security” 2015–2030 and the 2016 memorandum of understanding between
23-08920

3/5

S/2023/331

the League and the United Nations with a view to addressing conflict -related sexual
violence. The engagement of religious leaders on the prevention of conflict -related
sexual violence and the reduction of stigma for survivors, including children born of
conflict-related rape, was also discussed as an emerging topic for future collaboration.
During the reporting period, efforts were made to identify ways to strengthen
cooperation on preventing and countering terrorism and violent extremism. Both the
Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate have worked with the League of Arab States to that end. On 19 September
2022, the Under-Secretary-General for Counter-Terrorism met with the League to
explore areas for cooperation on issues of common interest. In November 2022, the
Executive Directorate met with the newly designated Director of the CounterTerrorism Department of the League to take stock of previous cooperation and explore
ways to cooperate in the future. It was decided that the Executive Directorate would
conduct a visit to the Headquarters of the League in Cairo in the second half of 2023
to further the dialogue.
The partnership between the United Nations and the League of Arab States is
crucial for addressing the plight of children affected by conflict in the Arab region.
In June 2022, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict met with the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States and the
Assistant Secretary-General for Social Affairs of the League in Cairo to discuss the
protection of children in armed conflict, following the adoption by the League of Arab
States of a comprehensive plan to prevent the recruitment of children. The Office of
the Special Representative also held technical round -table discussions with the
Secretariat of the League on matters including cooperation to prevent grave violations
against children and the Safe Schools Declaration. In September 2022, the Special
Representative addressed the League of Arab States committee on combating violence
against children, at its invitation.
The fifteenth general cooperation meeting between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States was held in Geneva in July 2022 to discuss strategic and
operational aspects of cooperation between the two organizations across a range of
issues affecting the Arab region, in accordance with General Assembly resolution
75/11. This biennial meeting provides a framework for taking stock of and planning
activities in various areas, including peace and security. In addition to the plenary
sessions, meetings of three working groups, on political, economic and social issues,
were held to review inter-organizational cooperation and plan new joint initiatives.
Participants agreed on a set of recommendations designe d to guide the further
development of general cooperation between the United Nations and the League and
to address challenges.
In accordance with General Assembly resolution 77/17, the fifteenth sectoral
meeting between the representatives of the secretariats of the United Nations system
and the General Secretariat of the League of Arab States, on the topic of cooperation
on climate change, was held in Cairo on 27–28 February 2023. This biennial meeting
was co-led by the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia,
the United Nations Environment Programme and the United Nations Development
Programme, with the support of the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,
and by the League of Arab States Department of Environmental and Meteorological
Affairs, with the support of the League of Arab States Department of International
Organizations. As at the general meeting on cooperation, participants reviewed
ongoing joint work and explored new avenues for cooperation, but the focus was
specifically on issues related to climate change. The resulting report contained a range
of recommendations intended to guide joint work in that area, taking into account its
impact on stability and prosperity in the region.

4/5

23-08920

S/2023/331

Looking to the future, the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs has
begun organizing the next general meeting on cooperation between the United
Nations and the League, which will be hosted by the United Nations in Geneva in
2024. As in 2022, the results of the cooperation between the United Nations and the
League across the full range of areas of common interest will be reviewed and plans
will be developed to take the cooperation further.
We are eager to continue strengthening institutional relations and cooperation
between the United Nations and the League of Arab States through dialogue, capacity building and enhanced collaboration on peace and security issues. I am convinced
that this will be beneficial for the achievement of our common goals and objectives
as well as our ability to address existing and emerging challenges together. Your
continued support would be a key contribution to this endeavour.
I would be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the att ention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

23-08920

5/5
