S/PV.7377

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7377th meeting

Friday, 6 February 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Hmoud
Mrs. Jakubonė
Mr. Haniff
Mrs. Schwalger
Mr. Sarki
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Tatham
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and
1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2015/74)

15-03331 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1503331*

Kosovo

S/PV.7377

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2015/74)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Serbia to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Farid Zarif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Zarif, who
is joining today’s meeting via video-teleconference
from Pristina.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hashim
Thaçi to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/74, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Farid Zarif.
Mr. Zarif: This Council meets today at a key
juncture in Kosovo’s history. Last December, after a
prolonged political impasse, a new Government was
established in Kosovo as a result of an alliance between
the Democratic Party of Kosovo and the Democratic
League of Kosovo. The new Government, led by
Prime Minister Isa Mustafa, declared its commitment
to economic reforms, strengthening the rule of law,
European and Euro-Atlantic integration and a continued
dialogue with Belgrade.

2/24

06/02/2015

Over the past weeks, however, the Government had
to focus on responding to public protests in Pristina on
24 and 27 January involving up to 7,000 people, which
turned violent and caused injuries and destruction
of public and private property. The protests were
largely organized by the opposition movement called
Vetëvendosje!, or Self-Determination!, to demand the
dismissal of a Kosovo Serb Minister for Communities
and Returns for the controversial remarks attributed
to him in reaction to the protests in Gjakovë/Ðakovica
against visiting Serbian internally displaced persons on
the occasion of the Orthodox New Year, on 6 January.
The protesters in Pristina also demanded the reversal
of the Government’s decision to withdraw a draft law
concerning the transformation of one of the largest
industrial entities, Trepça Mines, into a publicly owned
enterprise. In addition, the protests appear to have been
fuelled by a lingering wider public discontent with
the economic situation and a drastic increase in the
migration of people out of Kosovo in recent months. The
27 January protest was particularly violent and resulted
in over 50 protesters and 100 police officers seeking
medical assistance. Some 160 persons were arrested
and most of them subsequently released, including the
mayor of Pristina, a leader of the Self-Determination!
movement.
While peaceful protest is an essential right, the
criminal violence and vandalism that accompanied
the protests on 24 and 27 January are deplorable.
Employing such methods in the guise of pressing for
any particular political change or agenda is nothing less
than a backward-looking choice — backwards from the
voters’ aspirations expressed in the elections of June
2014, which were organized throughout Kosovo under
a single legal framework.
I commend the prompt and unequivocal public
condemnation of those acts by responsible political and
civil society leaders in Kosovo. In that context, I wish
to acknowledge the decision of some political parties,
unions and civil society organizations to publicly
distance themselves from the violent acts that took place
during the demonstrations. Unfortunately, however, a
small number of other political figures, mostly from
the opposition, attempted to exploit the situation and
deflect their own responsibility for what happened.
While the Kosovo police had to resort to the use of tear
gas and water cannons, its response was professional
and proportional in the face of determined attempts by
some elements among the protesters to assault the main
public Government buildings, including by throwing
15-03331

06/02/2015

Kosovo

stones and petrol bombs at the buildings and those
protecting them.
In that context, I appreciate the efforts made by
leaders both in Pristina and Belgrade to restrain political
acrimony surrounding the highly complex matter
related to the future of the Trepça mining enterprise.
I hope that a similarly measured approach will be
adopted by all sides with regard to the dismissal of the
Kosovo Serb Minister for Communities and Returns on
3 February. The new Government’s stated objectives
and resolve to undertake the serious work required at
this critical juncture should not be undermined by such
short-term challenges.
Despite those developments in Pristina, leaders in
both Belgrade and Pristina are determined to continue
with their high-level dialogue, which will be resumed
next Monday, 9 February, in Brussels. In fact, those
who initiated and initialled the First Agreement of
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations in
April 2013, Mr. Dačić and Mr. Thaçi, are in the Council
Chamber today. I urge both of them to continue to be
active supporters of the full implementation of the
agreed provisions and of the further tough core decisions
that are required for a comprehensive normalization of
relations.
From its inception, the dialogue facilitated by
the European Union has been about making hard
choices — between the past and the future, between
stagnation and progress and between consolidating
political power and doing what is in the best interest
of all people in the region. The meeting on 9 February
presents an opportunity to reaffirm the commitment to
a constructive and purposeful dialogue, with a view to
shaping a better future for all affected communities in
the region. I welcome therefore renewed statements of
determination by both Belgrade and Pristina to resolve
outstanding differences concerning the implementation
of the existing agreements. In that context, I wish to
highlight the need for the Kosovo Government’s early
commitment to the establishment of the association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities during
the coming period. That is one of the core provisions
of the April 2013 Agreement. I also hope that the
relations between Belgrade and Pristina will delve into
new important areas as the next round of the dialogue
unfolds.
Both the new Kosovo Assembly and the new
coalition Government in Pristina have made sensible
choices in their priorities, and appear to be acting

S/PV.7377

apace. The formation by the Government of a technical
team tasked with preparing the necessary legislation
for the establishment of the specialist court is critical.
I add my own voice to those of many others in the
international community who have urged the Assembly
and the Government to move swiftly to complete all
the required steps, given the fundamental importance
of this issue to justice and reconciliation in Kosovo.
The new Government has taken early and prudent steps
on some other immediate priorities, such as planning
viable economic development and enhancing the rule
of law. Both are essential to creating new and equal
opportunities for all, and to building confidence in
public institutions to promote good governance and
protect the rights of all.
I also applaud the swift action taken by the Kosovo
Assembly in considering a draft law criminalizing
participation in armed conflicts outside Kosovo. I
urge further consideration of the draft, in consultation
with concerned representatives of the international
community. Kosovo’s security institutions have
already taken active steps by arresting dozens of terror
suspects and confiscating weapons and ammunition,
and this legislation will help provide a more tailored
legal framework for handling the problem in the
future. As ever, however, it should be recognized that
law enforcement measures alone are not sufficient to
address the phenomenon in question. The continuous
engagement of political and religious community
leaders is vital to deterring youngsters from being
lured into violent extremist movements. I note with
appreciation that such work is already ongoing.
I welcome the Government’s commitment to
addressing the root causes of social inequality and
high unemployment in Kosovo, but am also alarmed
at the growing numbers of irregular, illegal migrants
to Western Europe. Many of the issues I have
highlighted here trace their roots to a widely perceived
dearth of economic and social prospects, especially
among Kosovo’s young people. In this respect, I note
the steps taken by the Kosovo authorities in recent
days, including the establishment of an executive
commission to carry out an analysis of unpaid debts
and review the possibility of debt forgiveness. These
steps include a Kosovo Assembly resolution proposing,
inter alia, the creation of a special fund for preventing
irregular migration, as well as President Jahjaga and
Prime Minister Mustafa’s initiative to engage both the
Government and international stakeholders in a broader
discussion of this troubling issue. I urge the Pristina

15-033313/24

S/PV.7377

Kosovo

authorities to proceed judiciously in these matters and
to continue to avail themselves of the many sources of
advice the international community can offer.
Notable progress has been made since my last
briefing (see S/PV.7327) in respect of the protection
and promotion of cultural heritage. The Council for the
Protection of the Village of Hoçë e Madhe/Velika Hoča
was established on 30 January, some two years after the
law mandating its creation came into force. Incidents
of thefts and vandalism affecting religious sites across
Kosovo remain too frequent and demonstrate the need
for continuous efforts on the part of the authorities to
promote public awareness and appreciation of the value
of the rich and diverse cultural heritage of all people
in Kosovo. While authorities have made efforts to
react to and prevent illegal construction within special
protective zones, in particular around the Visoki
Dečani monastery, the sensitivity of this matter and
its possible impact on intercommunity relations should
warrant even swifter action by officials. Incidents
between visitors to Serbian Orthodox sites and local
demonstrators, such as that which took place on
6 January in Gjakovë/Đakovica, need to be addressed
through enhanced local dialogue, beyond simple law
enforcement measures.
Finally, with regard to progress in the critical
process of establishing the fate of missing persons, I
urge both sides to muster the political will necessary
to bring about a swift closure of the 1,655 outstanding
cases, in order to help heal the wounds of the conflict
and its aftermath, alleviate the grief and suffering of
the families, bring the perpetrators to justice, provide
compensation to the affected families, and facilitate
reconciliation. In light of all the developments I have
discussed today, I trust that leaders at all levels in both
Belgrade and Pristina will courageously embrace their
responsibility at this critical moment in the historic
process of the normalization of relations and will not
shy away from making the often trying choices they are
likely to face in the dialogue process.
In conclusion, I wish to express my profound
gratitude to Council members for their support to the
work of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo. We will continue working
intensively and constructively with our local and
international partners, in accordance with our mandate.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Mr. Zarif
for his briefing.

4/24

06/02/2015

I now give the floor to Mr. Dačić.
Mr. Dačić (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; English text
provided by the delegation): Allow me to express my
gratitude for the opportunity to address the Security
Council on the occasion of the consideration of the most
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/74) on
the work of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I would like to thank all
the members of this organ for their continued attention
they accord to the question of Kosovo and Metohija.
Drawing upon the constructive cooperation achieved
over the 15 years since the establishment of the Interim
Administration in Kosovo and Metohija, I am convinced
that, through consistent efforts and joint endeavours
based on resolution 1244 (1999), we shall arrive at the
goal to which we all aspire — the political settlement of
the question of Kosovo and Metohija.
I would like to reiterate what I have said on a
number of occasions before this body. The presence of
the United Nations Mission is of paramount importance
to stability in the southern Serbian province and to
the creation of conditions leading to a lasting and
sustainable settlement to the question of Kosovo and
Metohija. Serbia highly appreciates the engagement of
UNMIK in creating conditions for peaceful coexistence
among the residents of Kosovo and Metohija, the
security of all local communities, and respect for their
human rights. We also appreciate the contribution
of other international organizations — including
the Kosovo Force (KFOR), the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Mission in Kosovo, as well as the specialized
agencies of the United Nations — which, through their
missions under United Nations auspices, are a part
of the international civil and security presences in
the province. In particular, we appreciate the efforts
made by Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, in monitoring the implementation
of the UNMIK mandate and coordinating international
civil and security presences.
Following the formation of the Government in
Pristina, as pointed out in the report before the Council
as one of the key political events, Serbia expects that the
political vacuum will be filled, which should contribute
to the continuation of the implementation of the
agreements reached in the Brussels dialogue. We also
expect that the continuation of the dialogue at the high
level in Brussels on 9 February this year will provide

15-03331

06/02/2015

Kosovo

additional impetus to the process of normalization
begun between Belgrade and Pristina.
The Government of the Republic of Serbia is
fully committed to the dialogue with the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government (PISG) in Pristina. The
essence of the process of the normalization of relations
is the finding of right answers to the questions that
burden the life of the residents of Kosovo and Metohija
and prevent them from realizing their basic rights. That
can be achieved only through dialogue, based on a
genuine understanding of the needs and interests of the
other party, and readiness to compromise. I am pleased
to note that, in that context, special mention has been
made in the report of the visit of Serbian Prime Minister
Aleksandar Vučić to Kosovo and Metohija on the
occasion of the celebration of the Orthodox New Year
and of his message of the need for life together and the
building of a stable future for the Serbian community
with its Albanian neighbours. However, a shadow over
the visit was cast by an incident involving a group of
Albanians who assaulted the motorcade of the highest
Government representatives of the Republic of Serbia,
which the report before us makes no mention of.
Serbia approaches the dialogue with Pristina
openly, desirous of finding practical solutions that
will make it possible for all residents of Kosovo and
Metohija to lead normal lives within a broader process
of European integration. The participation of the Serbs
in the political life of Kosovo and Metohija should
contribute in that regard. In that context, I would like
to point to the participation of the representatives of the
Serbian list in the work of the Pristina Government in
ministerial and other positions in its institutions.
The Government of the Republic of Serbia has fulfilled
conscientiously, consistently and in a timely manner all
its obligations emanating from the agreements reached
within the First Agreement of Principles Governing
the Normalization of Relations, signed in Brussels
on 19 April 2013. I express my satisfaction that the
importance of the establishment of the community of
Serbian municipalities is noted in the current report and
defined as the key question in the direct continuation of
the implementation of the Brussels Agreement.
Let me point out that the return of internally
displaced persons (IDPs), the position of the Serbian
Orthodox Church and property issues remain the key
questions for the Republic of Serbia in the further
dialogue with Pristina.

S/PV.7377

I take this opportunity to point out that the
Government of the Republic of Serbia abides by the other
agreement reached earlier on regional representation
and cooperation, too. The agreement provides for
the scope and manner of the participation of Pristina
representatives in regional activities, initiatives and
forums. Recently, however, attempts have been made
to include the representatives of Pristina in the work
of international organizations outside the context of
the agreement. Those attempts are unacceptable for
Serbia. These questions should be addressed within our
dialogue with Pristina.
Serbia welcomes the work of UNMIK in the area
of monitoring the status of non-majority communities
in Kosovo and Metohija in cooperation with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and other missions present in the province.
The Government of the Republic of Serbia attaches
great importance to finding a proper solution for
IDPs from Kosovo and Metohija. The creation of real
conditions for their return is one of the key factors in the
process of reconciliation. Unfortunately, even 15 years
after the end of the conflict, there exist no conditions
for sustainable IDP returns to Kosovo and Metohija,
primarily because of the lack of proper interest in this
question by the Provisional Institutions in Pristina.
This sad fact is noted also in the regular reports of
the Secretary-General on the work of UNMIK and in
the reports of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
Let me remind the Council that Serbia tops the
list of European countries with the largest number of
IDPs. From Kosovo and Metohija, they number almost
230,000. According to UNHCR data, noted also in the
report before us, 17,000 of them, mostly Serbs, are in
the province itself. Return to Kosovo and Metohija
has been realized by fewer than 5 per cent of IDPs.
According to UNHCR data, 12,145 persons returned
to Kosovo and Metohija from the rest of Serbia. Only
1.9 per cent — about 4 000 persons — have realized a
sustainable return. Seventy per cent of the returnees are
not ethnic Serbs. The latest UNHCR data, cited in the
current report on UNMIK, confirm the continuity of
the decreasing trend and confirm that only 149 persons
returned from central Serbia to Kosovo and Metohija in
the last trimester.
I would like to point out that the experience gained
so far from the work of the Kosovo Privatization

15-033315/24

S/PV.7377

Kosovo

Agency shows that the decisions on the right to property
restitution are ineffective — that is, they remain
words rather than deeds — as Albanians continue to
use Serbian property or to re-occupy it upon eviction
without consequences, while Serbs are still unable to
repossess it.
Physical insecurity, as evinced by the continued
attacks on Serbs and their property and helped by the
atmosphere of impunity for crimes committed against
Serbs, is surely accountable for the long delay in IDP
returns. Illustrative examples in that regard are the
numerous security incidents that took place as Serbs
from Dakovica — who numbered 12, 000 prior to
1999 — attempted to visit their homes and the town
cemetery. One incident involved the 6 January stoning
of a bus with about 40 displaced Serbs from Dakovica
inside. The only Minister in the Kosovo Government
who condemned the incident was Aleksandar Jablanović,
which resulted in his dismissal. The violence against
returnees, the dismissal of Minister Jablanović and
violent demonstrations in Pristina create an atmosphere
of hatred towards the Serbian people in Kosovo and
Metohija, as well as a feeling of distrust and insecurity.
Instead of using the constructive approach of Serbia
and its call on the Serbian people to take part in the
elections and participate in the Government, Pristina
has whipped up a climate of political instability and an
anti-Serbian campaign, which is contrary to the goals of
the Brussels dialogue. That is borne out also by OSCE
data, available in the report before us, on over 230
security incidents that took place in returnee localities
from August 2012 to 2014.
The presence of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) is
therefore necessary given the still unstable situation, and
the number of its troops must not be reduced further. I
expect KFOR to continue its engagement in accordance
with its current mandate and within its competencies
provided for both by the military-technical agreement
and resolution 1244 (1999).
In that context, I would like to draw the Council’s
attention as well to the legal insecurity evinced by a
systematic obstruction of the property rights of Serbs,
especially displaced Serbs, and the political obstruction
of the process of integration of the judiciary organs in
northern Kosovo and Metohija, as provided for by the
Brussels Agreement.
Serbia considers it its obligation to seek a solution so
that conditions could be created for a normal life for all
people who did not leave their homes of their own will.
6/24

06/02/2015

Concerned over the slow progress in voluntary returns
to Kosovo and Metohija and desirous of intensifying
the efforts in this area, the Government of the Republic
of Serbia has initiated the establishment of a new
consultative body, incorporating the United Nations and
other international and regional organizations, as well
as the Kosovo Minister for Communities and Returns.
The creation of conditions for the Serbian and other
non-Albanian populations to enjoy the basic human
rights and the rights belonging to them as non-majority
populations in Kosovo and Metohija would certainly
help improve the general atmosphere for IDP returns.
We condemn each and every desecration of religious
sites, of whichever faith. In that sense, I would like to
point out that the messages related to the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant “future Caliphate”, to the Kosovo
Liberation Army and to the Albanian National Army in
the graffiti scribbled on the walls of Visoki Dečani, the
Serbian Orthodox monastery founded in the fourteenth
century and included in the UNESCO World Heritage
List, continue to be disconcerting. The reason for our
deep concern in that regard is not the mere desecration
of a cultural heritage site of world renown, but that it
is being desecrated by scribbling messages that glorify
terrorists at a time when the international community is
making enormous efforts in combating that evil — the
biggest threat to international peace and security.
It is with concern that I bring to the Council’s
attention the continued desecration of Serbian
monasteries. In the night of 4 and 5 December 2014,
“UÇK” and “Kosovo” graffiti were scribbled on the
walls in the churchyard of the Saint Kosma and Damian
Church, despite the security provided by the Kosovo
Police forces. Let me point out that those acts are not
only a threat and an insult addressed to the Serbian
Orthodox Church and its clergy, but also a way to
intimidate the remaining Orthodox population in
Kosovo and Metohija, most of it consisting of Serbs. I
take this opportunity to point to the need to introduce
additional measures to protect the Serbian cultural and
religious heritage in Kosovo and Metohija.
The attacks on these sites are, at the same time,
attacks on the identity of Serbs and directly influence
their feeling of security and acceptance. The renewed
scribbling of graffiti on an endangered cultural site on
the UNESCO List of World Heritage Sites brings into
question the commitment of the relevant authorities
in the province to protecting and preserving Serbian
cultural and religious heritage. At the same time, we

15-03331

06/02/2015

Kosovo

have been witness to the unfolding of a parallel process
of altering historical facts, aimed at marginalizing and
eliminating the presence of Serbs and Serbia from the
history of Kosovo and Metohija.
Moreover, let me point out that the need for
increased security has recently assumed an additional
dimension related to the fight against terrorist
threats originating from the worldwide rise of violent
extremism. As a sponsor of resoltuion 2178 (2014), the
Republic of Serbia has taken all the necessary measures
to suppress the financing and organizing of terrorism
and the increasing phenomenon of recruitment of
foreign terrorist fighters who join armed terrorist
organizations in the Middle East, such as Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant. Serbia will continue to
act resolutely on the suppression of terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. We expect the international
missions in Kosovo and Metohija and PISG to make
their own contributions, within their capacities, to this
common fight of ours, which is of global significance.
In the context of the priority that the Government
of the Republic of Serbia attaches to resolving property
issues in Kosovo and Metohija, I would like to draw
the Council’s attention to the privatization processes
carried out by the Kosovo Privatization Agency, which
are contrary to international and European human rights
conventions. In addition, UNMIK has determined that
the process was contrary to resolution 1244 (1999), as
the Kosovo Privatization Agency was not established
under the laws in force in Kosovo and Metohija in
accordance with the resolution.
Particularly evident is the tendency to privatize
public and socially owned companies in the Serbian
majority communities. Such companies are being sold
to persons of Albanian nationality. I would like to point
out that the nationality of the persons who come into
possession of the companies is not in dispute; what is
in dispute is that the actions involved are unlawful and
motivated by the destruction of the economic resources
in the Serbian communities. I would like to take this
opportunity to raise the ongoing property issue of the
Trepça combine: any other solution to this question that
differs from the one achieved in the Brussels Agreement
would be unacceptable to the Republic of Serbia.
Of particular concern is the attempt of the Pristina
Government to adopt, without consultations with the
representatives of the Serbian community in Kosovo
and Metohija, the law on the amendments of the law on
public enterprises. In doing so, it is in breach of article

S/PV.7377

2 of the coalition agreement on the basis of which
the current Government was formed in Pristina. That
article provides for halting further privatization in the
Serbian communities and an agreement that property
issues be discussed in Brussels with the mediation of
the European Council and the European Commission.
I am convinced that we are all aware of the importance
of respect for ownership rights regardless of whether
private or public property is involved. In this sense,
it is necessary to ensure that all activities in Kosovo
and Metohija related to privatization once again
take place in the legally valid framework. That is all
the more relevant since activities in this area in the
southern Serbian province necessarily have an ethnic
connotation, which is inadmissible in a democratic
world.
I cannot emphasize strongly enough the importance
of continued monitoring and assessment of the work
of the judiciary and other PISG organs in Kosovo and
Metohija, as well as an appraisal of their readiness to
take over the executive competencies that the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) now
has responsibility for, as provided by the decision on the
extension of the mandate and reconfiguration of EULEX
taken in June 2014. On a number of occasions, Serbia
has pointed out the need for continued monitoring and
defining of proper criteria for the appraisal of the work
of the Institutions by the relevant missions present in
Kosovo and Metohija under the auspices of the United
Nations. It is with regret that we note that the current
situation in Kosovo and Metohija reflects, in part, the
lack of adequate professional capacities on the part of
the P1SG.
In its Kosovo Progress Report 2014, the European
Commission expresses serious concerns regarding the
independence, accountability and impartiality of the
justice system in Kosovo and Metohija. The report also
points to the need for more concrete results in the fight
against organized crime, corruption, money laundering
and terrorist financing. In reporting on the work of
first-instance courts in its Justice Monitor report for the
first half of 2014, OSCE points to shortcomings such
as poor or no translation provided in cases involving
members of non-majority communities, as well as to
the fact that more than half of the decisions have not
been fully reasoned.
The chaotic situation in the justice system of Kosovo
and Metohija is borne out also by the trial of the former
members of the Kosovo Liberation Army charged with

15-033317/24

S/PV.7377

Kosovo

the commission of war crimes in the detention centre in
the locality of Kleçka. Additional suspicion about the
impartiality of the Kosovo and Metohija justice system
is raised by the case of Oliver Ivanović, a political
leader of the Serbs who remained in custody for a year
before his trial began.
The current situation in Kosovo and Metohija
bears out our assessment that conditions have not yet
been fulfilled, under resolution 1244 (1999), for a
full transfer of competencies to the PISG. That these
functions have been entrusted to EULEX does not
diminish the powers and responsibility of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. I expect that,
within its mandate, EULEX will continue to carry out
its executive competencies in the area of the rule of
law, in view of the real assessment of the situation in
Kosovo and Metohija in that regard.
I take this opportunity to commend the efforts made
in the investigation of the allegations contained in the
report of Senator Dick Marty on the inhuman treatment
of people in the illicit trafficking in human organs in
Kosovo and Metohija. I welcome the reference in the
report before us on the need to urgently establish the
specialist court to try cases arising from the finding of
the European Union Special Investigative Task Force.
Serbia is committed to the process of reconciliation.
We consider that an important way to confront our own
past and, in that context, to establish the fate of missing
persons. This is important, first and foremost because
of the families of these persons and as a contribution
to the process of inter-ethnic reconciliation in the
province. To that end, our expert teams cooperate with
UNMIK and EULEX, as well as with the competent
bodies in Kosovo and Metohija.
The process of inter-ethnic reconciliation is
incomplete without the trial of the former members
of the Kosovo Liberation Army responsible for the
persecution of Serbs, Roma and other non-Albanians,
as well as their political opponents among Kosovo
and Metohija Albanians. We expect that necessary
conditions will be created to try former members of
the Kosovo Liberation Army who are suspected of war
crimes and crimes against humanity.
In conclusion, let me point out once again that the
quest for a lasting and sustainable peace in Kosovo
and Metohija is the national priority of Serbia. We can
arrive at the solution only through negotiations and
dialogue with the PISG in Pristina, fully respecting

8/24

06/02/2015

the legitimate interests of the Albanian, Serbian and
other populations in Kosovo and Metohija on the basis
of resolution 1244 (1999). The solution to the question
of Kosovo and Metohija must be in the interests of
our citizens, who should be enabled to live in normal
conditions, while a safe life together for all communities
should be made possible. In arriving at a solution, we
must achieve mutual reconciliation.
That will process will certaily be helped by the
adoption of European standards and values as the
entire region moves towards the European Union. We
believe that the commitment to European integration is
the principal driving force behind the normalization of
relations between Belgrade and Pristina. We expect the
European Union to continue its active engagement in,
and facilitate our dialogue, with Pristina.
I would like to address a call from this Chamber
to the political leaders in the province to invest
efforts — now that conditions have been created by
the ending of the stalemate of the political process in
Pristina — to continue the dialogue, primarily in the
interests of the population of Kosovo and Metohija. The
Government of the Republic of Serbia will certainly
maintain its active engagement in the implementation
of the Brussels Agreement in the interests of peace and
economic progress and reconciliation.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Thaçi.
Mr. Thaçi (interpretation from Albanian; English
text provided by delegation): Let me first express my
gratitude for this opportunity to address the Council
at its first meeting this year on Kosovo. Today, I will
inform the Council about the progress Kosovo has
achieved in recent months and of the commitments of
the new Government of Kosovo.
This month marks the seventh anniversary of
Kosovo’s declaration of independence, the most
important act in the people of Kosovo’s commitment
to freedom and democracy. I can say with pride that
the seventh anniversary of independence finds Kosovo
as a consolidated State, inside and out. The recognition
accorded to my country has shown that the State of
Kosovo is an irreversible reality and an indispensable
factor of peace and stability in the region. Kosovo has
been recognized by all neighbouring countries, with the
exception of Serbia, and the vast majority of countries
of the region and the Euro-Atlantic community. The
Republic of Kosovo has been recognized by 108
countries on all continents. I call upon all States

15-03331

06/02/2015

Kosovo

Members of the United Nations, including members of
the Council, to recognize Kosovo and to take the step
of joining in the support of Kosovo as an equal and full
member of the international community.
Recently, Kosovo became a member of the
International Organization of La Francophonie.
In December, Kosovo became a member of the
International Olympic Committee. Kosovo was granted
full membership, ending its international isolation. Our
athletes will now have the opportunity to compete in
the 2016 Olympic Games in Rio de Janeiro.
Kosovo has achieved concrete results in its goal of
strengthening regional cooperation. The new State has
become a member of all relevant regional organizations.
In accordance with our policy of strengthening regional
cooperation, at the beginning of my tenure I visited
Albania, Montenegro and Macedonia to promote
good-neighbourly relations and to ensure our mutual
commitment to the European future of the region.
In late March, Kosovo will host the six Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the Balkans, including the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, at a summit in Kosovo.
We plan to discuss joint investment opportunities and
projects.
We are also continuing to implement the agreements
reached in the process of normalizing our relations with
Serbia. The process of integrating the four municipalities
of northern Kosovo into Kosovo’s institutions is
now successfully under way. The representatives of
citizens who live in the north of the country are now
part of the new Government of Kosovo, and they hold
ministerial positions. Although dialogue at the political
level has been postponed due to the formation of new
Governments, first in Serbia and then in Kosovo, the
dialogue on technical issues has continued. During this
time, we have achieved satisfactory progress in closing
the parallel structures of the Ministry of Internal
Affairs of Serbia in the northern part of our country,
while Serbian personnel have been fully integrated into
the Kosovo police. We have come to agreements on the
implementation of integrated border management and
on energy and telecom issues. Finally, we have enabled
the collection of custom revenues at border crossings in
the northern part of the country.
I must express concern over tendencies on the
Serbian side to avoid or delay the implementation of
the Brussels Agreement, which indicates that Serbia
has not given up its interference in the internal affairs
of Kosovo. The report Dossier: Rudnica, published

S/PV.7377

last week by the internationally respected Serbian
Humanitarian Law Centre, is a very disturbing account.
It accuses the current Chief of the Serbian Army of
having committed atrocities in Kosovo in 1999 and of
hiding in mass graves the bodies of Kosovar civilians
killed in Serbia. According to the report, Serbia has
never initiated or brought charges against any of the
hundreds of officers and police officers implicated in
the atrocities. I invite the Serbian leadership to find the
strength to deal with the past, and call on the Security
Council to request that Serbia heed the report’s findings
with due gravity.
Earlier this year, we saw an increase in the
establishment of Serbian parallel structures, such as the
appointment of parallel municipal mayors, including
in the municipality of Štrpce, the creation of parallel
posts in the Dragaš and Prizren municipalities. We
have noted the obstacles faced by the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and local police in
establishing the rule of law and normality in the four
northern municipalities, caused by illegal mayors and
paramilitary and criminal groups that have hampered
the progress of the Serb community in Kosovo during
the past 15 years. We have informed the European
Union of all such developments, and demanded that
Serbia respect the Brussels Agreement in full. I call
on the Security Council today to demand that Serbia
honour the agreements reached.
The State of Kosovo has shown maturity in
consolidating its domestic affairs. One example of
that is the political maturity shown by all political
actors during the months in which we negotiated the
formation of the new Government, following the general
elections. Throughout that period, the political parties
have shown respect for the laws and institutions of
Kosovo. At the same time, the independent institutions,
such as the presidency and the Constitutional Court,
have shown integrity and professionalism. All that has
led to a political agreement that has paved the way for
the creation of the new Assembly and the formation
of the new Government. The new Government is a
comprehensive one in which all communities are
represented, including Kosovo Serb citizens who live
in the northern part of the country.
This week, Prime Minister Isa Mustafa dismissed
a member of the Government who represented the
Serb community. He was removed not because of his
affiliation, but because he did not show professionalism
in undertaking the tasks expected of a representative of

15-033319/24

S/PV.7377

Kosovo

the Government. That incident was used by Serbia to
politically attack Kosovo, but Kosovo is an independent
country and takes its own decisions independently.
Serbia also attacked Kosovo with respect to
the Trepča Mines complex and Serbia’s claim to
this industrial giant. It should be noted once again
that Trepča is the property of Kosovo and Kosovo’s
responsibility. The solution to the issue was delayed
because the Interim Administration in Kosovo was
not ready to face the political pressure that the Trepča
incident would bring. The institutions of Kosovo
have affirmed that Trepča requires a solution in
accordance with applicable laws and regulations
and with the principle of the privatization of socially
owned enterprises in Kosovo that had begun with the
United Nations Administration and with the consent of
the United Nation Office of Legal Affairs. Trepča is
Kosovo’s and Kosovo decides on Trepča.
The crucial evidence of Kosovo’s success is its
completion of negotiations in the stabilization and
association process with the European Union (EU). This
is recognition of the substantial progress that Kosovo
has made in the fields of its economy, democracy and
the rule of law.
I would also like to inform the Council of the main
priorities of the new Government of the Republic of
Kosovo. Together with the new Government’s partners,
we have created a realistic and ambitious Government
programme for the next four years. We are committed to
a dynamic executive and legislative agenda that should
move the country towards NATO and EU membership.
We are committed to economic development as our
main focus for the next four years, starting with a series
of concrete steps to improve the economic situation and
continue the positive trend of economic growth.
At the international level, I want to reiterate
that the Government of Kosovo will remain strongly
committed to the full normalization of inter-State
relations with Serbia and to continue dialogue that will
be finalized with mutual recognition. Only that step
will enable the building of sustainable peace between
the two countries and the establishment of diplomatic
and good-neighbourly relations in the European spirit.
The commitment will be confirmed in three days,
on 9 February, when the first meeting of the new
Prime Ministers of the two countries will take place
under the auspices of the EU High Representative
and Vice-President of the European Commission,
Ms. Mogherini.
10/24

06/02/2015

Kosovo, as part of the Western Balkans and the
Euro-Atlantic region, will also continue the process
of integration into the European Union as a priority
for its social transformation and economic and
political development. During its term in office, the
Government is committed to concluding the signing
of the EU stabilization and association agreement in
the first half of 2015 and to begin the implementation
of the agreement. The stabilization and association
agreement is a contractual relationship between the
EU and Kosovo, which will serve to Europeanize our
national policies and modernize the country.
Another issue to be addressed is that of the unfair
and perennial isolation of Kosovar citizens, who are
the only people in Europe that do not have the right
to freedom of movement in the Schengen Area. In this
respect, a key priority is the implementation of the
action plan addressing all the challenges of repatriation,
reintegration, document security, border and migration
management and overall security and public order.
Many Kosovars today are fleeing Kosovo due to the
inability to legally migrate to EU countries. Kosovo has
been isolated for too long and our young people want
have freedom of movement within our continent by any
means necessary.
The Republic of Kosovo has consistently shown
that it is a responsible actor in terms of its international
obligations. In the early days of the formation of the
Government, we showed our commitment by finalizing
the draft law that prohibits the citizens of Kosovo from
taking part in armed conflicts outside the country.
Although it is small, our country has shown that it is a
partner and ally in the global war against terrorism. We
naturally aligned ourselves with the global coalition, led
by the United States of America, against the so-called
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, and we will remain
active until we have achieved the annihilation of this
phenomenon, which has not only hurt the Middle East,
but affected European capitals as well. The uncertain
world of violence that these terrorists are proclaiming
is not a world that we can accept. Therefore, the
Republic of Kosovo is on the front lines to eradicate
this phenomenon. We know very well what it means to
live with terror in a state of systematic violence.
Kosovo this year will also apply to be a full member
of the Council of Europe. Today, Kosovars are the only
citizens in Europe who cannot seek protection from the
European Court of Human Rights. It is going to be a
key priority for me to put an end to this exclusion.

15-03331

06/02/2015

Kosovo

Kosovo’s goal is to be a place that contributes to
collective security, and we are tirelessly committed to
strengthening the peace and security architecture in the
region and beyond. In this regard, we have undertaken a
strategic review of the security sector in Kosovo and are
now making coordinated preparations for the transition
from the Kosovo Security Force to the Armed Forces of
Kosovo. I want to thank the NATO liaison and advising
team, which has been very close to us throughout this
process. I want to assure the Council that the Kosovo
Armed Forces will be a professional and multi-ethnic
force, guided by the principles of democratic and
civilian control, and will gradually integrate into the
Euro-Atlantic framework and be ready to contribute to
regional peace and global security.
I would like to inform the Council that Kosovo
intends to start a new chapter of cooperation with
NATO, moving towards the Partnership for Peace as
the main instrument for full membership, through a
gradual approach and coordination with our EuroAtlantic partners.
Let me reiterate that, during the past seven years, the
Republic of Kosovo, thanks to the will and commitment
of its people, as well as the political leadership and
support of the international community, has built stable
and durable multi-ethnic and democratic institutions.
As a result, Kosovo has become a source of peace and
an exporter of stability in the region and beyond. Let
me remind the Council once again that Kosovo is one
of the most successful State-building endeavours in the
United Nations history.
The objectives of resolution 1244 (1999) have
been met for quite some time now, and it is time for
a new chapter in the relations between Kosovo and
the United Nations. Kosovo is forever grateful for
the role and contribution of the United Nations in our
country’s State-building process. However, considering
the course of developments since the declaration of
independence, the role of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has been
significantly minimized and it now has only a reporting
role.
Bearing this in mind and praising Kosovo’s
achievements in the field of security, economic
stability and social and political development, as well
as highlighting the agreement reached between Kosovo
and Serbia, it is time that the Security Council consider
the possibility of a transformation of UNMIK that

S/PV.7377

would help Kosovo align itself with the specialized
agencies. We also ask the Security Council to help the
Republic of Kosovo in the realization of its aspirations
of joining the United Nations as a member with full
rights and responsibilities.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the members of the Security Council.
Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo, for his statement. I would also like to welcome
and thank Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Serbia, and Mr. Hashim Thaçi, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kosovo, for their statements.
Six months after the holding of parliamentary
elections on 8 June 2014, Chad is pleased to note the
signing of a coalition agreement between the principal
political parties in Kosovo, which allowed the formation
of a new Government in Pristina and the establishment
of the Assembly of Kosovo. This new momentum will
make it possible to overcome the State’s paralysis and
address the fundamental issues with regard to Kosovo’s
management and administration.
We welcome the adoption by the Assembly of Kosovo
of the law on the Kosovo budget for 2015. Moreover,
we note that the municipal budgets in northern Kosovo
are also finalized, but are encountering difficulties in
terms of taking into account the salaries for health and
education personnel. In that regard, we urge the new
authorities to promptly reach a solution to this situation.
With regard to security, in particular the
transformation of the Kosovo Security Force into
the Armed Forces of Kosovo, Chad believes that the
new authorities need to find the appropriate space to
facilitate the conditions to resolve this issue, while
respecting Kosovo’s general interests, territorial
integrity and sovereignty. We also welcome the
new Government’s commitment to fighting violent
extremism and terrorism through the adoption by the
Kosovo Assembly Committee on Internal Affairs of the
draft law on the prohibition of joining armed conflicts
outside State territory. These efforts and developments
are moving forward, as can be seen beyond the national
territory. We commend the joint efforts undertaken by
the authorities of Belgrade in the process of normalizing
the relationship between the two countries.

15-0333111/24

S/PV.7377

Kosovo

The constructive technical exchanges in the areas
of law, energy and migration, and the recent visits of
the Serbian President to Pristina and northern Kosovo,
demonstrate the desire to overcome the difficulties in
seeking peace and stability in the framework facilitated
by the European Union. These political and technical
gains will remain tenuous as long as the economic
and social situations are not brought under control and
stabilized.
According to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/74), a number of situations and challenges call
for particular attention and firm commitment if we want
to bring about lasting solutions to Kosovo’s problems.
These include, inter alia, the growing number of
demonstrations in different regions of Kosovo, which
have led to many arrests and discontent. The most recent
one was on 24 and 25 January. There are 1,655 cases of
disappeared persons and the relevant authorities must
address that situation. The establishment of a specialist
court to continue the work in the area of war crimes and
crimes against humanity is needed. There were more
than 17,000 internally displaced persons at the end of
2014 and the number of voluntary returns had declined,
according to the information provided by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
The movement of illegal migrants increasingly towards
Western Europe is a problem.
With regard to the process of disarming the civilian
population, the efforts of the local authorities, with the
support of United Nations Development Programme,
have made it possible to withdraw from circulation
more than 1,500 firearms in 2014. The number of
incidents affecting religious sites and places of worship
has led to the establishment of a monitoring Committee,
including all the churches and other denominations,
to provide an institutional and collective response to
hate speech and graffiti. Lastly, efforts to bring about
greater participation of women in political spheres and
to strengthen measures for their protection are key.
Chad believes that the democratic process has been
launched in Kosovo and that taking into account all the
variables will guarantee the building of a democratic
and multi-ethnic Kosovo. Kosovo will not achieve
this new phase without the contribution and persistent
and serious work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We
welcome the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Farid Zarif, and his entire team for their
commitment to carrying out their mission.

12/24

06/02/2015

Concerning the accusations of corruption on the
part of certain members of the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), Chad urges the
relevant bodies to investigate them in order to establish
responsibility. We have renewed confidence in EULEX,
which we believe can continue to oversee the situation
and play a role in the area of the rule of law.
In conclusion, we would like to once again
commend Pristina for the positive developments
concerning national reconciliation and normalization
of relations with Belgrade, and to congratulate UNMIK
on its commitment to promoting security, stability and
respect for human rights in Kosovo and the region, in
accordance with resolution 1244 (1999).
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia. We share
the views and concerns he expressed. We have taken
note of Mr. Thaçi’s statement, and we thank Mr. Zarif
for his presentation of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2015/74) on the activities of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and his assessment of the situation in the region.
As a result of the internal political crisis in
Kosovo that lasted until the end of 2014 — owing to
the key parties’ inability to form new power structures
independently and without outside involvement after
the elections to the Assembly of Kosovo, held ahead of
schedule on 8 June — the settlement of many pressing
issues, both in the region and in the relations between
Belgrade and Pristina, has come to a standstill.
The situation has once again shown that the facade
of Kosovo’s political institutions conceals serious
problems.
The formation of a coalition ministerial Cabinet that
includes representatives of the Serbian community has
helped to normalize the situation somewhat. However,
on 25 and 27 January the Kosovo Albanian opposition,
mainly nationalists, organized anti-Government
demonstrations in Pristina that escalated into serious
riots and clashes with police and produced dozens of
casualties. As a result, political stability has again come
under threat. Under pressure from the demonstrators,
the Kosovo authorities forced the Minister for
Communities and Returns, Aleksandar Jablanović,
an ethnic Serb, to resign. In that regard, we support
Serbia’s to reach a political solution to the Kosovo
problem. In the current circumstances, establishing a
15-03331

06/02/2015

Kosovo

mutually respectful dialogue between the parties is one
task that cannot be put off. We want to emphasize that
unilateral action is unacceptable, and the fomenting of
anti-Serb sentiment in Kosovo must end immediately.
We are on the Serbian side regarding the issue of the
importance of creating a specialist court to prosecute
the egregious crimes committed by the Kosovo
Liberation Army during the years of armed conflict.
The interim results released by the investigation speak
unambiguously to the adequacy of the evidence that has
been collected in support of the allegations of multiple
murders, kidnappings, rape, unlawful detention,
inhumane treatment, trafficking in human organs and
desecration of churches. It was such actions that led to
the mass exodus of Serbs from southern and central
Kosovo, where ethnic cleansing did indeed take place.
We call on the Secretary-General to closely monitor
the situation concerning the creation of the specialist
court and to facilitate completion of the process as soon
as possible. It is strange that the establishment of such
a body should depend on the enactment of legislative
decisions in Pristina, particularly considering the
evident weakness of Kosovo’s political institutions.
Nonetheless, we hope that real progress will be made
in that direction in the near future, and that in the end
the guilty parties will be punished regardless of the
position they occupy. It is vital that all witnesses be
duly protected during the course of the trials.
A number of years have passed during which
Kosovo has still not seen progress in the areas of justice
and the fight against corruption and organized crime,
including drug trafficking and trafficking in human
beings, as well as freedom of speech and limiting
political influence on the judicial system. Recent reports
of the European Commission and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe testify to this.
Regression in other areas, including the social and
economic fields, is clearly apparent. Unemployment is
very high, and people are leaving Kosovo en masse in
search of a better life.
Inter-ethnic tensions remain acute, yet we see no
concrete steps being taken to bring those responsible
for anti-Serb actions to justice. The ongoing desecration
of Orthodox monasteries in the region, including
the Visoki Dečani monastery, a jewel of the world’s
cultural heritage, is seriously disturbing. On 6 January,
the eve of Orthodox Christmas, a bus carrying Serbian
pilgrims, refugees from the town of Gjakovë/Đakovica
who were trying to visit a church there, was stoned.

S/PV.7377

Clearly, in such circumstances Serbs from Gjakovë/
Đakovica cannot expect to return to their homes they
abandoned there. Indeed, as the data from the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
shows, the already weak rates of refugee return are
falling, while the outflow of representatives of national
minorities is growing. The mere existence of legislation
guaranteeing their rights is therefore not enough; it
must be strictly monitored.
We note Belgrade’s constructive attitude and its
continued readiness to maintain contacts with Kosovo
Albanian representatives. We believe that the planned
resumption of a high-level political dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina in the next few days will enable
progress to be made on key issues on the agenda
concerning the creation of the association of Serbian
municipalities in Kosovo. The fact that the agreement
on this, reached way back in April 2013, has gone
unrealized has had a negative effect on interaction
between the ethnic communities in the region.
Kosovars’ participation in conflicts in the Middle
East, including in the ranks of Islamic State and other
radical organizations, should continue to be firmly
suppressed. We call on Pristina to be more active
in countering the spread of extremist ideas and the
fomenting of terrorism, using its recently passed
legislation. We assume that the issue will continue to
be a focus of attention for UNMIK.
The United Nations Mission is still the chief
international presence in Kosovo. The European Union’s
mediation of the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina
and the transfer of UNMIK’s rule-of-law functions to
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo do
not imply a reduction of the role of the United Nations
in the region. Considering the wide range of problems
that exists, we call on the United Nations Mission to
fulfil its mandate fully, in principle and proactively. In
order to that it must clearly be in possession of all the
necessary resources and personnel. We categorically
reject any attempts to devalue UNMIK’s role and call
on the Kosovo Albanian side to cooperate fully with the
United Nations presence.
Russia’s position on the question of Kosovo and
Serbia’s territorial integrity is unchanged. Resolution
1244 (1999) retains its full force and remains essential
to the entire international legal basis for the settlement
in Kosovo. In that regard, we do not support any
proposals that in any way modify the review cycle for

15-0333113/24

S/PV.7377

Kosovo

settling the Kosovo issue in the Security Council. The
prerequisites for that are not ready yet.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to thank Mr. Farid Zarif, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing.
Spain considers the role of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
in accordance with its mandate as established by
resolution 1244 (1999), to be very important. UNMIK
makes a crucial contribution to promoting and
preserving stability in the region and acting as a link
between the various international presences on the
ground. That is clearly expressed in the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/74), which
emphasizes UNMIK’s active role and the important
part it plays in preventing and reducing tensions and
in promoting cooperation among local authorities,
particularly North and South Mitrovica. For that
reason I would like to reaffirm Spain’s support for
UNMIK and Mr. Zarif. I would also like to express
our appreciation for the statements made by Mr. Ivica
Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and by Mr. Hashim Thaçi.
After a long hiatus, a new high-level meeting on
the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, facilitated
by the High Representative of the European Union, is
scheduled to take place, and that is clearly good news.
Spain offers its constructive support, without prejudice
to our principled position, for the High Representative’s
efforts to foster that direct dialogue in order to produce
concrete results that benefit the whole population. I
wish to acknowledge in that regard the commitment
that the authorities in Belgrade and Pristina have shown
thus far, as well as the openness and constructiveness
of their participation in the dialogue. We encourage
both parties to continue to participate in the process
with the same positive attitude.
Spain welcomes the agreements reached throughout
the process, but also believes that it is essential that
dialogue continue with political commitment and work
at the technical level in order to move ahead in the
implementation of the still pending provisions of the
19 April 2013 Agreement. It is important to make quick
and decisive progress on three fronts: in the justice
sector, property rights and the full establishment and
entry into functioning of the association/community of
Serb municipalities pursuant to the Agreement.

14/24

06/02/2015

In another vein, in the area of security, we listened
closely to Special Representative of the Secretary
General Zarif’s briefing, which brought us up to date
specifically on the recent violent episodes and protests,
which were also alluded to in the Secretary-General’s
report. Unfortunately, we cannot yet speak of total
reconciliation or a satisfactory integration among the
different constituent communities, which is seen, for
example, in the persistent incidents involving religious
sites, the ongoing decrease in the number of voluntary
returnees and the absence of conditions needed to
adequately reintegrate returnees in their communities.
There is also an ongoing contrast between legislation
that has made nominal progress in the area of human
rights and the rights of minorities and, at the same time,
a practical application thereof, which is not yet at the
level of international and European standards.
I wish to also highlight the work performed by
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo.
The Security Council acknowledges that work and
appreciates it. Economic governance issues and rule-oflaw issues are two areas where reforms are needed as a
matter of priority.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Spain’s commitment
to the European perspective for the Western Balkans.
We believe that progress made towards this shared
objective will allow for the definitive stabilization of
the region and the economic and social progress for its
inhabitants. That necessarily requires, however, a high
level of political commitment and concrete work from
all stakeholders, each in their areas of responsibility.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid
Zarif, for presenting the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2015/74). We welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and thank him
for his statement. We also welcome Mr. Hashim Thaçi.
Angola’s position is that resolution 1244 (1999)
continues to be the applicable legal framework for
reaching a comprehensive solution for Kosovo through
dialogue and negotiations on the basis of the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
the relevant Security Council resolutions. We therefore
support the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Serbia and understand the legitimate concerns of that
country on the Kosovo issue.

15-03331

06/02/2015

Kosovo

We would like to underline the fundamental role
played by the United Nations in Kosovo through the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) in promoting security, stability and
respect for human rights, and its cooperation with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Kosovo Force and European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo.
I shall now focus on four main issues: the key
political developments, human rights, internally
displaced persons (IDPs) and missing persons.
On key political developments, the European
Union-facilitated dialogue at a high-level of leadership
between Belgrade and Pristina appears to be crucial
for moving forward in the implementation of the
outstanding provisions of the 19 April 2013 Agreement.
In that regard, we commend the Government of Serbia
for its readiness to engage in the dialogue. Some progress
has been achieved at the technical level in setting
arrangements for the travel of Serbian and Kosovo
officials. However, additional progress is expected once
political talks resume at a higher political level in the
implementation of agreements on the judiciary, energy,
crossing points and the freedom of movement. We share
Belgrade’s concern over the announced intention of the
Kosovo authorities to transform the Kosovo Security
Force into the Kosovo Armed Forces in violation of
resolution 1244 (1999).
With respect to human rights, we welcome the
organization by UNMIK, supported by UN-Women
and the United Nations Development Coordinator, of an
“Open Day on Women, Peace and Security in Kosovo”,
marking the International Day for the Elimination
of Violence against Women and the recognition of
survivors of sexual violence in the relevant Kosovo
legislation. Another relevant idea was the Common Voice
Forum, a multi-ethnic initiative that brings together
representatives from all of Kosovo’s communities for
the advancement of inter-ethnic dialogue, conflict
prevention and civic awareness. However, the full
implementation of the legal framework continues to
be hindered, as the report underlines, by a range of
institutional factors, including inefficient coordination,
overlapping mandates, insufficient financial allocations
and limited accountability measures.
On internally displaced persons, we regret that by
the end of 2014 there were more than 17,000 internally
displaced persons in Kosovo and that the number of

S/PV.7377

voluntary returns continues to show a declining trend,
with the unresolved issues regarding property and a lack
of effective enforcement of the courts’ decisions as the
key obstacle to the increase of returnees. We recall in
that regard the request made by the Special Rapporteur
on the human rights of the internally displaced persons
following its mission to Serbia, including Kosovo,
to the competent authorities of Kosovo, especially
the provision of protection, security and safety for
returning IDPs to their places of origin.
On the issue of missing persons, we commend
the responsible authorities in Belgrade and Pristina
for their continued efforts to pursue new sources of
information and carry out investigations with respect
to 1,655 remaining missing persons from 1988 to 2000.
In conclusion, we are encouraged that the overall
security situation in Kosovo remained stable during
the reporting period, thereby highlighting that UNMIK
continued to be active in its facilitation role between
communities and officials and with international
organizations, particularly focused on efforts aimed
at preventing and reducing tensions and promoting
cooperation between local authorities.
Finally, we commend the work carried out
by UNMIK under the leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid
Zarif, in the promotion of security, stability, the rule of
law and respect for human rights in accordance with the
Mission’s mandate.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I thank Mr. Farid Zarif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing. My
delegation welcomes His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, and His Excellency Mr. Hashim
Thaçi, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, and thank them both for
their statements.
Malaysia joins other countries in welcoming
the recent formation of the Government in Kosovo,
following the legislative elections in June of last year.
After a six-month delay, we applaud the power-sharing
agreement between the coalition parties, based on a
spirit of compromise and inclusiveness. We commend
the key role played by President Atifete Jahjaga in
facilitating that outcome, as well as her unwavering
efforts to engage with the political leaders in Kosovo.

15-0333115/24

S/PV.7377

Kosovo

06/02/2015

With the formation of the coalition Government,
we call on all parties to close ranks and work closely
together, based on the collective responsibility to a
democratic, stable and prosperous future. We also take
note of the agreement between the coalition parties to
establish the association of Serb municipalities within
several months’ time, and look forward to seeing
progress on that long-contentious issue.

Based on the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/74), from October 2014 to January 2015 a
number of peaceful demonstrations were held in
Kosovo, mainly to protest against prevailing social
and economic conditions. Malaysia hopes that the
new Government will take heed of the demands of its
citizens for political, social and economic reform to
improve their living standards.

Malaysia fully supports the normalization of
relations between Kosovo and Serbia and welcomes the
resumption of the political dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade, facilitated by the European Union (EU)
in Brussels, next week. Despite the stalled dialogue at
the highest level, due to the delay in the formation of
the Kosovo Government in the second half of last year,
Malaysia is pleased to note that the EU-led dialogue has
nevertheless continued at the technical level.

Malaysia welcomes the ongoing cooperation
among the religious communities in Kosovo, including
in protecting cultural and religious heritage. Such
cooperation could serve as a bridge in building
confidence and trust among the religious communities
in Kosovo. We strongly condemn any attempt to spread
hate and instigate interreligious violence, including by
desecrating cultural and religious sites.

In December 2014, Serbia’s Constitutional Court
declined a request made by the Democratic Party of
Serbia to review the constitutionality of the 19 April
2013 First Agreement of Principles Governing the
Normalization of Relations between Serbia and Kosovo.
Given the Court’s decision, Malaysia hopes that all
parties in Serbia and Kosovo will remain committed to,
and ensure the full implementation of, the agreements
signed by their Governments under the auspices of the
European Union in Brussels. Indeed, that is the only
way forward towards a better common future for both
Serbia and Kosovo.
Malaysia also wishes to see progress in the
establishment of a specialist court, agreed to between
Kosovo and the EU, to try cases arising from the
findings of the EU Special Investigative Task Force last
year. Progress in establishing the specialist court to try
possible crimes against humanity is vital in promoting
reconciliation and closure among the communities in
Kosovo.
Malaysia welcomes the stable security situation
in Kosovo, as reported by Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Zarif. We fully support the
important role played by UNMIK to promote security,
stability and respect for human rights in Kosovo and
the region. We also welcome the continuing mandate
of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
to further strengthen the rule of law and the judicial
institutions in Kosovo towards the path of European
integration.

16/24

As a multiracial and multireligious country,
Malaysia has its share of difficulties and challenges in
ensuring a united, stable and prosperous country. We
believe that the value and practice of moderation is
crucial in bridging differences, as it calls for mutual
respect, acceptance and understanding among the
various groups.
We also need to prevent political, social and
economic marginalization in order to ensure unity
and stability in a multi-ethnic society. In that regard,
Malaysia stands ready to support Kosovo on its
path towards nation-building, inclusive democracy,
reconciliation and economic progress.
Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I thank the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative for Kosovo,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing today. I also welcome
First Deputy Prime Ministers Dačić and Thaçi to the
Security Council.
Since the Council last met in this format (see
S/PV.7327), only two months ago, we have witnessed
welcome progress in Kosovo. The formation of a new
Government in Pristina in December, after a long gap,
marks an important step forward following free and
fair elections throughout the territory of Kosovo in
June of last year. With the key institutions now in place,
we look forward to the new Government enacting the
reforms highlighted in the European Commission’s
annual Kosovo Progress Report 2014. There is much
for the new Administration to take forward, including
economic development and the rule of law, ensuring
greater independence of the judiciary and tackling
organized crime and corruption.

15-03331

06/02/2015

Kosovo

The formation of a new Government is also a chance
to bring renewed momentum to the European Union
(EU) facilitated high-level dialogue. The Governments
of both Serbia and Kosovo have shown welcome
commitment to that process, and we wish them every
success in their first meeting of 2015, next week. I
welcome the strong commitments to this process that
we have just heard from First Deputy Prime Ministers
Thaçi and Dačić in their statements this morning.
Continued progress at the working level will
be vital. I am pleased that the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2015/74) notes that some progress was made
in the technical-level dialogue in December. The
normalization of relations between Kosovo and Serbia
is integral to both countries’ European Union accession
paths.
We also welcome the new Government’s commitment
to establish judicial proceedings for the investigation
into the allegations reported by the Special Investigative
Task Force. As the Secretary-General makes clear in
his report, that will be an important step forward for the
new Government. We urge them to ensure that relevant
laws are passed to enable that.
I join the representative of Angola in commending
the work of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, supported by UN-Women and the
United Nations Development Programme, on women
and peace and security, including the holding of an open
day to mark the International Day for the Elimination
of Violence against Women.
We also welcome the adoption of the Kosovo action
plan for implementing resolution 1325 (2000). In that
context, the legislative provision made for survivors
of sexual violence during the Kosovo conflict is an
important step. Women and peace and security and
the prevention of sexual violence are rightly important
priorities of the Council, and it is heartening to see
these issues being addressed in Kosovo.
While the Secretary-General’s report underlines
the continuing stability of the overall security situation
in Kosovo, the violence in Pristina during recent
protests is a matter of concern. We all support the right
to peaceful protest, but Government authorities and the
opposition in Pristina must do all that they can to avoid
violence and escalation. It is vital that the Government
and the international community in Kosovo continue to
engage with the opposition to address the underlying
causes of the protests, including the economic situation.

S/PV.7377

The report of the Secretary-General also prompts
us to note the need for continued focus on tackling
ethnically motivated incidents. We urge all political and
community leaders to work towards creating greater
cooperation in and between communities, tackling
issues from the past and reconciliation.
Later this month, we will mark the seventh
anniversary of Kosovo’s declaration of independence.
It is an important moment to reflect on the progress
Kosovo has made. It is also a chance to recognize the
progress made in the international community. Since
2008, well over half of the States Members of the United
Nations have recognized Kosovo, including many of its
neighbours in the Western Balkans.
Thanks to the historic agreement reached with
Serbia in 2013, Kosovo now has a strong foundation for
cooperation with Belgrade and for negotiations on EU
membership. In addition, Kosovo has secured access
to funding from the international financial institutions
and will compete in the 2016 Olympic Games, having
gained membership of the International Olympic
Committee. We welcome that progress. It demonstrates
that Kosovo’s independence is irreversible. We
encourage those countries that have not yet recognized
Kosovo to do so.
Precisely because of that level of progress, the
United Kingdom reiterates its view that it is past time
to adjust the frequency of these meetings to reflect the
new realities on the ground. The situation does not, in
our view, merit quarterly meetings. The Council must
recognize and adapt to progress, particularly when
there are so many genuine challenges to international
peace and security confronting us. In practice, these
meetings see largely predictable exchanges of wellknown positions by Council members. The format tends
to lead to the accentuation of differences between the
two countries at a time when our shared goal should be
to inject momentum into the EU-facilitated dialogue.
We would like to see less talk in New York and more
action in the EU-facilitated dialogue.
Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): I thank Special
Representative Farid Zarif for his report, and welcome
Deputy Prime Ministers Dačić and Thaçi to today’s
debate.
New Zealand believes long-term stability and
security will come from an inclusive and democratic
Kosovo that respects the rights and interests of all its
citizens. It will come from genuine reconciliation among

15-0333117/24

S/PV.7377

Kosovo

its various communities and from the maintenance of
constructive and cooperative relations between Pristina
and Belgrade. The Secretary-General’s latest report
(S/2015/74) outlines the encouraging progress that
continues to be made in all those respects.
While the primary responsibility for that lies with
the parties themselves, the international community
continues to have an important role to play in providing
the necessary conditions for progress. We commend
and support the work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo and of Special
Representative Zarif in facilitating conditions for
building cooperative relations between Kosovo’s
communities and the important ongoing role of
regional partners, including the European Union (EU)
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. We, the Security Council, also need to play our
part in those efforts, including through support for a
resumption of high-level dialogue between the parties.
New Zealand welcomes the formation in December
of a new Government and the constitution of the Kosovo
Assembly, which brings to an end a lengthy period
of political uncertainty. The broad representation of
Kosovo’s communities in the new coalition Government
demonstrates just how far Kosovo has come. We hope
that recent security incidents will prove to be isolated
events and that the inclusive nature of the Government
remains unchanged.
We also welcome the announcement of the
resumption of high-level talks between Kosovo and
Serbia, beginning next week. The EU dialogue is an
important mechanism for enabling progress, and we
commend Belgrade and Pristina for their positive
approach. Maintaining a positive approach will be
important to ensure the full implementation and
outstanding provisions of the 19 April 2013 agreement.
Long-term reconciliation between Kosovo’s
various communities will require the resolution of the
outstanding questions concerning missing persons and
further progress on displaced people and facilitating
voluntary returns. We acknowledge the positive steps
taken with regard to the latter and encourage attention
to addressing the obstacles to returns identified in the
Secretary-General’s report.
We echo the Secretary-General’s call for the
establishment of a specialist court to try cases arising
from the work of the EU Special Investigative Task

18/24

06/02/2015

Force. It is important that the court be — and is seen to
be — objective and impartial.
Finally, New Zealand encourages further efforts to
strengthen rule of law institutions in Kosovo, including
through promoting judicial independence and measures
to tackle corruption and organized crime.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Farid Zarif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing on the
current situation in Kosovo. We also thank Mr. Ivica
Dačić, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, for his presence and statement. We
welcome the statement made by Mr. Hashim Thaçi.
We welcome the election of the new Government
of Kosovo on 9 December. We hope that the spirit of
cooperation and collective responsibility that prevailed
in that process persists as the Government tackles
new challenges such as the economic development
of Kosovo, the fight against organized crime and
corruption, and the establishment of the rule of law.
Regarding the security situation, we are concerned
about the news regarding recent violent events in
Pristina. However, despite disturbances and tensions,
we note positively that the security situation in Kosovo
remained generally stable and police forces in Kosovo
responded appropriately to the circumstances to restore
order. In that respect, we highlight the work and the
central role that UNMIK continues to play in promoting
security, stability and respect for human rights, which
is a priority for making progress in reconciliation
between communities.
We also congratulate the Kosovo authorities
on their adoption of the draft law prohibiting the
participation of Kosovo in foreign conflicts. We hope
that those changes can be coupled with improvements
in the living conditions of the citizens of Kosovo,
strengthening public confidence in the democratic
process and dissuading them from leaving their country
to participate in foreign conflicts.
To conclude, I would like to stress that resolution
1244 (1999) continues to be in full force as the
internationally accepted legal basis for resolving the
situation in Kosovo, including strict respect for the
principle of territorial integrity. We look forward to
the conversations that will take place in Brussels on

15-03331

06/02/2015

Kosovo

9 February between Belgrade and Pristina, and we
hope that the parties will continue to implement the
agreement of 19 April 2013 to continue the process of
normalizing their relations.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this Security
Council briefing on Kosovo. We welcome the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid
Zarif, and we note with appreciation the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2015/74) on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
We also welcome the participation of the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
Mr. Ivica Dačić, and the statement made by Mr. Hashim
Thaçi.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reiterates that
full adherence to international law — non-intervention,
respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity
and political independence of States, and the peaceful
settlement of disputes — is critical to the maintenance
of international peace and security. In calling for a
peaceful solution to the question of Kosovo, Venezuela
believes that resolution 1244 (1999) remains the
internationally accepted legal basis applicable to this
dispute, aimed at finding a general solution through
political negotiation. In that regard, we call for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia to be
guaranteed.
Our country supports the resumption of dialogue
and negotiations between Serbia and the local authorities
in the province of Kosovo, in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, in order to achieve a mutually acceptable
solution between the parties. An important step in
this direction was the establishment of the Kosovo
Assembly and the establishment of a new Government
in Pristina.
We note with cautious optimism that security on
the administrative border of Kosovo remains stable,
although certain incidents have been reported since the
most recent Council meeting on this issue (S/PV.7327),
held in December 2014. We appreciate the positive
role played by the United Nations through the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo by
promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights, as well as its cooperation with the Kosovo Force

S/PV.7377

and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), under the auspices of the Organization.
The mediation of the European Union between
Belgrade and Pristina and the transfer of functions from
UNMIK to EULEX do not, in our view, undermine the
work being done on the ground. We hope that such
missions will continue, on the basis of their respective
mandates, to play a constructive role in achieving an
appropriate solution to the Kosovo issue. However, we
note with concern reports that some senior officials of
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
have been implicated in acts of corruption. We hope that
Mr. Gabriele Meucci, in his efforts as Head of EULEX,
and the independent legal expert Mr. Jean-Paul Jacqué
will continue, in a fair and transparent manner, to
carry out their assigned task to clarify the facts and
thereby pursue their work to promote the rule of law in
Kosovo. Moreover, we encourage interested parties to
intensify their joint efforts in the process of clarifying
the situation of missing persons, and we thank EULEX
for its forensic cooperation in this matter. We also
urge the speedy establishment of the specialist court
to investigate allegations of crimes against humanity
committed during the armed conflict.
Venezuela rejects terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, as well as the spread of extremism.
In this regard, we note with appreciation the steps
being taken in Kosovo to prevent the recruitment of
persons as foreign terrorist fighters to participate in
armed conflict in Syria and Iraq. However, we urge the
authorities to remain highly vigilant in this matter of
extreme sensitivity in terms of security.
We attach great importance to the full respect of
the human rights of displaced persons and minorities,
as well as to their right to return to their places of
origin so that they can fully enjoy their human rights
free of discrimination. However, we are concerned
that incidents continue to occur against Kosovo Serb
citizens in certain areas, and we therefore call for
appropriate measures to be taken to remedy this
situation and prevent persecution and hostility on the
basis of ethnicity or religion.
We are further concerned that the sale of businesses
and property in Kosovo undermines the rights of the
Kosovo Serb minority and may become yet another
factor impeding the return of the displaced to their
homes. Illegal actions against cultural and religious
heritage have given rise to serious incidents between

15-0333119/24

S/PV.7377

Kosovo

the two communities that hinder the process of peace
and dialogue in Kosovo. We encourage both parties
to work together to prevent a recurrence of such acts,
which endanger peace and dialogue in the region.
Finally, we call on all parties to redouble their
efforts to find a peaceful, just and lasting political
solution within the framework of international law,
including full compliance with resolution 1244 (1999).
Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I wish
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary
General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing and the
Foreign Ministers of Kosovo, Mr. Hashim Thaçi, and
Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić, for their statements.
Just two months after our most recent debate in
the Security Council on the situation in Kosovo (see
S/PV.7327), we note the revival of the general political
landscape with the formation on 9 December 2014 of
a coalition Government in Pristina and the imminent
resumption of political dialogue between Serbia and
Kosovo. The successful elections of 8 June generally
met the expectations of the Council. We welcome the
fact that the parties have finally been able to take
responsibility for finding a solution, in accordance
with the Constitution and democratic principles, to
the political deadlock that prevailed between June
and December. Now that the uncertainty related to
the elections have lifted, we will remain particularly
attentive to the rapid resumption of political dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina. The new Heads of
Government, who will meet for the first time in Brussels
on Monday, should give new impetus to the process of
normalization of relations between the two countries.
We encourage the parties to engage in dialogue
and remind them that time is not on their side. In any
political process, regular progress is needed to reflect
the constantly renewed commitment of each. In this
regard, we hope that the agreement on justice can be
endorsed on Monday. In addition, we will continue
to pay particular attention to the establishment of
the association/community of Serb municipalities in
northern Kosovo. It must have real teeth and should be
adapted to Kosovo law. It will be a key milestone in the
implementation of the Agreement of 19 April 2013.
Similarly, we expect Kosovo to take the necessary
measures to establish the specialist court to follow up
the work of the Special Investigative Task Force of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, which
is looking into allegations of the crimes committed

20/24

06/02/2015

15 years ago. We send our best wishes to Mr. David
Schwendiman, the successor of Chief Prosecutor
Williamson, leading the Task Force.
We have no doubt about the willingness of Kosovars
to engage in a judicial process that is essential to the
fight against impunity and will address all aspects of
the difficult times experienced by Kosovo in the late
1990s. We note too that progress has been made towards
the the establishment of competent criminal courts.
In that respect, we again count on the commitment of
the political parties in Pristina to taking this process
to its conclusion and to fighting generally in favour of
strengthening the rule of law. It is in the light of progress
in these two areas in particular that the Council will be
able to assess the positive evolution of the situation in
Kosovo.
Today, I want to return to the situation of the
Kosovars, who are increasingly choosing exile in the
face of the difficulties they are encountering in their
daily lives, in particular employment-related economic
problems. The entire Kosovar political class must heed
those who are voting with their feet, and fight the
organized crime networks that contribute to the growth
of illegal immigration. The viability of Kosovar society
and the stability of the Balkans and the European Union
are at stake. We will remain vigilant vis-á-vis the
general living conditions of the populations in Kosovo,
and encourage the parties to ensure respect for the
rights of persons belonging to minorities. Restoring a
relationship of trust between communities remains the
only way to allow Kosovo and Serbia to open a new page
in their history. In that regard, demonstrations cannot
be allowed to degenerate into violent confrontations,
and all extremist rhetoric must be banished from the
public forum.
I conclude by commending the joint march of
Kosovo and Serbia towards the European Union.
Important steps have been taken in that direction.
Serbia has made substantial institutional changes, and
we welcome its achievements. The technical negotiation
process for accession to the European Union, formally
launched on 21 January 2014, continues. We now hope
that the efforts of Serbia will be recognized and that a
first negotiation chapter can be opened soon.
The European Commission has welcomed the
commitment of Pristina to concluding its stabilization
and association agreement. We hope that the agreement
will be finalized very soon. It is important that the
progress made by both parties proceed at the same
15-03331

06/02/2015

Kosovo

pace so as to prevent any delay in one from slowing the
progress of the other. We express the hope that Serbia
and Kosovo have again moved a little closer to their
common future.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his
comprehensive briefing. I would also like to welcome
Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister of Serbia,
and Mr. Hashim Thaçi, Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Kosovo,
whom I thank for their statements.
First of all, we congratulate Kosovo on having
formed its Government, which we hope will fulfil the
aspirations of the people of Kosovo. Achieving the
promise of its policies and overcoming the problems
that existed in the course of setting up the current
Government require greater efforts from the authorities
and genuine, responsible actions to improve the
political atmosphere prevailing in Kosovo. Stabilizing
the political environment will contribute to a stronger
State, leading to the economic and social development
that the citizens of Kosovo deserve.
Good-neighbourly relations and respect for
sovereignty and the individual characteristics of each
State by the other countries of the region are the most
important elements in ensuring stability and prosperity
for the Balkans in general. We therefore call on the two
neighbours —Serbia and Kosovo — to continue with
the full implementation of the agreements reached
bilaterally, including the Brussels Agreement. We
also call for strengthened cooperation in all areas. We
welcome the announcement of next week’s resumption
of the high-level dialogue sponsored by the European
Union. We hope that the meetings will be successful
and lead to the full normalization of bilateral relations
between the two States.
Jordan welcome’s Kosovo’s adoption of a law to
criminalize participation in foreign conflicts. This will
contribute to improving the domestic security situation
in Kosovo and help preserve stability in the region.
The progress and positive steps taken by Kosovo
on all fronts in general, and specifically on the rule
of law and human rights, are a testament to the will
of the people of Kosovo to consolidate the institutions
of a modern State, thereby proving to the world that
they are able to live up to their responsibilities. All of

S/PV.7377

those efforts strengthen that stature of Kosovo on the
international level.
In that connection, one of the most important
features of a modern secular State is its ability to treat
all citizens equally and without discrimination. We
therefore encourage the authorities in Kosovo to step up
their efforts, in particular in the areas of modernizing
the legislative system with regard to autonomy
for minorities so as to ensure their rights, thereby
strengthening efforts at reconciliation among all
members of society. Minorities must be protected from
all attacks and against any attacks on their religious,
cultural and historical institutions or property.
Jordan reiterates its call for strengthened relations
between Kosovo and the international community,
including facilitating its accession to various
international organizations. Efforts must be made
to not hinder Kosovo’s accession to such bodies. We
also reiterate our support for extending the reporting
period of the reports of the Secretary-General on the
activities of UNMIK, given the stability of the situation
in Kosovo.
We emphasize the importance of the activities
carried out by the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo, which is helping the country to modernize
and build the State. We express our gratitude to
UNMIK’s leadership and staff for their efforts to
discharge their mandate, which throughout the years
has led to an improvement of the situation in all areas.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Zarif
for his briefing. We welcome Foreign Ministers Thaçi
and Dačić back to the Security Council.
I commend both countries for their continued
dedication to the normalization of relations. We
particularly welcome Kosovo’s continuing integration
into the community of States, as demonstrated by its
participation in regional meetings and forums in recent
months. Specifically, we congratulate Kosovo on its
recognition by the International Olympic Committee,
and look forward to seeing Kosovo’s athletes competing
under the Kosovo flag in Rio de Janeiro in 2016.
The United States welcomes the successful
formation of a Government in Kosovo in December
2014. Although the process took time, it represents
the first democratic transition of political authority
resulting from free and fair elections across the entirety
of Kosovo’s territory. This coalition Government and

15-0333121/24

S/PV.7377

Kosovo

the process that led to its formation demonstrated the
resilience and vitality of Kosovo’s democratic and
political institutions. The United States appreciates the
leadership of President Jahjaga in helping to facilitate
the political dialogue that led to the formation of the
Government in accordance with Kosovo’s Constitution.
The new Government, which includes representatives
of minority communities, has been tested over the past
month by violent protests and by the separation from
Government service yesterday of the Minister for
Communities and Returns. The importance of a fully
representative, fully participatory and multi-ethnic
Government and Parliament cannot be understated.
With respect to the protests, let us be clear: all
citizens have the democratic right to protest, but
violence is illegal and unacceptable. We condemn all
acts of vandalism to public and private property, and
the intimidation of journalists and television crews. All
citizens of Kosovo should exercise their democratic
rights, and they should do so legally and responsibility.
We encourage the new Government to move quickly
to address the socioeconomic challenges in the country.
Economic growth and new employment opportunities
will demonstrate to the citizens of Kosovo, regardless of
ethnicity, that they have a prosperous and free future at
home, thereby stemming the tide of migration out of the
country. Additionally, we encourage efforts by Kosovo
to undertake the measures necessary to encourage the
return of those displaced, both internally and outside
of Kosovo, as a result of the conflict, including by
adjudicating property claims and enforcing court
decisions.
We will continue to urge Serbia, Kosovo and all
States in the region to increase cooperation at their
shared borders. Such cooperation will advance the rule
of law, increase security and counter criminal activity,
including smuggling and trafficking in persons.
We again condemn the actions of those who seek
to oppose the work of building inclusive democracy in
Kosovo by committing acts of violence of by sowing
tension, mistrust and fear among communities.
The use of violence against religious pilgrims, as
we unfortunately saw in Gjakova/Đakovica on
Orthodox Christmas, is clearly unacceptable. All
sides must guarantee the freedom of movement for
local populations. To that end, the Kosovo Force and
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo

22/24

06/02/2015

continue to exercise indispensable roles in facilitating a
safe and secure environment.
The United States notes the visit of Prime Minister
Vučić to Kosovo in January, and the cooperation of
Kosovo authorities to provide protection. That act was
another step towards the normalization of relations. The
European Union-facilitated Kosovo-Serbia dialogue
and the implementation of the April 2013 Agreement
continue to be critical elements of building a strong,
inclusive and multi-ethnic democracy in Kosovo. We
welcome next week’s high-level meetings in Brussels
and we hope that the session on Monday will lead to
concrete progress that will directly benefit the citizens
of both countries.
The United States commends Serbia and Kosovo
as well for their work in combating foreign terrorist
fighters, as demonstrated by their attendance at the
first ministerial-level plenary session of the counterIslamic State in Iraq and the Levant coalition, held
in Brussels in December. Kosovo’s dedication to that
effort is also apparent in the recent work to arrest and
prosecute foreign terrorist fighters in Kosovo and by
the introduction of a law to criminalize participation in
such activity.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that, while
the United States believes that the situation in Kosovo
remains an important issue and and there is much work
to be done to advance the dialogue, there is important
work to be done to discuss issues critical for long-term
stability, reconciliation and development in the region.
There is little, however, that such regular briefings
contribute to those issues. We reiterate our preference
that the Council extend the reporting period for the
Secretary-General to every six months.
Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Farid Zarif for his briefing on
the recent developments in Kosovo. I also acknowledge
the presence of His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić, First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, and His Excellency Mr. Hashim
Thaçi, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kosovo.
Nigeria notes the Constitution of the Assembly
of Kosovo and the formation of a new coalition
Government in Pristina. The Government’s inclusive
nature is a sign of progress in the implementation of
the normalization Agreement. With the Government
and Parliament in place, Kosovo’s leaders now have the

15-03331

06/02/2015

Kosovo

institutional framework to continue with the political
and economic reforms that were stalled by months of
political stalemate.
Nigeria acknowledges the efforts of the Kosovo
authorities to prevent their citizens from becoming
foreign terrorist fighters. The approval of the draft law
on the prohibition of joining armed conflicts outside
State territory is a significant step in that direction. It
is our hope that this legislation, which penalizes the
recruitment and participation of Kosovars in foreign
armed conflict, will be effective in dissuading potential
recruits. Preventing extremism, however, is not a task
for the authorities alone. That is why we commend
Kosovar religious leaders for their efforts at reaching
out to Kosovar youths with a message that discourages
extremism and radicalization.
The proliferation of small arms and light weapons
represents an ongoing security challenge for Kosovo, as
it does in our region. The situation calls for strengthened
measures to control the illicit flow of such weapons.
The legislative framework developed by the authorities
for weapons regulation and control is a step in the right
direction. That led to the removal of over 1,500 fire
arms from circulation in 2014. Nigeria commends the
authorities for that achievement and encourages them
to intensify their efforts.
In order to achieve lasting reconciliation in the
region, it is essential that residual issues awaiting
attention by the authorities be promptly addressed. To
that end, the Parliament should take urgent steps to
enact the legislative and constitutional changes required
for the efficient functioning of the specialist court on
post-war atrocity crimes. Similarly, it is important
that a transparent and credible judicial process be
put in place to adjudicate the allegations in the Dick
Marty report. That would facilitate a broad public
understanding and help to build consensus around the
adjudication process. Likewise, the disposal of assets
and the privatization of corporations should be guided
by extant laws and regulations and be conducted in a
transparent, impartial and credible manner.
The role of United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo remains vital to the promotion of
security and stability in Kosovo. We commend the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and his
team for the efforts they are putting into the fulfilment
of their mandate.

S/PV.7377

Mrs. Jakubonė (Lithuania): I welcome to the
Council Deputy Prime Ministers Ivica Dacic of Serbia
and Hashim Thaci of Kosovo, and I thank them for
their statements. I also thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative and the Head of the United Nations
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing.
Over the past few years, positive developments in
the region have been hard to miss. A new Government
of Kosovo was formed through dialogue and democratic
processes. We welcome its strong commitment to build
a democratic, peaceful, prosperous and multi-ethnic
Kosovo. We call for cooperation and collective
responsibility further to prevail when resolving
numerous open issues in the country, notably in the light
of recent protests on the ground. The new Government
and the Assembly need to build on the Kosovo’s reform
agenda, strengthen the rule of law, including judicial
independence, and fight against organized crime and
corruption. We call to complete the necessary steps
concerning the establishment of the specialist court to
try cases stemming from the findings of the European
Union Special Investigative Task Force without further
delay.
Lithuania remains a staunch supporter of Kosovo’s
European aspirations. We look forward to the
finalization of the atabilization and association
agreement between the European Union (EU) and
Kosovo and encourage making progress on the visa
liberalization dialogue. We also commend the Kosovo
Government on the recent adoption of the action plan
for the implementation of the recommendations of the
European Commission progress report.
Next week, the EU-facilitated dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina is to take place in Brussels. We
welcome the commitment of both parties to continue
seeking progress on their way in the normalization
process. We encourage both sides and their leaders
to show the decisiveness necessary for the common
European future and to engage actively in further
implementation of the First Agreement of Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations, signed on
19 April 2013, translating the Agreement into results on
the ground and building trust among the communities.
We reiterate our support for the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). We note
its important role on the ground in the fight against
organized crime and corruption, the prosecution of
war crimes and the fight against impunity. Again, my

15-0333123/24

S/PV.7377

Kosovo

delegation wishes to remind the Council that over a year
ago Audrius Šenavičius, a Lithuanian officer serving in
EULEX, was killed while on duty in northern Kosovo.
We ask the competent authorities to provide information
on the progress of the investigation.
We commend the solidarity Kosovo authorities
have demonstrated in the fight against terrorism. We
welcome the adoption by the Kosovo Assembly of the
law on the prohibition of joining the armed conflicts
outside State territory.
Finally, I wish to reiterate our view that debating the
UNMIK report twice times a year, instead of quarterly,
would be a reasonable step forward to acknowledge
the progress in the normalization of relations between
Belgrade and Pristina and the stability in Kosovo.
Mr. President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Zarif, for his briefing. I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Serbia, for his presence and statement today. I also
listened attentively to the statement by Mr. Thaçi.
China respects Serbia’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity and understands its legitimate concerns over
the question of Kosovo.
Resolution 1244 (1999) represents an important
legal basis for the resolution of the Kosovo question.
China has always maintained that it is imperative to
follow the policies and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and within the framework of the relevant

24/24

06/02/2015

Security Council resolutions to carry out dialogue
and negotiations to reach a proper settlement that is
acceptable to the parties concerned. China appreciates
Serbia’s active effort in search of a political settlement
of the Kosovo question and welcomes and supports the
continuation of pragmatic and constructive dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina to implement the
agreements already reached by the two sides on energy
and the exchange of personnel. Thanks to the joint
efforts of the various parties, the security situation in
Kosovo is generally stable. We encourage the two sides
to continue to push ahead with the dialogue process
and to seek a lasting solution of the Kosovo question
in order to safeguard the security and stability in the
Balkans and Europe region at large.
China appreciates the work undertaken by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) under the leadership of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zarif,
and supports UNMIK in continuing to implement
its Security Council mandate. We hope that the
international presence, including UNMIK, the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and
the Kosovo Force, will step up its coordination and
play a positive and constructive role in promoting an
appropriate settlement of the Kosovo issue.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

15-03331
