64

General Assembly- Thirty-ninth Session

9 . Urges the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and
the United States of America to initiate immediately and
in a constructive spirit negotiations aimed at preventing an
arms race in outer space and to advise the Conference on
Disarmament regularly of the progress of their bilateral
negotiations so as to facilitate its work;
10. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to
report on its consideration of this subject to the General
Assembly at its fortieth session;
11 . Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Conference on Disarmament all documents relating to the
consideration of this subject by the General Assembly at
its thirty-ninth session;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Prevention of an arms
race in outer space".
97th plenary meeting
12 December 1984

39/60. Implementation of General Assembly resolu­
tion 38/72 on the immediate cessation and
prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests
The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned over the intensification of the nuclear­
arms race and the growing threat of nuclear war,
Recalling that over the past thirty years the need for ces­
sation and prohibition of nuclear-weapon testing has been
in the focus of attention of the General Assembly,
Reaffirming its conviction that the conclusion of a multi­
lateral treaty on the prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests by
all States would constitute an indispensable element for
the success of efforts to halt and reverse the nuclear-arms
race and the qualitative improvement of nuclear weapons,
and to prevent the expansion of existing nuclear arsenals
and the spread of nuclear weapons to additional countries,
Stressing once again that the elaboration of such a treaty
is the task of the highest priority and should not be made
dependent on the attainment of any other measure in the
field of disarmament,
Deeply deploring that the Conference on Disarmament
has to date been prevented from carrying out negotiations
with a view to reaching agreement on such a treaty,
Recalling its previous resolutions on this subject,
1 . Resolutely urges all States, and especially all
nuclear-weapon States, to exert maximum efforts and
exercise political will for the elaboration and conclusion,
without any delay, of a multilateral treaty on the prohibi­
tion of nuclear-weapon tests by all States;
2 . Urges the Conference on Disarmament to proceed
promptly to negotiations with a view to elaborating such a
treaty as a matter of the highest priority, taking into
account all existing proposals and future initiatives, and,
for that purpose, to establish an ad hoe committee with a
negotiating mandate;
3 . Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session an item entitled "Implementation of Gen­
eral Assembly resolution 39/60 on the immediate cessa­
tion and prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests".
97th plenary meeting
12 December 1984
23 fbid., Twentieth Sessum. Annnes, agenda item 105. document A/597)
24 A/39/470.

39/61.

Implementation of the Declaration on the
Denuclearization of Africa
A
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE DECLARATION

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the Declaration on the Denucleariza­
tion of Africa23 adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of the Organization of African Unity at
its first ordinary session, held at Cairo from 17 to 21 July
1964,
Recalling resolution 1652 (XVI) of2 4 November 1961 ,
its earliest on the subject, as well as its resolutions 2033
(XX) of 3 December 1965, 31/69 of 10 December 1976,
32/81 of12 December 1977 , 33/63 of14 December 1978 ,
3 4/76 A of 11 December 1979 , 3 5/1 46 B of 12 December
1980, 36/8 6 B of9 December 1981, 37/7 4 A of9 Decem­
ber 1982 and 38/ I81 A of 20 December 1983 , in which it
called upon all States to consider and respect the continent
of Africa and its surrounding areas as a nuclear-weapon­
free zone,
Recalling that in its resolution 33/63 it vigorously con­
demned any overt or covert attempt by South Africa to
introduce nuclear weapons into the continent of Africa and
demanded that South Africa refrain forthwith from con­
ducting any nuclear explosion in the continent of Africa or
elsewhere,
Taking note of the report of the United Nations Institute
for Disarmament Research entitled "South Africa's
nuclear capability", 24 undertaken in co-operation with the
Department for Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat
and in consultation with the Organization of African
Unity, as well as the report of the Disarmament Commis­
sion, 25
Expressing regret that, despite the threat South Africa's
nuclear capability constitutes to international peace and
security, in particular to the realization of the objective of
the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa, the Dis­
armament Commission has, once again, in 198 4, failed to
reach a consensus on this important item on its agenda,
I. Strongly renews its call upon all States to consider
and respect the continent of Africa and its surrounding
areas as a nuclear-weapon-free zone;
2 . Reaffirms that the implementation of the Declara­
tion on the Denuclearization of Africa adopted by the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity would be an important
measure to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons
and to promote international peace and security;
3. Expresses once again its grave alarm at South Afri­
ca's possession and continued development of nuclear­
weapon capability;
4. Condemns South Africa's continued pursuit of a
nuclear capability and all forms of nuclear collaboration
by any State, corporation, institution or individual with
the racist regime that enable it to frustrate the objective of
the Declaration which seeks to keep Africa free from
nuclear weapons;
5. Calls upon all States, corporations, institutions and
individuals to desist from further collaboration with the
racist regime that may enable it to frustrate the objective
of the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa;
25 Ofjiual Records ol 1hc General Assemh/r. Thmv-nuuh Se.rnon, Supp/e1>1t·nt Nn_ 42 (A, 39/42)

Ill. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

6. Demands once again that the racist regime of South
Africa refrain from manufacturing, testing, deploying,
transporting, storing, using or threatening to use nuclear
weapons;
7. Appeals to all States that have the means to do so, to
monitor South Africa's research on, and development and
production of nuclear weapons, and to publicize any infor­
mation in that regard;
8. Demands once again that South Africa submit
forthwith all its nuclear installations and facilities to
inspection by the International Atomic Energy Agency;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to render all neces­
sary assistance that the Organization of African Unity may
seek towards the implementation of its solemn Declara­
tion on the Denuclearization of Africa;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Implementation of the
Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa".

97th plenary meeting
I 2 December I 984

B
NUCLEAR CAPABILITY OF SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 34/76 B of 11 December 1979,

35/146 A of 12 December I 980, 36/86 A of 9 December
1981, 37/74 B of 9 December 1982 and 38/181 B of 20
December 1983,
Bearing in mind the Declaration on the Denucleariza­
tion of Africa 23 adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of the Organization of African Unity at
its first ordinary session, held at Cairo from 17 to 21 July
1964,
Recalling that, in paragraph 12 of the Final Document
of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, it
noted that the accumulation of armaments and the acqui­
sition of armaments technology by the racist regimes, as
well as their possible acquisition of nuclear we-apons,
presented a challenging and increasingly dangerous obsta­
cle to a world community faced with the urgent need to
disarm, 26
Recalling also that in its resolution 33/63 of 14 Decem­
ber 1978, it vigorously condemned any overt or covert
attempt by South Africa to introduce nuclear weapons into
the continent of Africa and demanded that South Africa
refrain forthwith from conducting any nuclear explosion in
the continent or elsewhere,
Taking note of resolution GC(XXVIIl)/RES/423 on
South Africa's nuclear capabilities, adopted on 27 Septem­
ber 1984 by the General Conference of the International
Atomic Energy Agency during its twenty-eighth regular
session,
Taking note of the report of the United Nations Institute
for Disarmament Research, entitled "South Africa's
nuclear capability" , 24 undertaken in co-operation with the
Department for Disarmament Affairs and in consultation
with the Organization of African Unity,
Expressing regret that, despite the threat South Africa's
nuclear capability constitutes to international peace and
security, in particular to the realization of the objective of
the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa, the Dis­
armament Commission has, once again, in 1984, failed to
reach a consensus on this important item on its agenda,
26 Resolution S- I 0/2.

Gravelv concerned that South Africa, in flagrant viola­
tion of the principles of international law and the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, has con­
tinued its acts of aggression and subversion against the
peoples and the independent States of southern Africa,
Strongly condemning the continued military occupation
by South African troops of parts of the territory of Angola
in violation of its national sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity, and urging the immediate and uncon­
ditional withdrawal of South African troops from Angolan
soil,
Expressing its grave disappointment that, despite
repeated appeals by the international community, certain
Western States and Israel have continued to collaborate
with the racist regime of South Africa in the military and
nuclear fields and that some of the same Western States
have, by a ready recourse to the use of the veto, consist­
ently frustrated every effort in the Security Council to deal
decisively with the question of South Africa,
Recalling its decision taken at the tenth special session
that the Security Council should take appropriate effective
steps to prevent the frustration of the implementation of
the decision of the Organization of African Unity for the
denuclearization of Africa, 27
Stressing the need to preserve peace and security in
Africa by ensuring that the continent is a nuclear-weapon­
free zone,
I. Condemns the massive buildup of South Africa's
military machine, in particular, its frenzied acquisition of
nuclear-weapon capability for repressive and aggressive
purposes and as an instrument of blackmail;
2. Expresses its full support for the African States faced
with the danger of South Africa's nuclear capability;
3. Reaffirms that the racist regime's acquisition of
nuclear-weapon capability constitutes a very grave danger
to international peace and security and, in particular, jeop­
ardizes the security of African States and increases the
danger of the proliferation of nuclear weapons;
4. Condemns all forms of nuclear collaboration by any
State, corporation, institution or individual with the racist
regime of South Africa, in particular the decision by some
Member States to grant licences to several corporations in
their territories to provide equipment, technical and main­
tenance services for nuclear installations in South Africa;
5. Demands that South Africa and all other foreign
interests put an immediate end to the exploration and
exploitation of uranium resources in Namibia;
6. Calls upon all States, corporations, institutions and
individuals to terminate forthwith all forms of military
and nuclear collaboration with the racist regime;
7. Requests the Disarmament Commission to consider
as a matter of priority during its session in 1985 South
Africa's nuclear capability, taking into account, inter alia,
the findings of the report of the United Nations Institute
for Disarmament Research on South Africa's nuclear
capability;
8. Requests the Security Council, for the purposes of
disarmament and to fulfil its obligations and responsibil­
ity, to take enforcement measures to prevent any racist
regimes from acquiring arms or arms technology;
9. Further requests the Security Council to conclude
expeditiously its consideration of the recommendations of
its Committee established by resolution 421 (1977) con2, /Ind para. 63 (c).

66

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

cerning the question of South Africa, 28 with a view to
blocking the existing loopholes in the arms embargo, so as
to render it more effective and prohibiting, in particular,
all forms of co-operation and collaboration with the racist
regime of South Africa in the nuclear field;
I0. Demands once again that South Africa submit
forthwith all its nuclear installations and facilities to
inspection by the International Atomic Energy Agency;
11 . Requests the Secretary-General to follow very
closely South Africa's evolution in the nuclear field and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its fortieth ses­
sion.
97th plenary meeting
12 December 1984
39/62. Prohibition of the development and manufac­
ture of new types of weapons of mass destruc­
tion and new systems of such weapons
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3479 (XXX) of 1 1 December
1975 , 31/74 of 10 December 197 6, 32/84 A of 12 Decem­
ber 1977 , 33/66 B of 14 December 1978, 34 /79 of 11
December 1979 , 35 /14 9 of 12 December 1980, 36/89 of9
December 1981 , 37177 A of9 December 1982 and 38/182
of 20 December 1983 concerning the prohibition of new
types of weapons of mass destruction,
Bearing in mind the provisions of paragraph 39 of the
Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the Gen­
eral Assembly,26 according to which qualitative and quan­
titative disarmament measures are both important for
halting the arms race and efforts to that end must include
negotiations on the limitation and cessation of the qualita­
tive improvement of armaments, especially weapons of
mass destruction, and the development of new means of
warfare,
Recalling the decision contained in paragraph 77 of the
Final Document to the effect that, in order to help prevent
a qualitative arms race and so that scientific and techno­
logical achievements might ultimately be used solely for
peaceful purposes, effective measures should be taken to
prevent the emergence of new types of weapons of mass
destruction based on new scientific principles and achieve­
ments, and that efforts aiming at the prohibition of such
new types and new systems of weapons of mass destruc­
tion should be appropriately pursued,
Expressing once again its firm belief, in the light of the
decisions adopted at the tenth special session, in the
importance of concluding an agreement or agreements to
prevent the use of scientific and technological progress for
the development of new types of weapons of mass destruc­
tion and new systems of such weapons,
Noting that in the course of its session in 1984 the Con­
ference on Disarmament considered the item entitled
"New types of weapons of mass destruction and new sys­
tems of such weapons: radiological weapons",
Convinced that all ways and means should be utilized to
prevent the development and manufacture of new types of
weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such
weapons,
Taking into consideration the report of the Conference
on Disarmament relating to this question, 29
I. Requests the Conference on Disarmament, in the
light of its existing priorities, to intensify negotiations,
28 See Official Records of the Security Council. Thirty-fifth Year, Supple­
ment for July, August and September 1980, document S/14179.
29 Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-ninth Session, Supple­
ment No. 27 (A/39/27), sect. 111.G. paras. 118 and 121-124.

with the assistance of qualified governmental experts, with
a view to preparing a draft comprehensive agreement on
the prohibition of the development and manufacture of
new types of weapons of mass destruction and new sys­
tems of such weapons, and to draft possible agreements on
particular types of such weapons;
2 . Once again urges all States to refrain from any
action which could adversely affect the talks aimed at
working out an agreement or agreements to prevent the
emergence of new types of weapons of mass destruction
and new systems of such weapons;
3. Calls upon the States permanent members of the
Security Council as well as upon other militarily significant
States to make declarations, identical in substance, con­
cerning the refusal to create new types of weapons of mass
destruction and new systems of such weapons, as a first
step towards the conclusion of a comprehensive agreement
on this subject, bearing in mind that such declarations
would be approved thereafter by a decision of the Security
Council;
4. Calls again upon all States to undertake efforts to
ensure that ultimately scientific and technological achieve­
ments may be used solely for peaceful purposes;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Conference on Disarmament all documents relating to the
consideration of this item by the General Assembly at its
thirty-ninth session;
6. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to submit
a report on the results achieved to the General Assembly
for consideration at its fortieth session;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Prohibition of the devel­
opment and manufacture of new types of weapons of mass
destruction and new systems of such weapons: report of
the Conference on Disarmament".
97th plenary meeting
12 December 1984
39/63. Review and implementation of the Conclud­
ing Document of the Twelfth Special Session
of the General Assembly
A
WORLD DISARMAMENT CAMPAIGN: ACTIONS AND
ACTIVITIES

The General Assembly,
Aware of the growing public concern at the dangers of
the arms race, particularly the nuclear-arms race, and its
negative social and economic consequences,
Noting with satisfaction the successful implementation
of the World Disarmament Campaign, launched by the
General Assembly at its twelfth special session, 30 the sec­
ond special session devoted to disarmament, and its posi­
tive impact on the mobilization on a large scale of world
public opinion on behalf of peace and disarmament,
Recalling its resolutions 36/92 J of 9 December 1981 ,
37/ 100 H of13 December 1982 and 38/7 3 F of l5 Decem­
ber 1983 , as well as the report of the Secretary-General on
world-wide action for collecting signatures in support of
measures to prevent nuclear war, to curb the arms race and
for disarmament, 31
JO Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Special Session,
Annexes, agenda items 9 to 13. document A/S-12/32, annex V.
11 A/S-12/15 and Add. I.
