A/RES/68/78

United Nations

Distr.: General
16 December 2013

General Assembly
Sixty-eighth session
Agenda item 51

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 11 December 2013
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/68/424)]

68/78. Operations of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 194 (III) of 11 December 1948, 212 (III) of
19 November 1948, 302 (IV) of 8 December 1949 and all subsequent related
resolutions, including its resolution 67/116 of 18 December 2012,
Recalling also the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
Having considered the report of the Commissioner-General of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East covering
the period from 1 January to 31 December 2012, 1
Taking note of the letter dated 17 June 2013 from the Chair of the Advisory
Commission of the Agency to the Commissioner-General, 2
Deeply concerned about the extremely critical financial situation of the
Agency, caused in part by the structural underfunding of the Agency, as well as its
rising expenditures resulting from the deterioration of the socioeconomic and
humanitarian conditions and the rising instability in the region and their significant
negative impact on the provision of necessary Agency services to the Palestine
refugees, including its emergency-related and development programmes in all fields
of operation,
Recalling Articles 100, 104 and 105 of the Charter of the United Nations and
the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations, 3
Recalling also the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel, 4
_______________
1
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 13 (A/68/13); and ibid.,
Supplement No. 13A (A/68/13/Add.1).
2
Ibid., Supplement No. 13 (A/68/13), pp. vi-viii.
3
Resolution 22 A (I).
4
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2051, No. 35457.

13-44413

*1344413*

Please recycle

Operations of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

A/RES/68/78

Affirming the applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,5 to the Palestinian territory
occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem,
Aware of the continuing needs of the Palestine refugees in all fields of
operation, namely, Jordan, Lebanon, the Syrian Arab Republic and the Occupied
Palestinian Territory,
Gravely concerned about the extremely difficult socioeconomic conditions
being faced by the Palestine refugees in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including East Jerusalem, particularly in the refugee camps in the Gaza Strip, as a
result of the continuing prolonged Israeli closures, the construction of settlements
and the wall, and the severe economic and movement restrictions that in effect
amount to a blockade, which, despite measures taken by Israel in 2012 and 2013,
have deepened unemployment and poverty rates among the refugees, with
potentially lasting, long-term negative effects,
Gravely concerned also about the continuing negative repercussions of the
military operations in the Gaza Strip between December 2008 and January 2009,
which caused extensive loss of life and injury, particularly among Palestinian
civilians, including children and women; widespread destruction and damage to
Palestinian homes, properties, vital infrastructure and public institutions, including
hospitals, schools and United Nations facilities; and internal displacement of
civilians, including refugees,
Deploring the loss of civilian lives, including women and children, as a result
of the hostilities that affected the Gaza Strip and Israel in November 2012,
Commending the extraordinary efforts by the Agency to provide emergency
relief, medical, food, shelter and other humanitarian assistance to needy and
displaced families in the Gaza Strip,
Recalling, in this regard, its resolution ES-10/18 of 16 January 2009 and
Security Council resolution 1860 (2009) of 8 January 2009,
Expressing regret over the continued restrictions that impede the Agency’s
efforts to repair and rebuild thousands of damaged or destroyed refugee shelters,
and calling upon Israel to ensure the unimpeded import of essential construction
materials into the Gaza Strip and to reduce the burdensome cost of importation of
Agency supplies, while taking note of recent developments regarding the situation
of access there,
Expressing concern about the severe classroom shortage in the Gaza Strip and
the consequent negative impact on the right to education of refugee children as a
result of the constraints on the ability of the Agency to construct new schools due to
Israel’s ongoing restrictions impeding the entry of necessary construction materials
into the Gaza Strip,
Stressing the urgent need for the advancement of reconstruction in the Gaza
Strip, including by ensuring the timely facilitation of construction projects and by
sustaining the swift entry of construction materials needed for projects managed by
the Agency, and the need for the accelerated implementation of other urgent United
Nations-led civilian reconstruction activities,

_______________
5

2/6

Ibid., vol. 75, No. 973.

Operations of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

A/RES/68/78

Urging the timely disbursement of remaining pledges made at the International
Conference in Support of the Palestinian Economy for the Reconstruction of Gaza,
held in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, on 2 March 2009, to accelerate the reconstruction
process,
Noting with appreciation the completion of the first phase and near-completion
of the second phase of the project to rebuild the Nahr el-Bared refugee camp,
commending the Government of Lebanon, donors, the Agency and other concerned
parties for the important progress made and for the continuing efforts to assist
affected and displaced refugees, and emphasizing the need for additional funding to
complete the reconstruction of the camp and end the displacement of its 27,000
residents without delay,
Expressing deep concern at the critical situation of Palestine refugees in the
Syrian Arab Republic and at the impact of the crisis on the Agency’s ability to
deliver its services, and regretting profoundly the loss of life among refugees and
the killing of eight staff members of the Agency during the crisis since 2012,
Emphasizing the need for increased assistance to Palestine refugees in the
Syrian Arab Republic as well as those who have fled to neighbouring countries, and
emphasizing the necessity of ensuring open borders for Palestine refugees fleeing
the crisis in the Syrian Arab Republic, consistent with the principles of
non-discrimination and non-refoulement under international law,
Aware of the valuable work done by the Agency in providing protection to the
Palestinian people, in particular Palestine refugees, and recalling the need for the
protection of all civilians in situations of armed conflict,
Deploring the endangerment of the safety of the Agency’s staff and the
damage and destruction caused to the facilities and properties of the Agency during
the period covered by the report of the Commissioner-General, and stressing the
need to maintain the neutrality of and safeguard the inviolability of United Nations
premises, installations and equipment,
Deploring also the extensive damage and destruction of Agency facilities in
the Gaza Strip caused during the military operations between December 2008 and
January 2009, including schools where civilians were sheltered and the Agency’s
main compound and warehouse, as reported in the summary by the SecretaryGeneral of the report of the Board of Inquiry 6 and in the report of the United
Nations Fact-finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict, 7
Deploring further, in this regard, the breaches of the inviolability of United
Nations premises, the failure to accord the property and assets of the Organization
immunity from any form of interference and the failure to protect United Nations
personnel, premises and property,
Deploring the killing and injury of Agency staff members by the Israeli
occupying forces in the Occupied Palestinian Territory since September 2000,
Deploring also the killing and wounding of refugee children in the Agency
schools by the Israeli occupying forces during the military operations between
December 2008 and January 2009,

_______________
6
7

See A/63/855-S/2009/250.
A/HRC/12/48.

3/6

Operations of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

A/RES/68/78

Deeply concerned about the continuing imposition of restrictions on the
freedom of movement and access of the Agency’s staff, vehicles and goods, and the
injury, harassment and intimidation of the Agency’s staff, which undermine and
obstruct the work of the Agency, including its ability to provide essential basic and
emergency services,
Aware of the agreement between the Agency and the Government of Israel,
Taking note of the agreement reached on 24 June 1994, embodied in an
exchange of letters between the Agency and the Palestine Liberation Organization, 8
1.
Reaffirms that the effective functioning of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East remains essential in all fields
of operation;
2.
Expresses its appreciation to the Commissioner-General of the Agency,
as well as to all the staff of the Agency, for their tireless efforts and valuable work,
particularly in the light of the difficult conditions, instability and crises faced during
the past year;
3.
Expresses special commendation to the Agency for the essential role that
it has played for over 60 years since its establishment in providing vital services for
the well-being, human development and protection of the Palestine refugees and the
amelioration of their plight;
4.
Expresses its appreciation for the important support and cooperation
provided by the host Governments to the Agency in the discharge of its duties;
5.
Also expresses its appreciation to the Advisory Commission of the
Agency, and requests it to continue its efforts and to keep the General Assembly
informed of its activities;
6.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Working Group on the
Financing of the Agency 9 and the efforts to assist in ensuring the financial security
of the Agency, and requests the Secretary-General to provide the necessary services
and assistance to the Working Group for the conduct of its work;
7.
Commends the Agency’s six-year Medium-Term Strategy, which
commenced in January 2010, and the continuing efforts of the CommissionerGeneral to increase the budgetary transparency and efficiency of the Agency, as
reflected in the Agency’s programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015; 10
8.
Also commends the Agency for sustaining its reform efforts, despite
difficult operational circumstances, and urges it to continue to apply maximum
efficiency procedures to reduce operational and administrative costs and to
maximize the use of resources;
9.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on
the strengthening of the management capacity of the Agency, 11 and urges all
Member States to carefully consider the conclusions and recommendations
contained therein, including the continued provision of financial resources from the
regular budget of the United Nations;
_______________
8

Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 13 (A/49/13), annex I.
A/68/388.
10
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 13A (A/68/13/Add.1).
11
A/65/705.
9

4/6

Operations of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

A/RES/68/78

10. Endorses the efforts of the Commissioner-General to continue to provide
humanitarian assistance, as far as practicable, on an emergency basis, and as a
temporary measure, to persons in the area who are internally displaced and in
serious need of continued assistance as a result of recent crises in the Agency’s
fields of operation;
11. Encourages the Agency to provide increased assistance, in accordance
with its mandate, to affected Palestine refugees in the Syrian Arab Republic as well
as those who have fled to neighbouring countries, as detailed in the Syria regional
crisis response plans, and calls upon donors to urgently ensure sustained support to
the Agency in this regard;
12. Welcomes the progress made thus far by the Agency in rebuilding the
Nahr el-Bared refugee camp in northern Lebanon, and calls for the expeditious
completion of its reconstruction, for the continued provision of relief assistance to
those displaced following its destruction in 2007 and for the alleviation of their
ongoing suffering through the timely fulfilment of pledges made at the International
Donor Conference for the Recovery and Reconstruction of the Nahr el-Bared
Palestine Refugee Camp and Conflict-affected Areas of Northern Lebanon, held in
Vienna on 23 June 2008;
13. Encourages the Agency, in close cooperation with other relevant United
Nations entities, to continue making progress in addressing the needs and rights of
children, women and persons with disabilities in its operations in accordance with
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 12 the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women 13 and the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities, 14 respectively;
14. Commends, in this regard, the Agency’s initiatives that provide
recreational, cultural and educational activities for children during the summer,
including in the Gaza Strip, and, recognizing their positive contribution, calls for
full support of such initiatives, expressing regret that financial constraints led to the
cancellation of the Summer Games in 2012;
15. Calls upon Israel, the occupying Power, to comply fully with the
provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War, of 12 August 1949;5
16. Also calls upon Israel to abide by Articles 100, 104 and 105 of the
Charter of the United Nations and the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities
of the United Nations 3 in order to ensure the safety of the personnel of the Agency,
the protection of its institutions and the safeguarding of the security of its facilities
in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem;
17. Urges the Government of Israel to expeditiously reimburse the Agency
for all transit charges incurred and other financial losses sustained as a result of
delays and restrictions on movement and access imposed by Israel;
18. Calls upon Israel particularly to cease obstructing the movement and
access of the staff, vehicles and supplies of the Agency and to cease the levying of
taxes, extra fees and charges, which affect the Agency’s operations detrimentally;

_______________
12

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
14
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
13

5/6

A/RES/68/78

Operations of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

19. Reiterates its call upon Israel to fully lift the restrictions impeding or
delaying the import of necessary construction materials and supplies for the
reconstruction and repair of thousands of damaged or destroyed refugee shelters,
and for the implementation of suspended civilian infrastructure projects in refugee
camps in the Gaza Strip, while noting the commencement of several projects in
this regard;
20. Requests the Commissioner-General to proceed with the issuance of
identification cards for Palestine refugees and their descendants in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory;
21. Notes with appreciation the completion of the Palestine Refugee Records
Project and its contribution to the modernization of the Agency’s archives;
22. Also notes with appreciation the success of the Agency’s microfinance
programme, and calls upon the Agency, in close cooperation with the relevant
agencies, to continue to contribute to the development of the economic and social
stability of the Palestine refugees in all fields of operation;
23. Reiterates its appeals to all States, the specialized agencies and
non-governmental organizations to continue and to augment the special allocations
for grants and scholarships for higher education to Palestine refugees in addition to
their contributions to the regular budget of the Agency and to contribute to the
establishment of vocational training centres for Palestine refugees, and requests the
Agency to act as the recipient and trustee for the special allocations for grants and
scholarships;
24. Welcomes the conclusions endorsed by the special meeting of a group of
supporters of the Agency, held on 26 September 2013 on the margins of the general
debate of the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session, and calls for serious
follow-up efforts by the Agency and the donor community to meet the goals set
forth therein;
25. Urges all States, the specialized agencies and non-governmental
organizations to urgently increase their contributions to the Agency in order to
address the persistent, growing and serious financial constraints and underfunding,
especially with respect to the Agency’s regular budget deficit, noting that financial
shortfalls have been exacerbated by the current humanitarian situation and
instability on the ground that have resulted in rising expenditures, in particular with
regard to emergency services, and to support the Agency’s valuable and necessary
work in assisting the Palestine refugees in all fields of operation.
65th plenary meeting
11 December 2013

6/6
