Resolutiom adopted without reference to a Main Committee

3369 (XXX). Ohserver status for the Islamic
Conference al the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Noting the desire of the States members of the lslamic
Conference for co-operation between the United
Nations and the Islamic Conference,
1. Decides to invite the Islamic Conference to participa.te in the sessions aind the work of the General
Assembly and of its subsidiary organs in the capacity
of observer;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary action to implement the presenit resolution.
2 383rd plenary meeting
JO October 1975

3375 (XXX). lnvitation to the Palestine Liheration Organization to participate in the
efforts for peace in the Middle East
The General Assembly,
Having considered the it.em entitled "Question of
Palestine",
Reaf]irming its resolution 3236 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974, in which it recogrl!ized the inalienable
national rights of the Palestinian people,
Recognizing the necessity of achieving a just and lasting peace in the Middle East at the earliest possible
time,
Believing that the realization of the ina1ienab1e rights
of the Palestinian people in accordance with the purposes and principies of the Charter of the United
Nations is a prerequisite to achieving a just and lasting
peace in the area,
Convinced that the participation of the Palestinian
people is essential in any efforts and deliberations aiming at the achievement of a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East,
1. Requests the Security Council to consider and
adopt the necessary resolutions and measures in order
to enable the Palestinian people to exercise its inalienable national rights in accordance with General Assembly resolution 3236 (XXIX);
2. Calls for tlle invitation of the Palestine Liberation
Organization, the representative of the Palestinian people, to participa.te in ali efforts, deliberations and conferences on the Middle East which are held under the
ª'!5pices of the. United Natiions,. on an equal footing
with other partíes, on the bas1s of resolution 3236
(XXIX);
.
3. Requests the Secretary-General to inform the CoChairmen of the Pea.ce Conference on the Middle East
of the present resolution and to take ali necessary steps
to secure the invitation of the Palestine Liberation Organization to participare in the work of the Conference
as well as in all other efforts for peaoe;
4. Requests tbe Secretary-GeneraJ to submit a report
on this matter to. the General Assembly as soon as
possible.
2 399th plenary meeting
JO November 1975

3376 (XXX).

Question of Palestine

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3236 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974,

3

T aking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of that resolution, 13
Deeply concerned that no just solution to the problem
of Palestine has yet been achieved,
Recognizing that the problem of Palestine continues
to endanger intemational peace and security,
l. Reaf]irms its resolution 3236 (XXIX);
2. Expresses its grave concern that no progress has
been achieved towards:
. ('!) The exercise by 1he Palestini:an people of ¡,ts
mahen~bl~ right~ in Palestine, including the right to selfdetermmatton w1thout external interference and the right
to national independence and sovereignty;
. ( b) Toe exercise by Palestinians of their inalil nable
nght to retum to their homes a:nd property from which
they have been displaced and uprooted;
3. Decides to establish a Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
composed of twenty Member States to be appointed by
the General Assembly at the currenit session;
4. Requests the Committee to consider and recommend t? the G~neral Assembly a programme of implemen~hon, d~s1gned to e~able the Palestinian people to
exerc1se the nghts recogmzed in paragraphs 1 and 2 of
Assembly resolution 3236 (XXIX) and to take into
accoun~, in the formulation of its r~endations for
the implementation of that programme, ali the powers
conferred by the Cbarter upon the principal organs of
the United Nations;
. 5. Authorizes the Committee, in the fulfilment of
1ts mandate, to establish contact with and to receive
and ~onsider suggestions and proposal; from, any State
and mtergovemmental regional organi2Jation and the
Palestine Liberation Organization;
6. J_?.eques~s the Secretary-General to provide the
Committee ~th ali the necessary facilities for the performance of 1ts tasks;
7. Requests the Committee to submit its report and
recommendations to the Secretary-Geneml no later •than
1 fon~ 1976 and requests ~he Secretary-General to
transm1t the report to the Secunty Council;
8. Requests the Security Council to consider as
soon !3.5 possible after 1 June 1976, the question of the
exerc1se by the Palestinian people of the inalienable
rights recognized in paragraphs 1 and 2 of resolution
3236 (XXIX);
9. Requests the Secretary-General to inform the
~ommittee of t~e action taken by the Security Council
m accordance w1th paragraph 8 above;
_10. Auth_orizes the Committee, taking into conside' _
atton the act10n taken by the Security Council, to subJt
to the General Assembly, at its thirty-first session
report containing its observations and recommendati~ns··
11. Decides to include the itero entitled "Questio~
of J>:alestine" in the provisional agenda of its thirty-first
sess10n.
2399th plenary meeting
JO November 1975

a

*

*

*

At its 2443rd plenary meeting, on 17 December 1975 the
Genera_/ Assemb~y, in pursuance o/ paragraph 3 o/ the dbove
resolutlon, appomted the following twenty Member States a.s
members of the Committee on the Exercise of :he Inalienable
18 A/10265.

General All84mlhly-Thirtieth SeNion

4

Rights of the Palestinian People: .AFGHANISTAN, CuBA, CYPRUS,
GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC, GUINEA, HUNGARY, INDIA, INDONESIA, LA.o PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC, MADAGASCAR,
MALAYSIA, MALTA, PAKlSTAN, ROMANIA, SENEGAL, SIERRA LEONE,
TUNISIA, TURKEY, UKRAINIAN SovmT SoCIALIST REPUBLIC and
YUGOSLAVIA.

3385 (XXX). Admission of 111&-(;omoros to
membership in the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Havin8 received the recommendation of the Security
rouncil of 17 0ctober 1975 th~t the Comoros should
be ·a.dmitted to membershi,p in the United Nations, 14
Having considered the application for membership of
the Comoros, 15
Reaffirming the necessity of respecting the unity and
territorial integrity of the Comoro Archipelago, composed of the islands of Anjouan, Grande-Comore,
Mayotte and Mohéli, as emphasized in resolution 3291
(XXIX) of 13 December 1974 and other resolutions
of the General Assembly,
Decides to admit the Comoros to membership in the
United N ations.
2402nd plenary meeting
12 November 1975
3386 (XXX). Reporl of the International
Atomie Energy Agency

The General Assembly,
H aving received the report of the Intemational Atomic
Energy Agency to the General Assemhly for the year
1974/1975 and the addendum thereto, 16
A ware that the statement of the Director General of
the Intemational Atomic Energy Agency of 12 November 1975 17 provides additional information on the main
developments in the Agency's activities,
Recognizing that in the course of 1975 it was made
abundantly clear that further measures should be taken
towards the full realization of the goal of an intemational non-proliferation policy,
l. Takes note of the report of the Intemational
Atomic Er.ergy Agency and of the addendum thereto;
2. No tes that the annual report of the lnternational
Atomic Energy Agency will henceforth be based on the
calendar yt:ar for ,the purpose of simplifying the evaluation of programme implementation;
3. W e/comes the action taken by the Intemational
Atomic Energy Agency to increase further the 1evel or
the target for voluntary contributions to ilie general
fuoo of $5. 5 million m 1976 ,and the oontiinuing increase
of total contributions of member States towards the
realization of targets;
4. Notes with appreciation the iincreased and continuing emphasis which the lntemational Atornic Energy
Agency places in its technical as~istance programme on
the introduction of nuclear power and its teohnology in
14 Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, Annexes, agenda item 22, document A/10302.
111 A/10293-S/11848. For the printed text, see Ofjicial Records
of the Security Council, Thirtieth Y ear, Supplement for October, November and December 1975.
16 International Atomic Energy Agency, Annual Report,
1 July 1974-30 June 1975 (Vienna, July 1975) apd corrigendum and addendum; transmitted to the members of the General Assembly by notes of the Secretary-General (A/10168 and
Corr.1 and Add.1).
17 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Ses.sion, Plenary Meetings. 2403rd meeting, paras. 2-40.

developing countries for the peaceful needs of these
countries, in particular the series of training courses on
nuclear power project planning and implementation;
5. Notes with satisfaction the intensification of work
of the Intemational Atornic Energy Agency, in accordance with its statute, in the fields of reactor safety and
reliability, the disposal of radio-active waste, the safeguarding and physical protection of nuclear facilities
and materials, and the oomprehensive studies of fuel
cycle facilities, including the possibility of establishing
regioool. fuel cycle sefVlioes;
6. Commends the lnternational Atornic Energy
Agency for its implementation of General Assembly
resolutions 2829 (XXVI) of 16 December 1971 and
3213 (XXIX) of 5 November 1974 regarding nuclear
explosions for peaceful purposes and, in µiis connexion,
for establishing the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Nuclear
Explosions for Peaceful Purposes to identify possible
applications of peacefuJ n),!clear explosions and to study
safety, environmental and economic aspects as well as
the, legal implications and the procedures for assistance
in oarrying out peacefuJ. explooion projects;
7. Urges ali States to continue to co-operate with
the lntemational Atomic Energy Agency and to take ali
necessary measures to enhance the recognized efforts of
the Agency in the fulfilment of its tasks in ithe various
fields of the peaceful uses of atomic energy;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to·the
Director-Gdrteral of the Intemational Atomic Energy
Agency the reoords of the thirtieth session of the General Assembly relating to the Agency's activities.
2403rd plenary meeting
12 November 1975
3391 (XXX). Restitution of works of art
to eountries vietims of expropriation
The General Assembly,
A ware of the paramount aims of the United Nations
and particularly of its faith in fundamental human rights
and in the dignity and worth of the human person,
Recalling ,the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 18
Recalling the Convention on the Means of Prohibiting
and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer
of Ownership of Cultural Property, adopted by the
General Conference of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization at its sixteenth session, on 14 November 1970, 19
Recalling General Assembly resolution 3187
(XXVIII) of 18 December 1973 conceming the restitution of works of art to countries victims of expropriation, in which the Assembly, ínter alia, invited the
Secretary-General, in consultation with the United
Nations Educational, Scieati:fic and Cultural Organization and Member States, to subrnit a report to the Assembly at its thirtieili session on the progress achieved,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 2º
Noting with interest the steps taken by certain States
towards the restitution of works of art to countries
victims of expropriation in accordance with resolution
3187 (XXVIII),
18 Resolution 1514 (XV).
19 United Nations Educational,

Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General Con/ erence, Sixteenth Susion, vol. I, Resolutions, pp. 135-141.
20 A/1O224 .
