S/PV.8651

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8651

st meeting
Wednesday, 30 October 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Matjila. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Trullols Yabra
Mr. Ondo Angue
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Licharz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Bourisly
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Jamróz
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Allen
Mr. Barkin

Agenda
The situation concerning Western Sahara
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation concerning Western Sahara
(S/2019/787)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-34051 (E)
*1934051*

S/PV.8651

The situation concerning Western Sahara

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Western Sahara
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation concerning Western Sahara
(S/2019/787)
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/787, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation concerning
Western Sahara.
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2019/847, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by the United States of America.

30/10/2019

for the self-determination of the people of Western
Sahara. While we are disappointed that some members
of the Council chose yet again to abstain in the voting,
we know that the Council is united in its conviction that
the political process must continue without delay.
We would like to express our appreciation to
former President Köhler and his team for their historic
achievement in bringing Morocco, the Frente Popular
para la Liberación de Saguía el-Hamra y de Río de Oro,
Algeria and Mauritania together. I would also like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Colin Stewart and the entire MINURSO team for their
efforts. We urge the parties to work constructively
with MINURSO. Furthermore, we look forward to the
Secretary-General’s appointment of a new Personal
Envoy as soon as possible. This will take the political
process forward and ensure that the momentum
generated by former President Köhler is not lost.

In favour:
Belgium, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominican
Republic, Equatorial Guinea, France, Germany,
Indonesia, Kuwait, Peru, Poland, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America

There is one thing I would like to make clear,
though. The renewal of MINURSO for 12 months in
these unique circumstances does not mean a return to
business as usual. The United States therefore calls
on the parties to conduct a dialogue in good faith
and without preconditions, remembering the central
importance of including women and young people. We
also urge countries with influence in Western Sahara to
think creatively about how to move the peace process
forward so that we can support a new personal envoy
once in place. A lasting breakthrough will require the
willingness of all involved to approach negotiations
with a genuine desire to make progress.

Against:
None

Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): The United Kingdom
was pleased to vote in favour of this resolution.

Abstaining:
Russian Federation, South Africa

I would like to take this opportunity to set out our
position on the Western Sahara. We reaffirm our support
for the efforts by the Secretary-General to advance the
political process and aimed at reaching a just, realistic,
pragmatic, lasting and mutually acceptable political
solution to the issue of Western Sahara, based on
compromise and in accordance with Security Council
resolutions. We strongly support the continuing work
of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara (MINURSO) and Mr. Colin Stewart,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, as
well as the renewal of MINURSO’s mandate for a
further 12 months, which will provide much-needed
certainty and support the Mission’s valuable work.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

The President: The draft resolution received 13
votes in favour, none against and 2 abstentions. The draft
resolution has been adopted as resolution 2494 (2019).
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Barkin (United States of America): We are
pleased with the Council’s strong statement of support
for the United Nations Mission for the Referendum
in Western Sahara (MINURSO) and its mandate. We
believe that the time has come for a just, lasting and
mutually acceptable political solution that will provide
2/8

19-34051

30/10/2019

The situation concerning Western Sahara

The United Kingdom greatly appreciates the efforts
of Mr. Horst Köhler, the former Personal Envoy of the
Secretary-General, to advance the political process. We
welcome the engagement of delegations from Morocco,
the Frente Popular para la Liberación de Saguía el-Hamra
y de Río de Oro, Algeria and Mauritania in two roundtable meetings during Mr. Köhler’s period of office. We
hope that a successor to Mr. Köhler can be appointed
to build on his efforts as soon as possible. To that end,
we reaffirm our support for the United Nations process
and our commitment to helping the parties achieve a
just, lasting and mutually acceptable political solution
based on compromise, which will provide for the selfdetermination of the people of Western Sahara in the
context of arrangements consistent with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
We underline the primary role of the United Nations
in mediation to resolve the issue and note the roles and
responsibilities of the parties. We welcome the serious
and credible Moroccan efforts to move the process
forward towards a resolution. We call on the parties
to demonstrate further political will towards finding
a solution, including by recommitting to supporting
United Nations efforts, and we urge the neighbouring
countries to continue to make positive contributions to
the process.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the adoption of resolution 2494
(2019), on the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO) until 31 October 2020, and commends the
excellent work done by the United States as penholder
on the item.
By voting in favour of the draft resolution,
Côte d’Ivoire wished to reaffirm its support for the
momentum and positive dynamics created by the
two round-table processes with the participation of
Morocco, Algeria, Mauritania and the Frente Popular
para la Liberación de Saguía el-Hamra y de Río de Oro,
which give us hope for a lasting political solution to
the dispute under the auspices of the United Nations.
My country sees this resolution as an expression of
the Security Council’s full support for the efforts
made so far by Mr. Horst Köhler, Personal Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Western Sahara. It is our
firm hope that the next Personal Envoy will build on
Mr. Köhler’s achievements and on the agreement of the
four participants to meet again in the same format. To
that end, it is important that the stakeholders continue

S/PV. 8651

to engage in order to reach a just, lasting and mutually
acceptable solution based on bold compromises to end
regional differences.
In addition, Côte d’Ivoire considers that Morocco’s
efforts to reach a final settlement of the dispute,
including through its autonomy initiative, seem to us
to be serious and credible and to constitute a good
basis for discussion. My delegation fully supports
Morocco’s accomplishments in the area of human
rights, through the role played by the committees of
the National Council of Human Rights in Dakhla and
Laayoune and the cooperation between Morocco and
the relevant special procedures mechanisms of the
Human Rights Council.
Côte d’Ivoire would like to take this opportunity
to commend the commitment of Mr. Colin Stewart,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Western Sahara and Head of MINURSO, whose work
on the ground in a difficult environment is helping
to ensure compliance with the military agreements
and the relevant obligations and to maintain peace in
the region.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire urges the stakeholders,
the neighbouring States and the international
community to concert their efforts to reach a lasting
settlement to the dispute with a view to revitalizing the
unity of the Arab Maghreb for the benefit of the peoples
of the region.
Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We are pleased with the Council’s
adoption today of resolution 2494 (2019), which renews
the mandate of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO), and we
thank the United States for its work as its penholder.
The Dominican Republic voted in favour of resolution
2494 (2019), as it is a balanced text in which the Security
Council takes measures designed to advance the
political progress in Western Sahara and emphasizes
the importance of the work that MINURSO has done.
The resolution emphasizes the importance of achieving
a realistic, practical and lasting political solution based
on compromise.
The resolution expresses its full support for the
efforts of the Secretary-General and pays tribute to the
commendable work of President Köhler in achieving
new momentum with the first round-table meetings
bringing together representatives from Morocco, the
Frente Popular para la Liberación de Saguía el-Hamra y

19-340513/8

S/PV.8651

The situation concerning Western Sahara

de Río de Oro, Algeria and Mauritania, which we hope
the future Personal Envoy of the Secretary General will
continue. The resolution extends MINURSO’s mandate
for 12 months to provide the necessary time for the
future Personal Envoy to initiate consultations with the
relevant stakeholders and continue to give impetus to
the political process with the goal of reaching a just,
lasting and mutually acceptable political solution.
Lastly, the Dominican Republic believes that the
Moroccan initiative for Western Sahara’s autonomy
represents a serious and credible step forward towards
a negotiated solution in Western Sahara.
Mr. Bourisly (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): Kuwait
voted in favour of resolution 2494 (2019), which
extends the mandate of the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) until
31 October 2020, because we believe in the Mission’s
positive role. We would like to have seen it adopted
unanimously. However, we thank the delegation of the
United States, as the penholder, for its work and are
pleased that the Mission’s mandate has been extended
for a year, something that we have repeatedly called for.
Now the new mandate has enough time to enable progress
to be made on the political process. The State of Kuwait
supports the relevant Security Council resolutions and
the efforts of the Secretary-General with a view to
reaching a solution that is acceptable to all parties. We
also stress the importance of MINURSO’s role and of
ensuring that it can fully implement its mandate.
We want to express our thanks and appreciation
to Mr. Horst Köhler, the previous Personal Envoy of
the Secretary-General, for his good offices, which
have helped to move the political process forward
and to create momentum that has given us renewed
hope that a realistic and practical political solution
based on consensus can be achieved. We hope that his
successor will follow the same path. We look forward
to a resumption of the round-table meetings with the
participation of all parties, without preconditions and in
good faith, while ensuring that the frequency of meetings
is maintained and that trust and a convergence of views
are promoted. We emphasize that Kuwait is eager to
see enhanced security, stability and prosperity in the
Arab Maghreb. We want to reiterate Kuwait’s position
in support of the Moroccan initiative for autonomy for
Western Sahara, which represents a constructive choice
aimed at reaching a solution acceptable to all parties,
and we once again affirm the importance of respecting
Morocco’s sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity.
4/8

30/10/2019

Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): In the context of the international efforts to
resolve the issue of the Western Sahara, we would like
to once again affirm the Russian Federation’s wellknown and consistent position.
We support a balanced and unbiased approach to
the issue, with direct negotiations between Morocco
and the Frente Popular para la Liberación de Saguía
el-Hamra y de Río de Oro (Frente POLISARIO). As
a permanent member of the Security Council and a
member of the Group of Friends of Western Sahara,
we continue to engage actively with all the parties
concerned, working with the Moroccans, Frente
POLISARIO members, Algerians and Mauritanians.
Russia has historically strong and friendly relations
with all the States involved that we naturally value. We
believe that only a mutually acceptable solution, based
on the relevant Security Council resolutions, within a
framework of procedures consistent with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, can
be stable and viable.
We support the work of the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO),
whose personnel include Russian military observers.
The Mission plays a crucial stabilizing role in the
region. Its effective work helps to maintain an
environment conducive to advancing a settlement for
Western Sahara. We very much appreciate the efforts
of former President Köhler, who has unfortunately had
to resign his post as Personal Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral and who has done a great deal to maintain a
dialogue among the parties. We await the appointment
of a new Personal Envoy and hope to see progress in the
plan to hold another round of negotiations in Geneva
between the parties to the settlement of the Western
Sahara issue, with the participation of neighbouring
countries. We urge for the inclusion of all the invitees
in a constructive dialogue without preconditions and
with a view to achieving mutually acceptable solutions.
We realize that the tasks that come under the
Mission’s mandate still have to be implemented. At the
same time, we believe it is wrong to try to use resolution
2494 (2019), adopted today to extend that mandate, to
predetermine the direction of the negotiation process
being conducted under the auspices of the United
Nations or to change established approaches affirmed
in previously adopted resolutions. In the past few years,
unfortunately, there have been modifications made to
the resolutions extending MINURSO’s mandate that
19-34051

30/10/2019

The situation concerning Western Sahara

in our view are damaging to the Security Council’s
impartial and unbiased approach. It is unacceptable
to blur previously approved parameters that among
other things outline the blueprint for a settlement and
provide for arriving at a mutually acceptable solution
that guarantees the self-determination of the people
of Western Sahara that is consistent with the purposes
and principles of the Charter. We did not agree with
these arbitrary modifications in previous years and
cannot support such an approach today. Replacing the
fundamental principles of a settlement of the issue of
Western Sahara with generalizations about the need to
stick to realistic approaches or resort to compromise
creates ambiguity, undermines trust in our work and
clouds the prospects for the political process.
Russia will continue to be an impartial and balanced
actor in the settlement of the Western Saharan conflict,
while maintaining contact with all parties of the region.
We will work actively to support the negotiation
process, but in the understanding that only the parties
themselves can come up with the kind of decision that
coresponds to the interests of regional security and
stability. We cannot permit the various extremist forces
in the region to take advantage of a vacuum in the peace
process and a failure to resolve the problem at hand,
which could have a negative impact on the military
and political situation in the entire region. The task of
consolidating the positions of the external players in
order to avoid such a scenario is an urgent one.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara (MINURSO) has diligently implemented its
mandate from the Security Council in contributing
to the efforts to find a political solution to the issue
of Western Sahara and maintain overall stability in
the region. China commends the efforts of MINURSO’s
peacekeepers and supports the renewal of its mandate.
Resolution 2494 (2019), which the Council has
just adopted, renews the MINURSO mandate for 12
months. It demonstrates the Council’s determination to
uphold the Mission’s mandate and promote a political
settlement of the question of Western Sahara. China
hopes that in future the consultations in the Council on
draft resolutions renewing MINURSO’s mandate will
be more adequate to arriving at a more balanced text
and reaching consensus.
China appreciates the efforts of Mr. Köhler, the
Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General for Western

S/PV. 8651

Sahara, in using his good offices on the issue, and
hopes that a new Personal Envoy will be appointed
without delay so that the round-table meetings can
resume as soon as possible in order to advance the
political process on the issue. China will maintain its
objective and impartial position and support the work of
the United Nations in promoting a political solution to
the Western Sahara issue. We encourage the parties to
seek a just and lasting solution acceptable to all through
negotiations based on the relevant Council resolutions.
Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome
the adoption of resolution 2494 (2019). We voted in
favour of the resolution, based on our belief in the
importance of supporting the crucial role played by the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara in maintaining calm and upholding the ceasefire
in the separation zone, and in keeping with the efforts
of the Secretary-General to revive the political process
in Western Sahara. In our view, there is an urgent need
to resume the political process without preconditions
and in good faith in order to achieve a fair and lasting
political solution mutually acceptable to the parties
on the basis of international law and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, which provide for
the self-determination of the people of Western Sahara.
We are grateful for President Horst Köhler’s work,
which restored forward momentum to the political
process, and we hope his replacement will be appointed
promptly with a view to keeping up that momentum. We
firmly believe that the parties and their neighbouring
States will maintain their steadfast commitment to
continuing the negotiating process through talks under
the auspices of the United Nations and the incoming
Personal Envoy.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would like to begin by
reiterating my delegation’s full support for the political
process led by the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral. Indonesia commends President Horst Köhler,
the former Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General, for
his tireless efforts to revive the political process, which
injected new and positive momentum in encouraging
the parties to resume direct talks and find a durable
solution to their dispute. It is important to ensure that
the Council, together with all the relevant stakeholders,
maintains that new momentum and builds on the
accomplishments made so far. My delegation would
therefore like to stress the need for the SecretaryGeneral to appoint his next Personal Envoy without
delay. And while that is a matter of urgency, it must

19-340515/8

S/PV.8651

The situation concerning Western Sahara

30/10/2019

be someone who is credible and acceptable to all
the parties.

that they maintain a continuing dialogue with the
Special Representative.

Indonesia would also like to express its appreciation
for the United Nations Mission for the Referendum
in Western Sahara (MINURSO) and underscore the
pivotal role it plays. The Mission’s mandate is crucial
to maintaining peace and stability in the region, which
is a necessary condition for the peace talks involving
all parties. Indonesia, as a troop-contributing country,
including to MINURSO, supports the 12-month
mandate renewal for the Mission. It will create a better
sense of certainty and predictability and improve the
Mission’s ability to manage its planning and operations.
At the same time, it will also provide the SecretaryGeneral and his incoming Envoy with sufficient room
to prepare for the forthcoming political process.

Secondly, I want to pay tribute to the work carried
out by President Köhler. His personal commitment
and tireless efforts breathed new life into the
political process with the holding of two round tables
bringing together Morocco, the Frente Popular para la
Liberación de Saguía el-Hamra y Río de Oro, Algeria
and Mauritania for the first time since 2012. The
appointment of a new Personal Envoy will be important
to maintaining that positive momentum, as expressed
in the direction of today’s resolution, which encourages
the resumption of the political process by building on
the progress already made.

We want to thank the United States, as the
penholder, for preparing the text of resolution 2494
(2019). We also commend the constructive engagement
all the parties with the political process. We call on
them to remain committed to it and to extend their full
support and cooperation to the future Personal Envoy
in working for a mutually acceptable political solution.
Mr. de Rivière (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the Council’s adoption of resolution 2494
(2019). At the outset, I would like to reiterate France’s
full support for the work of Special Representative
Colin Stewart and his entire team. I commend their
efforts to strengthen the effectiveness of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO), as well as the protection of its personnel,
and to increase the number of women in its ranks in
keeping with the women and peace and security agenda.
MINURSO plays an essential role in ensuring respect
for the ceasefire agreement and preventing flare-ups
through exchanges with the parties. It is therefore a key
component of stability in the region and contributes to
establishing the conditions necessary for a resumption
of the political process. We particularly welcome the
return to a one-year mandate, which should continue
to be the norm with regard to peacekeeping, since
this kind of timetable enables continuity and greater
predictability in the Mission’s management.
Lastly, we welcome the relative calm in the situation
on the ground and want to emphasize the importance
of ensuring that all the parties abide fully by the
ceasefire agreement, particularly in the Guerguerat
buffer strip, where the situation remains volatile, and
6/8

We reiterate France’s full support for the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to achieve a fair, lasting and mutually
acceptable solution in Western Sahara in accordance
the resolutions of the Security Council. In that context,
France believes that the Morocco’s 2007 autonomy
plan represents a serious and credible foundation for
discussions reviving a dialogue.
Mr. Licharz (Germany): We welcome the
Council’s adoption today of resolution 2494 (2019),
renewing the mandate of the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO)
until 31 October 2020. The Mission’s work is vital to
ensuring stability on the ground and thereby providing
space for the political process. We want to explicitly
thank former Personal Envoy Horst Köhler for his
success in moving the political process forward, thereby
creating new momentum for direct negotiations. It will
be crucial to appoint a new Personal Envoy as soon as
possible in order to keep up the momentum and build
on the progress achieved. We call on the parties to lend
the same support and trust to his successor as they did
to President Köhler.
Besides the appointment of a new Envoy, it is
crucial to ensure that the Council remains engaged
and does everything to support progress on the
political track. For the political process to succeed,
the situation on the ground must remain calm. We
therefore commend MINURSO, its peacekeepers
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Stewart for their tireless and committed work. We call
on all sides to engage constructively with the Special
Representative and enable him to fulfil his mandate
without restrictions.
19-34051

30/10/2019

The situation concerning Western Sahara

S/PV. 8651

Mr. Ondo Angue (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank the
United States, as penholder for resolution 2494 (2019),
for introducing the draft text and ensuring that it took
into account the range of views expressed by Council
members as well as those of the parties involved.

In that regard, we look forward to the appointment
of a new Personal Envoy to pursue the United Nationsled political process. We believe in a political solution
that would be inclusive, durable and acceptable to all
parties to the dispute and that is based on the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

Equatorial Guinea decided to vote in favour of
resolution 2494 (2019), thereby affirming its full support
for the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara (MINURSO) and its Head, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Colin Stewart.
We consider the progress made by the former Personal
Envoy very important and therefore want to stress how
crucial it is that his successor builds on Mr. Köhler’s
efforts and takes into account the commitment by all
parties to holding a third meeting in the same format.

Poland commends the role of the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO) in maintaining peace and stability and
supporting the peace process. We believe that the
resolution adopted today by the Security Council is an
important step in advancing this process. In that regard,
I would like to thank the United States as penholder
for its efforts during the negotiations. We welcome the
fact that today the Security Council decided to extend
MINURSO’s mandate for 12 months. We believe
that this mandate should be maintained until reliable
progress has been achieved.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea believes
that regardless of the long drawn-out nature of the
situation, peace can be achieved only through a frank
and inclusive dialogue based on a realistic, practicable
and enduring political solution in order to put an end to
the conflict.
By way of conclusion, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea would like to commend the achievements
registered by the Kingdom of Morocco in promoting
human rights through the various steps and initiatives
it has carried out and for the role played by the
National Council on Human Rights Commissions,
operating in Dakhla and Laayoune, and the interaction
between Morocco and the Special Procedures of the
Human Rights Council, as reflected in the nineteenth
preambular paragraph of the resolution.
This could be the last time during our membership
of the Council that we will discuss the issue of
MINURSO. If so, we would like to wish for every
success and a definitive solution for the good of all the
parties involved, the international community and the
United Nations as the body entrusted with guaranteeing
international peace and security for a better world.
Mr. Jamróz (Poland): Poland welcomes the
adoption of resolution 2494 (2019). We voted in favour in
order to express our gratitude for the work of Mr. Horst
Köhler as the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Western Sahara. His dedication and tireless efforts
aimed at reinvigorating the political process gave us
hope that a political solution to the question of Western
Sahara is possible.

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of South Africa.
At the outset, South Africa wishes to reiterate
its unequivocal and strong support for the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO). The Mission, as its name indicates, was
created almost 30 years ago, with a mandate to hold a
referendum to allow the people of Western Sahara to
exercise their right to self-determination. We lament
the fact that such a referendum has, unfortunately,
not occurred, depriving the people of the territory of
Western Sahara of this universally accepted right.
South Africa wishes once again to commend the
political process facilitated by the Secretary-General’s
good offices, through his former Special Envoy,
Mr. Horst Köhler, as well as the efforts of the Special
Representative and Head of MINURSO, Mr. Colin
Stewart. A new Personal Envoy should be appointed as
soon as possible to continue this process.
Although resolution 2494 (2019), which was just
adopted, contains numerous paragraphs with which
South Africa can agree, there remain several elements
of concern to our delegation, as follows.
First, the current text, as it stands, is not balanced.
It does not provide a true reflection of the unfortunate
undertaking by the two parties, Morocco and the
Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic, as the latter is
referred as a member of the African Union, represented
by the Frente Popular para la Liberación de Saguía el-

19-340517/8

S/PV.8651

The situation concerning Western Sahara

Hamra y de Río de Oro (Frente POLISARIO) in the
political process under discussion. Indeed, both parties
are members of the African Union.
Secondly, we note that once again terms such as
“realistic”, “realism” and “compromise” are being
used in the resolution. These references are an attempt
to undermine the principle of self-determination for
the people of Western Sahara, which, as has been
established by numerous General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions, is relevant to the situation
in Western Sahara. The Council must reaffirm its longstanding and unequivocal commitment to the right to
self-determination for the people of Western Sahara in
an unqualified manner.
South Africa would have preferred a six-month
mandate for MINURSO, which we believe would have
allowed the Council to regularly meet to consider the
progress made on the appointment of the Special Envoy
and the status of the political process. The argument put
forward for the Council to meet regularly on items on
its agenda should also hold for the situation in Western
Sahara. Western Sahara should not be treated differently
from the other issues on the Council’s agenda in similar
circumstances, and we should not allow for an out-ofsight, out-of-mind approach to this matter.
South Africa welcomes the reference to human
rights in the seventeenth to twentieth preambular
paragraphs of resolution 2494 (2019). However, we
wish to reiterate that there is a need for a formal human
rights mandate to strengthen the monitoring of possible
human rights violations on all sides, by Morocco and
the Frente POLISARIO.
Lastly, we wish to note once again that the text
must differentiate between the parties to the conflict:
Morocco, the Frente POLISARIO and the neighbouring

8/8

30/10/2019

States of Algeria and Mauritania. We wish to reiterate
once again that the Council’s working methods on this
matter, whereby it delegates responsibility to the Group
of Friends of Western Sahara, remain of serious concern
to South Africa. We have consistently raised this issue
as problematic, particularly the unrepresentative nature
of the Group, which does not include a single African
member of the Council, despite the fact that this is an
African issue.
The substantive concerns that we have raised
regarding the text could have and should have been
raised in negotiations on the text. However, despite
having been elected by the General Assembly to serve
on and participate in the work of the Security Council,
we were not given that opportunity. This process
presents Council members that are not members of the
Group of Friends with a text with a take-it-or-leave-it
approach, which is not sustainable and does not allow
us the opportunity to carry out our mandate.
South Africa reiterates its principled position on
the situation in the Western Sahara, which remains
the last colony on the African continent, listed by the
United Nations as a Non-Self-Governing Territory.
Given our concerns and in considering the text before
us, as the resolution renews the mandate of MINURSO
and endorses the political process embarked upon by
the former Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General,
South Africa was not able to vote in favour. That is why
we abstained.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.

19-34051
