United Nations

General Assembly

A/RES/66/65
Distr.: General
13 December 2011

Sixty-sixth session
Agenda item 105

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 2 December 2011
[on the report of the First Committee (A/66/419)]

66/65.

Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological
(Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on
Their Destruction

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions relating to the complete and effective
prohibition of bacteriological (biological) and toxin weapons and to their destruction,
Noting with satisfaction that there are one hundred and sixty-five States parties
to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their
Destruction, 1 including all the permanent members of the Security Council,
Bearing in mind its call upon all States parties to the Convention to participate
in the implementation of the recommendations of the review conferences of the
parties to the Convention, including the exchange of information and data agreed to
in the Final Declaration of the Third Review Conference of the Parties to the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction, 2 and to
provide such information and data in conformity with standardized procedure to the
Secretary-General on an annual basis and no later than 15 April,
Welcoming the reaffirmation made in the Final Declaration of the Fourth
Review Conference that under all circumstances the use of bacteriological
(biological) and toxin weapons and their development, production and stockpiling
are effectively prohibited under article I of the Convention, 3
Recalling the decision reached at the Sixth Review Conference to hold four
annual meetings of the States parties of one week’s duration each year commencing
in 2007, prior to the Seventh Review Conference, which is to be held no later than

_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1015, No. 14860.
See BWC/CONF.III/23, part II.
3
See BWC/CONF.IV/9, part II.
2

11-46272

*1046272*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/66/65

the end of 2011, and to hold a one-week meeting of experts to prepare for each
meeting of the States parties, 4
1.
Notes with appreciation that two additional States have acceded to the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction,1
reaffirms its call upon all signatory States that have not yet ratified the Convention
to do so without delay, and calls upon those States that have not signed the
Convention to become parties thereto at the earliest possible date, thus contributing
to the achievement of universal adherence to the Convention;
Welcomes the information and data provided to date, as well as the
2.
several measures to update the mechanism for the transmission of information in the
framework of confidence-building measures agreed upon at the Sixth Review
Conference of the States Parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction, and reiterates its call upon all States parties to
the Convention to participate in the exchange of information and data agreed upon
at the Third Review Conference;2
3.
Recalls the decisions on all provisions of the Convention reached at the
Sixth Review Conference,4 and calls upon States parties to the Convention to
participate in their implementation;
4.
Notes with appreciation the work of the Implementation Support Unit
within the Office for Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat during the 2007–2010
intersessional process consistent with its mandate and in accordance with the
decisions of the Sixth Review Conference;
Welcomes the successful holding of meetings as part of the 2007–2010
5.
intersessional process, and in this context also welcomes the discussion aimed at the
promotion of common understanding and effective action on topics agreed upon at
the Sixth Review Conference;
Notes the success of the meeting of the Preparatory Committee for the
6.
Seventh Review Conference, held in Geneva from 13 to 15 April 2011, and
welcomes the convening of the Seventh Review Conference in Geneva from 5 to
22 December 2011 pursuant to the decision of the Preparatory Committee;
Recalls that the Seventh Review Conference is mandated to consider
7.
issues identified in the review of the operation of the Convention as provided for in
article XII thereof and any possible consensus follow-up action;
Urges all States parties to continue to work together to achieve a
8.
consensus outcome of the Seventh Review Conference which strengthens the
Convention;
Notes with appreciation the events organized by some States parties for
9.
exchanges of views on the work of the Seventh Review Conference;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to render the necessary
assistance to the depositary Governments of the Convention, to provide such
services as may be required for the implementation of the decisions and
recommendations of the review conferences and to render the necessary assistance

_______________
4

2

See BWC/CONF.VI/6, part III.

A/RES/66/65

and to provide such services as may be required for the Seventh Review
Conference;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-seventh session
the item entitled “Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production
and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their
Destruction”.
71st plenary meeting
2 December 2011

3
