S/PV.8422

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8422

nd meeting
Thursday, 13 December 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Adom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Côte d’Ivoire)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Amde
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Blok
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-43649 (E)
*1843649*

S/PV.8422

The situation in the Central African Republic

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.

heavy toll paid by the civilian population, humanitarian
personnel and Blue Helmets, it was essential for the
Security Council to reaffirm its support for MINUSCA
and the Central African authorities.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Central
African Republic to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2018/1016, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by France.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Côte d’Ivoire,
Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, France, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Netherlands, Peru, Poland, Sweden, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and United States of America
Against:
None
Abstaining:
China and Russian Federation
The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 13 votes in favour, none against and
two abstentions. The draft resolution has been adopted
as resolution 2448 (2018).
I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2448 (2018),
which renews the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) for one year.
In a context that is characterized by ongoing serious
violence carried out by armed groups, as unfortunately
evidenced by the current situation in Alindao, and with a
2/9

13/12/2018

In order to promote consensus, we have sought
relentlessly, through extensive consultations and,
of course, with respect for each other’s positions, to
strike a delicate balance among the various positions
expressed during the negotiations. All the members of
the Council actively participated in those negotiations
and shared their sometimes diverging positions, which
we have spared no effort to reconcile.
In that context, we solemnly call on everyone to
actively and in good faith implement the resolution
by putting the interests of the Central African people
above our national interests. Action in favour of the
Central African Republic can be achieved neither
through a solitary and exclusive approach, nor by
methods that ignore the solutions provided by our
African partners themselves — first and foremost, the
African Union — nor through initiatives that call into
question the decisions of the Security Council.
To return to what should be at the heart of our
common concerns, the MINUSCA mandate, I would
like to underscore three points here with regard to the
important resolution that we have just adopted.
First, the resolution maintains MINUSCA’s
robust format and mandate, which is key. MINUSCA,
which operates in a difficult environment, has
repeatedly demonstrated that it can act proactively
and robustly, when necessary, to protect the civilian
population — particularly the most vulnerable, namely,
women and children — from the threat of armed groups.
Now that MINUSCA has reached its full operational
capacity with the arrival of the last contingents, which
resulted from the increase in the troop ceiling authorized
last year, we hope that MINUSCA will be able to
pursue its efforts to enhance its mobility and improve
its operational performance. It must also intensify the
efforts already under way to prevent cases of sexual
exploitation and abuse and ensure that they do not go
unpunished. In that regard, I recall the importance of
the Special Criminal Court and cooperation with the
International Criminal Court.
Secondly,
the
resolution
also
reinforces
MINUSCA’s role, in accordance with the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations, in supporting the political
process in the Central African Republic, under the aegis
18-43649

13/12/2018

The situation in the Central African Republic

of the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic, which is also absolutely
essential. The African Initiative is the only direct
and inclusive dialogue process between the Central
African Government and armed groups from which a
comprehensive peace agreement can emerge.
In that context, we welcome the decision of the
United Nations and the African Union to integrate
MINUSCA into the African Initiative, as well as to
include the Permanent Representative on the panel
of facilitators. We also welcome the decision to
support the African Initiative through a joint United
Nations-African Union Special Envoy, and stress the
importance of an early appointment at this crucial
time to advance the peace and reconciliation process.
Under the resolution, MINUSCA could also strengthen
its substantive support for and mediation role in the
African Initiative, in addition to the support it already
provides in the technical, logistical and security areas.
Its role as coordinator of international support for the
African Initiative will also be bolstered.
Thirdly and lastly, the resolution authorizes
additional support from MINUSCA to the Central
African authorities for the extension of the State’s
authority throughout Central African territory. I am
thinking in particular of the logistical support, albeit
limited, that MINUSCA will be able to provide to the
Central African armed forces trained or certified by
the European Union Military Training Mission in the
Central African Republic, as well as the internal security
forces, in order to allow them to gradually redeploy
within the Central African territory and conduct joint
operations to ensure the safety of local populations.
Negotiations on that point have been difficult. That
is a fact, and expectations should not be unrealistic.
MINUSCA is already working with armed forces of
the Central African Republic who have either been
trained or certified by EUTM RCA and could therefore
continue to do so by adding logistical support to the
extent that its resources permit and within its areas of
deployment.
France is well aware of the commitment and
sacrifices that MINUSCA and its civilian, police and
military staff are making in order to promote peace
in the Central African Republic, and will continue
to give them its firm support both on the ground and
here in New York. We will also continue to give our
full support to President Touadera and the people of
the Central African Republic, who have suffered far

S/PV. 8422

too long in this crisis. I want to say once again that
France’s motive is its desire to support the people of the
Central African Republic, and that motive should guide
the action and commitment of every Council member.
The President (spoke in French): I would like to
welcome the presence of His Excellency Mr. Stef Blok,
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, and to
give him the floor.
Mr. Blok (Netherlands): As we gather in this
Chamber this afternoon, more than half of the people
of the Central African Republic are fleeing the ongoing
violence there. The attacks on civilians, peacekeepers
and humanitarian workers continue, despite the peace
process led by the African Union Initiative for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic.
It is clear that the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) has a vital role to play to support
and protect the people of the Central African Republic.
We therefore thank France for its work and leadership
in facilitating the discussion on MINUSCA’s mandate
by making extensive efforts to find a compromise
among all members of the Council.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes the
mandate’s renewal for a period of one year. We are
pleased that the Mission’s role in the political process
and the mandate for the protection of civilians have been
significantly strengthened by comparison to last year’s
mandate. We are also satisfied with MINUSCA’s newly
assigned task extending limited logistical support to
the country’s armed forces that have been trained by
the European Union Training Mission in the Central
African Republic, which is essential to strengthening
the State’s authority. MINUSCA also has an important
role in coordinating international security-sector reform
initiatives, which should be undertaken transparently
and coherently. For these reasons, we regret that the
mandate was not adopted unanimously. We urge all
Council members to work to restore unity in their
support to the people of the Central African Republic.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): The
United States strongly supports the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and is
pleased to have voted for this mandate renewal. We note
that it will be difficult for the Council and MINUSCA to
assist the Government of the Central African Republic
in making peace with armed groups, re-establishing

18-436493/9

S/PV.8422

The situation in the Central African Republic

Government control over its entire territory and laying
the groundwork for peace and prosperity for all the
citizens of the Central African Republic unless there
is total unity, transparency and coordination among
key actors, including the African Union (AU) and
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS).
We are deeply concerned about the violence in
Bangui, Bambari and Alindao, and believe that the
fighting and the actions against civilians demonstrate
the importance of ensuring that the Central African
authorities coordinate with MINUSCA before
redeploying security forces, as authorized in this
mandate. We are concerned about the possibility the
Central African military might be moving to zones that
were not previously agreed on with the United Nations.
We will continue to urge for the establishment of a
national inspection protocol for all weapon donations
to the Government of the Central African Republic.
We commend all the donors providing that assistance,
and we want to reaffirm our commitment to achieving
the highest possible standards of transparency in
coordinating with the Government and other partners
on military assistance, training and donations. In some
cases, the distinction between activities that represent
official Government assistance and those that represent
private commercial activities, unrelated to donor
coordination, has been unclear.
Assisting the Government of the Central African
Republic is not a competition. In helping one of the
world’s poorest countries emerge from more than a
decade of conflict to pursue peace and development,
there can be no room for jealousy. We must coordinate
closely to ensure that our combined assistance and
related activities help to achieve the Security Council’s
objectives in support of the Central African Republic’s
territorial integrity.
As is authorized in this mandate, we urge for more
rapid progress on the African Union Initiative for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic,
and we encourage all Member States to embrace
transparency and full cooperation with the Government
of the Central African Republic, the AU, ECCAS and
MINUSCA in support of a political resolution to the
violence.
Finally, we note that resolution 2448 (2018) contains
references to the International Criminal Court (ICC), and
in that connection we want to refer to the United States
4/9

13/12/2018

policy on the ICC, as announced by the White House on
10 September. In particular, the United States reiterates
its continuing and long-standing principled objection
to any assertion of ICC jurisdiction over nationals of
States that are not parties to the Rome Statute, including
the United States and Israel, without a Security Council
referral or the consent of such a State. We also want
to reiterate our serious and fundamental concerns
about the ICC Prosecutor’s proposed investigation of
United States personnel in the context of the conflict in
Afghanistan. As today’s resolution recalls, the Central
African Republic is a State party to the Rome Statute
and has consented to the ICC’s exercise of jurisdiction
in its territory. The United States remains a leader in the
fight to end impunity and continues to support justice
and accountability for international crimes, including
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. We
respect the decision of the nations that have chosen to
join the ICC, and in turn we expect that our decision
not to join and not to place our citizens under the ICC’s
jurisdiction will also be respected.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation was unable to
support resolution 2448 (2018), proposed by our French
colleagues to extend the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic. We abstained not
because we do not support the Mission or disagree with
anything to do with it. On the contrary, we are grateful
for its activities and the dedication of its peacekeepers.
The reason is the manner in which the work on the text
was done, especially in the final stages, and it leads
us to wonder once again about the true reasons for the
behaviour of the authors of the resolution, who, unlike
us, are apparently continuing to play a zero-sum game
in Africa. Furthermore, behind all of this we get a
glimpse of an attitude that has persisted for decades to
the independence that African countries have achieved
through their struggles for national liberation and that
treats their lands like some kind of patrimony or their
own preserve in a vicious cycle where metropolis meets
colony.
Throughout all the rounds of expert consultations,
we asked that our concerns be heard and that the text
reflect a number of points of principle, aimed chiefly
at increasing the transparency of the interactions with
Bangui’s international partners, something that Western
delegations are constantly calling for, and a recognition
of the important role of regional actors in the process of
18-43649

13/12/2018

The situation in the Central African Republic

achieving a settlement in the Central African Republic.
Once again, unfortunately, our desire for mutually
respectful work in the Council was repudiated. Our
arguments during the work on the resolution were
ignored. Moreover, we detect in the resolution’s content
the penholders’ clear overstepping of their authority to
assert a national agenda or reflect the priorities of their
closest partners. There was basically no effort to seek
compromises or reach a consensus. We were offered
what were termed compromise solutions that took no
account of our legitimate demands, and we were told
that this was as far as the penholders could go, it was
their maximum. What I want to know is who decides
what the maximum is. Their maximum is not even our
minimum. Practically speaking, we were faced with
a fact and, not for the first time, were told to take it
or leave it, to go along with the situation as presented
in the name of preserving the unity of the Security
Council.
It is not the first time that we have encountered this
in the Council or said that it is time that this culture
of discourse, or rather the lack thereof, must come to
an end. The way the draft was agreed on once again
emphasized how essential it is that we change the
current system of penholdership for various items on
the Security Council’s agenda, which has been usurped
by the Western troika.
The authors of the document flatly refused to take into
account a number of our principled political concerns.
The result was that it did not reflect the important
concept welcoming peace initiatives that align with and
contribute to achieving the African Initiative for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic.
Nor did we hear any convincing or clear reasons why
the French delegation was categorically opposed to our
incidentally very generalized proposed wording. But
we certainly do remember that on 14 November, when
consensus on a draft resolution was not reached, it was
immediately taken off the table at the request of one
delegation. For some reason we did not see Paris take a
similarly careful approach to our position.
The suggestion that the meeting in Khartoum that
for the first time in a long time brought the leaders
of the Central African Republic opposition groups
together around the same negotiation table was not
aligned with the African Initiative is totally wrong. We
heard the same kind of excuses in 2015 when France
prevented similar efforts to achieve peace by rejecting
the Nairobi agreement between the main opposition

S/PV. 8422

groups headed by François Bozizé and Michel Djotodia
on the invented pretext that it was not in line with the
previous agreements. Since then we have all seen that
the security situation in the Central African Republic
is deteriorating, the socioeconomic situation is getting
worse and the human suffering is continuing. In that
connection, we would specifically like to point out that
we have taken note of the French delegation’s promise
to reflect the importance of the Khartoum process
in future Security Council documents. We will be
watching attentively to see that promise fulfilled.
Another subject not reflected in the resolution was
the major contribution that has been made to training
the Central African armed forces by the Russian
instructors who are in the Central African Republic at
the invitation of its leaders and are working to improve
the armed forces’ real battle readiness. Instead, the
penholders bent over backwards to puff up the role of
the European Union Military Training Mission in the
Central African Republic, which as the Europeans
themselves admit is focused on human rights training
for the military, which is not exactly going to help it
ensure security and control throughout the country.
In our view, what is extremely revealing is the
evolving story of the approval in the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013) of the
second batch of Russian weapons sent free of charge to
the Central African Republic in response to Bangui’s
official request. There is supposed to be a consensus on
the importance of strengthening the national security
sector, and we have responded to all of the questions.
But we are now being told that the Central African
Republic does not have the proper storage facilities.
And yet for a subsequent delivery of 1,400 submachine
guns from the French — which on top of that are
not from their own stores but seized from smugglers
in murky circumstances — storage facilities were
suddenly found. Where is the logic in that? Or is it
another infamous example of double standards? As this
shows, guided by their own narrow self-interests, the
countries of the West are putting obstacles in the way
of rebuilding battle-ready forces in the Central African
Republic and restoring the Government’s legitimate
authority throughout the country, despite all their
assertions to the contrary.
I will have to disappoint those who are getting
ready to blame Russia for all of the world’s deadly sins.
Incidentally, we were surprised to learn from the BBC
today — Council members can find it on the Internet

18-436495/9

S/PV.8422

The situation in the Central African Republic

themselves — about a statement by United States
National Security Adviser John Bolton on Russia and
China’s role in Africa. The same claims that he made
about our countries could just as well be made about
the United States. In fact, that was what the reporter
describing the situation was saying. It can be found on
the BBC’s website.
The fact is that the international community’s
unSited support for stabilizing the Central African
Republic has not vanished, and our understanding
of the importance of extending the mandate of the
peacekeeping mission in that country is still there. But
we cannot accept it when in the guise of so-called good
intentions with regard to consolidating support for
Bangui, in practice the resolution’s penholders plant the
idea about the exceptional nature of their own efforts.
We hope that reason will ultimately prevail in the
interests of the people of the Central African Republic.
Russia will continue its active and peaceful work
to stabilize the situation and establish peace in the
Central African Republic, and we are ready to engage
in respectful, constructive collaboration with anyone so
inclined. There is room for everyone who wants to help
the Central African Republic.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me take this
opportunity to thank France for its efforts in coordinating
the drafting of resolution 2448 (2018). Poland voted in
favour of it, and we regret that we were unable to reach
consensus on it. In our opinion, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic is a crucial element in the
Council’s efforts to support peace in the Central African
Republic, and the issue of extending the mandate of the
Mission for another year is extremely important both
for the country and the whole Central African region.
In that context, it is critical to maintain a constructive
position in the Council on the issue in order to help to
ensure overall stability in the Central African Republic,
especially in the context of the elections planned for
2020 and 2021. It is especially important right now to
send a clear message to the Government and the people
of the Central African Republic that the Security
Council is united in supporting their aspirations for
stability and prosperity.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
has played an important role in maintaining peace and
6/9

13/12/2018

stability in the Central African Republic, and China
supports the extension of its mandate. Meanwhile, the
efforts of the relevant parties within the international
community to achieve peace and security in the Central
African Republic should be recognized and positively
acknowledged. The legitimate concerns of all parties,
particularly the Central African Republic, should be
fully heeded and taken seriously by the penholders.
Resolution 2448 (2018) should serve to foster Council
consensus, maintain Council unity and send a positive
signal from the international community in support
of the Government of the Central African Republic.
Only in doing so can we contribute to lasting peace
and stability in the Central African Republic. With
that in mind, China abstained in the voting on the draft
resolution just adopted.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): The Central African Republic
is now taking important steps to advance the peace
process under the African Union-led African Initiative
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic. In parallel, its national security forces are
improving their capabilities in spite of the very volatile
and fragile situation in the country, as the recent attacks
on civilians in Alindao and Batangafo demonstrated. I
want to emphasize the critical role played by the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
in securing stability and advancing the peace process,
as well as in supporting the protection of civilians
and fighting sexual and gender-based violence. We
would like to thank France for its work on resolution
2248 (2018). I want to briefly highlight three specific
areas where the mandate of MINUSCA has been
strengthened.
The first is the protection of civilians, including
prevention and early warning. The second is MINUSCA’s
political role in supporting the peace process, and the
third is MINUSCA’s ability to provide logistical and
technical support to the Central African armed forces.
I also want to emphasize that the resolution recognizes
the adverse effects of climate change on the stability
of the Central African region and stresses the need for
adequate risk assessments and long-term strategies by
the United Nations and Governments of the region. The
mandate was not adopted by consensus, but we urge
all Council members to unite in their support to the
Central African Republic and to MINUSCA, and we
know that they will.
18-43649

13/12/2018

The situation in the Central African Republic

The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of Côte
d’Ivoire and on behalf of the three African countries
that are members of the Security Council.
The delegations of Ethiopia, Equatorial Guinea and
Côte d’Ivoire welcome the adoption of resolution 2448
(2018), renewing the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) for an
additional year. The three African members of the
Council voted in favour of the text, which represents
the clear support of the international community to
the peace efforts of the people of the Central African
Republic. We regret, however, that the one-month
postponement of the adoption of the resolution did not
allow us to smooth out the difficulties and create the
spirit of compromise needed to reach consensus on the
text, which would have fully ensured the legitimacy of
MINUSCA’s presence in the Central African Republic.
In any event, the three African Council members
wish to stress that our decisions must be guided solely
by the best interests of the Central African Republic
and its people, who have suffered too much from the
persistent crisis in their country. We are convinced that
the renewal of MINUSCA’s robust mandate will enable
the Mission to carry out its priority tasks of protecting
civilians, supporting the political peace process and
supporting the delivery of humanitarian assistance to
Central Africans in need.
Through the new resolution, the Council also
reaffirms its support for the African Initiative for
Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic. It reinforces MINUSCA’s role in leading the
Initiative with a view to fostering direct and inclusive
dialogue among the various actors. The Council also
supports the participation of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in the Initiative’s panel of
facilitators, thereby demonstrating his interest in the
political process, which is undoubtedly the appropriate
framework for finding a lasting solution to the crisis in
the Central African Republic.
In addition, the three African Council members
welcome the strengthening of MINUSCA’s support
to the Central African authorities in the context of
the extension of State authority, the deployment of
security forces and the preservation of the country’s
territorial integrity. There is no doubt that this support
is an essential tool in addressing the ongoing political,

S/PV. 8422

security and humanitarian challenges to the Central
African Republic.
Finally, Ethiopia, Equatorial Guinea and Côte
d’Ivoire express their support for the Government of
the Central African Republic and encourage it and all
stakeholders to collaborate with the United Nations
system, including MINUSCA, in their efforts to resolve
the crisis with a view to restoring peace and lasting
stability to this brotherly country.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Central
African Republic.
Ms. Kpongo (Central African Republic) (spoke
in French): I congratulate you, Mr. President, on Côte
d’Ivoire’s assumption of the Council presidency this
month and thank you for organizing this meeting with
a view to adopting resolution 2448 (2018), renewing
the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA).
I express my heartfelt gratitude to all members
of the Security Council for their support in adopting
the resolution and the acute sense of responsibility
that accompanied their long consultations. I say this
because while we dither at the United Nations in
general, and in the Security Council in particular, the
reality on the ground is extremely serious and requires
our concerted attention.
As we noted on 23 October (see S/PV.8378) when
the Secretary-General presented his report (S/2018/922)
on the situation in the Central African Republic, the
situation remains fragile due to clashes among armed
groups, in particular ex-Séléka and anti-balaka factions.
Civilians, humanitarian workers and international
forces are caught up as targets in the spiral of this
violence. Despite calls for armed groups to lay down
their weapons and engage in the peace process, they
are responding with demonstrations of force, as we
witnessed in Ndélé in recent weeks.
I stress the relevance of paragraph 66 of the report,
which stresses the need to exert credible, adequate
and sustained military pressure to prevent any further
strengthening or expansion of the armed groups.
Unfortunately, we are now witnessing that sad reality.
Indeed, the latest unfortunate events in Batangafo,
Bambari, and especially in Alindao on 15 November

18-436497/9

S/PV.8422

The situation in the Central African Republic

and in Ippy on 4 December, where displaced person
sites were the targets of senseless, deadly attacks,
sufficiently demonstrate some of the limitations
of MINUSCA.
The persistence of conflicts has forced more than
1 million Central Africans to leave their homes due to
arson, the demolition of their homes or as a preventive
measure. As of 30 September, the Commission on
Population Movement reported 643,396 internally
displaced persons, while the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees reported
573,242 refugees in neighbouring countries. More
than half of the displaced are children. In 2018, an
increasing number of unaccompanied and separated
children — approximately 704 — were identified after
a forced displacement. The hardest hit categories of
populations are displaced persons, host families and
people living in conflict areas.
The Central African Republic continues to be
caught up in a cycle of violence that has spread to
various parts of the country, including areas that were
previously considered relatively stable. Abuses and
serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law continue to be perpetrated in a context
of impunity, exacerbating tensions in several parts of the
country. That has led to increasing humanitarian needs
and raised fears that the country may be plunging further
into humanitarian crisis. Civilians, particularly women
and children, continue to suffer the consequences of the
conflict, are increasingly exposed to safety risks and
have ever more pressing humanitarian needs. Today,
one in five people is a displaced person or refugee as a
result of abuses by armed groups.
The crisis is first and foremost one of protection
and requires all parties to commit to the protection of
civilians. Women and children continue to bear the
brunt of the violence. A growing number of women
have been victims of violence.
In view of the security challenges facing the
country, it is crucial to seriously consider the
deployment of the Forces armées centrafricaines
(FACA), which could reduce the bellicose fervour of
the armed groups where they are located. The decrease
in security breaches in Bangui, Bangassou, Paoua and
several prefectures in the west are due to the sizeable
joint deployment of FACA and MINUSCA troops. The
Central African Government calls on the Security
Council to authorize MINUSCA to provide logistical
8/9

13/12/2018

support for the redeployment of the FACA to garrisons
throughout the country.
It should be noted that to date, in addition to
the training of personnel by the European Union
Military Training Mission in the Central African
Republic (EUTM RCA), some neighbouring
countries — including Rwanda, Cameroon, Equatorial
Guinea, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Republic of the Congo — also provide training. We also
note that, at the bilateral level, the Russian Federation
has supported our forces in by providing weaponry
and combat training to elements previously trained by
EUTM RCA. Those troops are subsequently redeployed
to the field jointly with MINUSCA. The presence of
the Forces armées centrafricaines, equipped with their
working tools throughout the country, is a guarantee of
security for the civilian population, a defender of the
decentralized services of the State and an important
factor that can contribute to the country’s economic and
social development.
In addition to the renewing Mission’s primary
mandate, which focuses on certain priority tasks,
including support for the political and reconciliation
process and the protection of civilians, resolution 2448
(2018) confers on the Mission other equally important
tasks, such as involvement in the upcoming electoral
process, its integrated support for the African Initiative
and the inclusion of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General as a full member of the panel
of facilitators.
We warmly welcome those initiatives, and in
that context it is important to ensure that MINUSCA
is provided with the resources necessary to properly
fulfil its new mandate, which is a responsibility that
falls on all members of the Security Council and the
United Nations. For its part, the Government of the
Central African Republic reiterates its strong and
determined support for the African Initiative for Peace
and Reconciliation, under the leadership of the African
Union. The Government fully appreciates the proposal
to appoint a joint United Nations-African Union
Special Envoy.
I conclude by underlining our gratitude for the
mobilization of the Council and the entire international
community on behalf of MINUSCA and lasting peace
in the Central African Republic. We must strengthen
the progress made in several areas in order to advance
towards finding a solution to the crisis. We reiterate our
18-43649

13/12/2018

The situation in the Central African Republic

sincere thanks for the Council’s unwavering support
for President Touadera in his quest to turn the Central
African Republic into a country where life is good.
We continue to acknowledge the troop-contributing
countries whose nationals have lost their lives in the

S/PV. 8422

service of the United Nations for the protection of the
Central African population. We will always carry them
in our hearts.
The meeting rose at 3.55 p.m.

18-436499/9
