S/PV.7381

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7381st meeting

Thursday, 12 February 2015, 10.45 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Haniff
Mr. McLay
Mr. Laro
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

15-03941 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1503941*

S/PV.7381

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Qatar and
Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jamal
Benomar, Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on
Yemen, to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Benomar,
who is joining today’s meeting via video teleconference
from Sana’a.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to whom I now give
the floor.
The Secretary-General: We have all been following
recent developments in Yemen with the deepest
concern. As the Security Council knows, I have just
returned from Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates. Preventing civil war in Yemen was the main
political subject of my discussions with the leaders of
the two countries.
I met with the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques,
His Majesty King Salman bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud; the
Vice-President and Prime Minister of the United Arab
Emirates, His Highness Sheikh Mohammed Bin Rashed
Al Maktoum; Gulf Cooperation Council SecretaryGeneral Abdul Latif Al Zayani, and many other
leaders. They all expressed to me their serious concern
that the situation in Yemen may get significantly worse
unless we take more determined and concerted action.
In particular they called for a strong and unmistakable
signal to be sent to all parties that further acts aimed
at undermining the transition would not be allowed to
stand. I briefed them on the latest efforts by my Special
Adviser on Yemen, Mr. Jamal Benomar. We agreed to
work together even more closely going forward. I take
this opportunity to highly commend Special Adviser
Benomar for his leadership, hard work and commitment

2/6

12/02/2015

to facilitating the political negotiation under very
dangerous circumstances.
Let me be clear: Yemen is collapsing before our
eyes. We cannot stand by and watch. The country is
facing multiple challenges. A dangerous political crisis
continues in Sana’a. President Abdrabuh Mansour
Hadi, Prime Minister Khaled Bahah and Government
ministers and other State officials must be granted the
freedom of movement.
I am concerned by reports of excessive use of force
to disperse peaceful demonstrators and of the use of
arbitrary arrest and detention of civil society activists
and journalists. I call for the protection of human rights,
especially the rights to peaceful assembly and to the
freedom of expression.
There have been more widespread and lethal attacks
by Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula, with increasing
hostilities between that groups and the Houthis in
various provinces south of Sana’a, such as Damar and
Al Baydah.
There are increasing secessionist tendencies in the
south, and an acute humanitarian crisis. An astounding
61 per cent of the population — almost 16 million
people _ now need humanitarian assistance in Yemen.
These developments threaten regional and international
peace and security.
Given these troubling circumstances, we all have
a solemn obligation to live up to our commitments
under the Charter of the United Nations. We must do
everything possible to help Yemen step back from the
brink and get the political process back on track.
Yemen’s transition has an agreed road map. All
parties must abide by the common framework as set
forth in the Implementation Mechanism of the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative, the outcomes of the
National Dialogue Conference and the Peace and
National Partnership Agreement. I expect them to
refrain from any further provocations and to implement
these agreements in full and without any further
delays. To that end, my Special Adviser is facilitating
negotiations with all sides on a consensual and
peaceful way forward, under very difficult operational
circumstances. All Yemeni parties must engage in the
negotiations and cooperate in good faith.
I also call on the members of the Security Council
to provide their continued unified support to the
facilitation efforts of my Special Adviser. I also urge all

15-03941

12/02/2015

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7381

members to work closely with the members of the Gulf
Cooperation Council and other international partners to
take confidence-building steps with the Yemeni sides
to de-escalate tensions and pave the way for a peaceful
way forward through political negotiations.

ultimatum to conclude the United Nations-facilitated
negotiations within three days or else revolutionary
committees would take action. The 4 February deadline
passed without incident, and the negotiations moved
ahead.

First and foremost, our focus must be on helping the
Yemeni people to re-establish legitimate Government
authority as soon as possible. At this time of crisis, I
also call on Member States to increase their funding for
the 2015 humanitarian response plan. Such support will
be more urgently needed than ever before. This will be
essential for preventing an escalation of the conflict
and creating the basis for reverting to a peaceful
political transition, which I firmly believe is the only
way forward.

The United Nations-facilitated negotiations were
adjourned in essence late on the evening of 5 February,
with broad understanding among the parties on the
general contours of an agreement. The parties decided
to utilize the next day, 6 February, to resolve outstanding
issues through bilateral consultations and to enable
the United Nations to prepare a compromise text. The
plan was then to reconvene on 7 February with the aim
reaching a conclusion on an agreement.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Benomar.
Mr. Benomar (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council has made every effort to support a peaceful,
negotiated transition in Yemen. Over the past three
years, I have repeatedly warned the Security Council
about the dangers facing the transition process. Today,
I deeply regret to inform the Council that the transition,
which was widely heralded as a model, is now in
disarray.
Over the past few weeks, Yemen has witnessed
dramatic events. I have already briefed the Council
twice in the past three weeks. I will therefore not repeat
what I have already said, but will instead provide
a factual account of events since my last briefing on
26 January.
I have continued exercising the good offices of
the Secretary-General by convening negotiations on
a daily basis involving 12 political parties, including
Ansarallah, with a view to finding a consensual
solution to the current political impasse. As mediators,
we must maintain both our unique access to all sides
and our principled position as framed by the Charter of
the United Nations and international law. Today we are
navigating multiple minefields. There have been ups
and downs. Nevertheless, reasonable progress has been
made, with all sides cognizant of the need to swiftly
find a solution to restore public confidence.
In parallel to the negotiations under way, Ansarallah
organized a large three-day gathering in Sana’a that
concluded on 1 February. The gathering ended with an

However, on 6 February, in a surprising move,
Ansarallah took unilateral action. They organized a
gathering of their supporters at the Republican Palace
and made a so-called “constitutional declaration”.
That declaration pronounced that Parliament would be
dissolved, a five-member presidential council would
be formed and that a supreme revolutionary committee
would run the country temporarily.
The unilateral declaration has created strong
backlash domestically and internationally. Major
political parties have rejected it. The prevailing
political uncertainty and heightened security risks
have prompted key diplomatic missions to close and to
withdraw temporarily from Yemen.
I have made it crystal clear that I deeply regret the
unilateral action taken by Ansarallah, in particular
when good progress had been made in the negotiations.
As a representative of the Secretary-General, I have
also made it clear to all parties, including Ansarallah,
that the current political impasse can only be solved
through peaceful dialogue and negotiations, based on
the Implementation Mechanism of the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative, National Dialogue Conference
outcomes and the Peace and National Partnership
Agreement.
I consulted with the political parties. I also had
direct contact with Mr. Abdul Malik Al-Houthi, who
assured me that he welcomed a consensus-based
negotiated solution through United Nations facilitation.
I am pleased that all agreed to resume the negotiations.
Since the beginning of this week, we have been meeting
on a daily basis, and progress has been made. We are
still in the middle of delicate negotiations. Under
discussion are complex issues regarding governing

15-039413/6

S/PV.7381

The situation in the Middle East

arrangements during the transition period, including
both executive and legislative authorities. The parties
are considering power-sharing measures in a new
Government of national unity and mechanisms and
arrangements for enabling State security institutions to
re-assume their responsibility. In addition, the parties
are debating the means of preventing an outbreak of
hostilities in Ma’rib, and undertakings to ensure the
protection of fundamental human rights, such as the
rights to peaceful assembly and freedom of expression,
among others.
The situation in the oil-rich province of Ma’rib
is very tense. Many Yemenis fear that confrontation
between the Houthis and tribesmen could break out
at any time. In the south, the situation is volatile.
Southerners, who have suffered from many years of
discrimination and marginalization, have become more
assertive, with many demanding separation.
The current instability is creating conditions
conducive to the re-emergence of Al-Qaida in the
Arabian Peninsula. Even more concerning is the prospect
that Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula might establish
a foothold in parts of Abyan, Shabwah, Hadramawt
and Ma’rib. Today, Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula
has seized control of the 19th Infantry Brigade camp,
which houses a large arsenal of ammunition and heavy
weapons, in Bayhan and Shabwah.
The political uncertainty has created serious
pressure on the local currency, the riyal. If no political
settlement is secured in the coming days, a real
possibility exists that the riyal may collapse. Serious
concerns exist that the Government may be unable to
pay salaries in the next two to three months. That, in
turn, could prompt either a default on payments or an
increase in money supply — that is, money printing that
would cause severe devaluation and hyperinflation.
Should that happen, the current poverty rate of
54 per cent would increase further, and private sector
activities would be severely affected. Indeed, many
donors already have halted development aid, and others
are considering such action. That, in turn, would cause
most capital expenditures to cease and basic service
delivery to be interrupted, and tens of thousands could
lose their jobs. That could further impact the security
situation, with those unemployed joining armed groups
for monetary and financial reasons, and contribute to a
worsening of Yemen’s humanitarian needs.
An estimated 15.9 million people — or 61 per cent
of the population — need humanitarian assistance.
4/6

12/02/2015

The humanitarian response plan for 2015 is being
finalized this week and will request some $748 million
dollars to meet the needs of 8.2 million people. Of that
requirement, $285 million is for urgent life-saving and
protection assistance to the most vulnerable Yemeni
people. Humanitarian partners are concerned about
a possible expansion of conflict and the impact that
would have on the civilian population. The increased
political instability and risk of conflict could also
complicate humanitarian efforts to develop durable
solutions and sustainable livelihoods and to facilitate
Yemen’s progress towards recovery.
The transition has encountered serious obstacles in
the past, yet time and again Yemenis have managed to
forge ahead. Today, Yemen is at a crossroads: either the
country will descend into civil war and disintegrate, or
it will find a way to put the transition back on track. That
largely depends on the political will of Yemeni leaders.
They all bear responsibility for the current status of
affairs and for finding a way to pull the country back
from the brink.
The political, humanitarian and security environments
pose serious challenges for United Nations operations.
Nevertheless, the United Nations will not leave Yemen.
The United Nations reaffirms its commitment to
Yemen as it seeks to complete its political transition. In
that regard, we have been consulting and coordinating
closely with the Gulf Cooperation Council and other
international partners.
Yesterday marked the fourth anniversary of the
start of the peaceful demonstrations demanding change.
It was the courage of the young demonstrators that
opened the way for Yemenis to start a path to democratic
transformation. Despite all the setbacks, failures and
obstacles, that dream is still alive. Yemenis can still
achieve it. The Security Council and the international
community have a responsibility to support them in
these difficult times.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Mr. Benomar
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Four
years ago, on 11 February 2011, demonstrations took
place in all Yemen’s provinces. The demonstrations
grew, demanding a change and the creation of a
legitimate modern secular State founded on the basis of
the rule of law, respect for fundamental freedoms and
human rights. Since then, my country has experienced a
15-03941

12/02/2015

The situation in the Middle East

great deal of turbulence and a great many crises, which
could have plunged the country into anarchy were it not
for the grace of God, the support of our countrymen and
the limitless support offered to us by friendly countries.
The United Nations was present from the very outset,
through the good offices deployed by the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Adviser, Mr. Jamal Benomar.
He was able to organize very complex negotiations with
all political components and factions that led to the
signing, on 23 November 2011 in the brotherly Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia, of the Gulf Cooperation Council
(GCC) Initiative and Implementation Mechanism.
As the Council knows, the Initiative enabled
Yemen to avoid plunging into chaos. All components of
society have committed themselves to working through
a period of transition that should enable us to recreate
a secular, federal Yemeni State. The inclusive National
Dialogue Conference, one of the main components of
the GCC Initiative, enabled us to unite all political,
cultural and social components around one negotiating
table. The 10-month dialogue resulted in the wellknown outcome containing the recommendations of
the National Dialogue Conference, which represent
all the desired objectives the Yemeni people. After
the National Dialogue Conference ended, varying
interpretations of those elements emerged, giving rise
to differences among the various political components,
although the latter were able, on 21 September 2014, to
forge the Peace and National Partnership Agreement.
But the situation has deteriorated. His Excellency
President Abd Rabbo Mansour Hadi was forced to
resign, which led the various political components to
engage in consultations under the auspices of the Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General to reach a consensus
solution that would be acceptable to all parties. On
6 February, developments in the situation encouraged
all parties to act responsibly by granting priority to the
national interests, and to agree that consultations would
resume on 9 February. That was certainly necessary as
dialogue is the only possible way for Yemen to extricate
itself from the potential crisis.
We certainly appreciate the very constructive role
played by the Secretary-General through his Special
Adviser, Mr. Jamal Benomar, working alongside all
political components to achieve a consensus solution
to ensure that the country does not plunge into the
abyss. God preserve us from that. Yemen should not
be turned into a hotbed of tension, threatening the
region and the world. The situation could lead to civil

S/PV.7381

war, which would not benefit Yemen, the region or the
world. Consultations among Security Council members
should rapidly lead to measures that would enable us
to move forward towards achieving national consensus
and advancing the transition period.
I am compelled to refer to the very serious
humanitarian situation being endured by Yemenis. In
addition to hundreds of thousands of refugees from the
Horn of Africa and regions affected by conflict within
the country, millions of Yemenis live below the poverty
line. Statistics show that nearly 60 per cent live in
poverty, with record levels of unemployment, pushing
Yemen to the very brink of humanitarian catastrophe.
We invite the international community to provide
the necessary humanitarian assistance for Yemen in
2015. Yemen is commited to providing all necessary
protection to diplomatic and consular missions. We
cherish the hope that the friendly countries that have
closed their embassies in Sana’a will resume their
presence there as rapidly as possible.
In conclusion, I call upon the Security Council, all
our brotherly States of the GCC, all States that have
sponsored the Initiative, and all friends and brothers of
our country to continue to back the political process,
in keeping with the GCC Initiative and Implementation
Mechanism, the Peace and Partnership Agreement,
and the outcome of the National Dialogue Conference
to guarantee peace, security and stability, which will
contribute to the stability of the region and the world
as a whole.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf
of the States members of the Gulf Cooperation Council
(GCC) — the United Arab Emirates, the Kingdom of
Bahrain, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the Sultanate of
Oman, the State of Qatar and the State of Kuwait — I
should like first to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
China’s accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, and to thank you for convening
this meeting in order to respond to the dangerous
developments in Yemen. I also thank Mr. Jamal
Benomar, Special Adviser of the Secretary-General,
for his briefing and all his efforts to achieve a political
transition and strengthened stability in Yemen.
The events that have unfolded in recent weeks are
dangerous and unprecedented because the coup against
the legitimate Government in Yemen undermines the

15-039415/6

S/PV.7381

The situation in the Middle East

political and peaceful transition. It goes against the
highest interests of the people in Yemen at a time
when the country is facing economic and development
problems. Indeed, the current unacceptable escalation
is the result of the activities of the Houthis and their
sponsors, who have perpetrated a coup, occupied
legitimate Government and other institutions by force,
and kidnapped and placed elected officials — including
President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour and Prime
Minister Khaled Mahfoudh Abdullah Bahah — under
house arrest. This is unacceptable. They are using force
and flagrantly violating human rights, international
law and humanitarian law. They have terrorized the
people, committed arbitrary executions, threatened
young people, recruited followers and threatened the
livelihood, security and health of the people of Yemen.
Indeed, the activities undertaken by the Houthis and
their sponsors are a gross and egregious violation of
resolution 2140 (2014) and of international law.
In response to those events, on 21 January the
GCC convened an extraordinary ministerial summit
in Saudi Arabia. The meeting reaffirmed the fact that
the security of Yemen is intrinsic to the security of all
countries of the GCC. It pledged its full support for the
Yemeni people and condemned all terrorist activities.
The GCC also declared its rejection of the latest move of
the Houthis in issuing what they called a constitutional
declaration. We believe that the declaration constitutes
a violation of the GCC Implementation Mechanism,
which is the outcome of the Gulf Initiative, which in
turn was the result of the National Dialogue Conference
in which all parties took part. The Mechanism is also
supported by the Security Council. Therefore, we
believe that the recent move should be condemned and
that the Council should declare it illegal. We believe
that we should bring pressure to bear on the Houthis to
stop using force and withdraw from all governmental
institutions under their control. They should be asked to
normalize the security situation in Sana’a, the capital;
put an end to their armed activities; and return the
weapons they have looted from security and military
institutions.

6/6

12/02/2015

I believe that if the Security Council does not react
quickly enough or if it procrastinates, it will send a
reassuring message to the Houthis and their supporters
and encourage them to continue in their activities,
which will threaten international peace and security
and the security and political stability in Yemen.
We are confident that the Council will not adopt a
passive position towards these activities, because this
is a coup using force against an elected Government
and Parliament. We believe that the current state of
affairs will encourage Al-Qaida to carry out even more
activities in the region and will have a negative and
nefarious impact on the region and the world at large.
That is why we stand ready to give all possible
assistance to our brothers in Yemen to facilitate the
achievement of a political solution and implement the
GCC Initiative and Implementation Mechanism and
the outcomes of the comprehensive National Dialogue
Conference. We also hope that general elections will
be organized in Yemen in the near future. In order to
achieve these goals, the GCC shall support the efforts of
the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on Yemen
to promote an amicable agreement and to facilitate and
conclude the political transition in Yemen.
Finally, we call on the Security Council to promptly
react and address this situation. The GCC shall continue
coordinating our efforts with the Security Council in
order to ensure the implementation of resolution 2140
(2014) on Yemen to protect peace and stability in Yemen
and ensure its territorial integrity and independence. In
order to save Yemen from catastrophe, we would like
to state once again that Yemen’s territorial integrity
and stability are part and parcel of our own regional
security. We believe that we must make every effort to
protect Yemen’s vital interests.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

15-03941
