United Nations

S/PV.4319

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-sixth year

4319th meeting
Monday, 14 May 2001, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cunningham . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .

Mr. Ahsan
Mr. Wang Donghua
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Doutriaux
Mr. Ryan
Miss Durrant
Mr. Ouane
Mr. Neewoor
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Gatilov
Mr. Mahbubani
Mr. Jerandi
Mr. Kuchinsky
Sir Jeremy Greenstock

Agenda
The situation in Guinea following recent attacks along its borders with Liberia and
Sierra Leone
The situation in Sierra Leone
Letter dated 30 April 2001 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2001/434).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

01-37081 (E)

*0137081*

S/PV.4319

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of the former International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) President,
Judge Laïty Kama
The President: At the outset of this meeting, I
should like, on behalf of the members of the Security
Council, to express profound sorrow at the death of
Judge Laïty Kama, who served as President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda from 1995
to 1999. At the time of his death, he was serving as the
Presiding Judge in one of the trial chambers of the
Tribunal. Judge Kama was highly respected by his
fellow judges and was regarded as a father figure and a
leader who played a crucial role in the formative years
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
On this sad occasion, I should like to convey to
the Government and the people of Senegal and to the
bereaved family the Council’s profound condolences.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea following recent attacks
along its borders with Liberia and Sierra Leone
The situation in Sierra Leone
Letter dated 30 April 2001 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2001/434)
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend
invitations under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations; Mr.
Ibrahima Fall, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs; and Ms. Carolyn McAskie, Deputy Emergency
Relief Coordinator.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Guéhenno to take a seat at the
Council table.
I invite Ms. McAskie to take a seat at the Council
table.

2

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them a letter
dated 30 April 2001 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
transmitting the report of the Inter-Agency Mission to
West Africa, document S/2001/434.
I should like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to document S/2001/353, which contains
the text of a letter dated 11 April 2001 from the
Permanent Representative of Mali to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council, transmitting the final communiqué of the
Extraordinary Summit of Heads of State and
Government of the Economic Community of West
African States, held in Abuja on 11 April 2001.
Today the Security Council will hear briefings by
Mr. Guéhenno, Ms. McAskie and Mr. Fall.
At the end of those briefings, I will give the floor
to Council members who wish to make comments or
ask questions. I should like to invite them to indicate to
the Secretariat if they wish to take the floor.
I now give the floor to Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.
Mr. Guéhenno: As requested, I would like to
brief the Security Council on recent developments in
Sierra Leone and in the subregion, including progress
in the forward deployment of the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), various
meetings involving the United Nations, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
Government of Sierra Leone and the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF), and actions taken or being
envisaged by the parties and by UNAMSIL in
implementing the decisions of the recent review
meeting of the Abuja ceasefire Agreement.
First, I will touch on the political developments.
Since our last briefing to the Security Council, the
major political development was the meeting in Abuja
on 2 May 2001 of ECOWAS, the United Nations, the
Government of Sierra Leone and the RUF to review the
implementation of the Abuja ceasefire Agreement. The
review meeting was preceded on 1 May by a meeting
of the United Nations-ECOWAS-Government of Sierra
Leone coordination mechanism.

S/PV.4319

The review meeting was chaired by the Foreign
Minister of Mali and attended by UNAMSIL, the
Government of Sierra Leone, and an RUF delegation
led by Omrie Golley, Chairman of the RUF Political
and Peace Council. The meeting, which was held in a
frank but cordial atmosphere, resulted in a number of
important conclusions and decisions, as follows.
It was concluded that the ceasefire Agreement
had been largely observed, but that the Civil Defence
Forces (CDF) had violated it by attacking the RUF in
Tongo on 19 April. The Government of Sierra Leone
should exert the necessary control over the CDF in
order to avert future attacks which could jeopardize the
peace process. The Government of Sierra Leone was
called upon to extend its authority throughout the
country in the wake of UNAMSIL’s deployment.
There was a renewed commitment by the
Government of Sierra Leone and the RUF to remove all
roadblocks in areas under their control. The RUF
pledged to return, by 30 May 2001, all weapons and
equipment it had seized from UNAMSIL and
ECOMOG.
The meeting called for the simultaneous
disarmament of the CDF and the RUF, and a decision
was taken to set up a joint committee comprising
UNAMSIL, the Government of Sierra Leone and the
RUF, to meet in Freetown on 15 May to develop a firm
timetable and modalities for the implementation of the
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programme. The meeting also called on the RUF to
release all abductees, in particular child combatants,
and called on the two parties to create an atmosphere
conducive to the safe return of refugees and internally
displaced persons.
The review meeting also decided that in order to
stop the RUF incursions and the Guinean attacks, the
RUF would withdraw all its combatants from the
Kambia district and allow the Sierra Leone Army
(SLA) to deploy there. UNAMSIL, accompanied by
unarmed RUF observers, would mount increased
patrols in the district. The withdrawing RUF
combatants would be disarmed and screened for
absorption into the Sierra Leone army.
Confidence-building measures reached at the
meeting include the Government of Sierra Leone’s
declared intention and preparedness to address the
RUF’s political concerns, including releasing some
detained RUF officials; facilitating the complete

certification of the RUF as a political party; and
providing land or office space to the party in Freetown
and in the provinces.
The Abuja meeting constitutes a step in the right
direction. Obviously, the right balance will have to be
struck between giving the RUF the opportunity to
transform itself into a political entity, and maintaining
a strong posture for UNAMSIL. On balance, we
believe that, if properly implemented by both sides in
good faith, the Abuja meeting has the potential to
create the confidence needed to make further progress.
It is a first step.
The Government has set up a high-ranking task
force to oversee the implementation of the Abuja
meeting. The members of this task force will also
represent the Government at the meeting on the
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programme with the RUF, to be held tomorrow. The
RUF, in a meeting with Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Adeniji last Friday, 11 May,
reaffirmed its commitments, but also stressed the need
for more confidence-building measures. It also said it
was ready to welcome the deployment of the Sierra
Leone police in the areas now under the RUF’s control.
During the period under review, ECOWAS
leaders actively pursued their efforts to advance the
peace process in Sierra Leone. On 11 April, an
Extraordinary Summit meeting of ECOWAS Heads of
State was held in Abuja. That meeting called on the
Security Council to authorize and assist the deployment
of the ECOWAS Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) forces
along the borders of Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia.
It also set up a mediation committee, comprising the
Presidents of Mali, Nigeria and Togo, to encourage
dialogue between the Heads of State of Guinea, Liberia
and Sierra Leone, and it decided to dispatch an
ECOWAS mission to Liberia on 18 April to assess
Liberia’s compliance with the Security Council’s
demands in resolution 1343 (2001). I understand that
the Permanent Representative of Mali has kept the
Security Council well informed of these important
developments.
(spoke in French)
I should now like to touch on follow-up actions
by the parties and by UNAMSIL. In a meeting held at
Makeni on 6 May, the RUF military leaders
unanimously endorsed the Abuja decisions and
established
committees
to
oversee
follow-up

3

S/PV.4319

implementation of these decisions. In subsequent
meetings with UNAMSIL, RUF representatives
reiterated their leaders’ commitment to withdraw from
Kambia on 18 May, to release at least 200 child
combatants by 25 May, and to return all seized
weapons by 30 May. These undertakings by the RUF
are a positive development that need to be encouraged
and very closely followed up.
It is worth noting that the withdrawal of all RUF
combatants from the Kambia district would facilitate
efforts at repatriating Sierra Leonean refugees from
Guinea so that they can return home. Such a
withdrawal would also set a positive precedent for the
withdrawal of the RUF from other areas, particularly
the diamond-producing areas.
On 9 May, UNAMSIL organized a meeting with
the Government of Sierra Leone to prepare for the 15
May meeting between the RUF, the Government of
Sierra Leone and UNAMSIL, which will clarify
modalities and establish a firm timetable for the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process,
in keeping with a decision taken at the review meeting
of the Abuja ceasefire Agreement.
Turning to the deployment of UNAMSIL in areas
being held by the RUF, I should like to inform the
Council that, in keeping with its concept of operations,
UNAMSIL deployed into RUF-held areas, notably
Lunsar, Makeni and Magburaka, between 7 and 23
April. UNAMSIL has also continued to conduct
long-range patrols into these areas, including three
patrols to the Kono district, two of which took place at
night, enabling the area to be approached from both the
west and the east. One patrol was conducted from
Magburaka to Koidu, Konkoworo, Saima and Koardu,
which is 2 kilometres from the Guinea border. From the
east, the Guinean battalion patrolled from Daru to
Bumumbu, Benda Juma, Gandahun and Woama. Longrange patrols were also carried out three times to
Kailahun from Daru, as well as to Buedu.
The local people have warmly welcomed
UNAMSIL’s deployment and patrols, which had an
immediate and very positive effect on economic
activities in the areas concerned and on the return of
displaced persons. UNAMSIL is considering the
establishment of a permanent presence in Kambia and
Koidu.
The Pakistani contingent should start deploying at
the end of this month, with the arrival of an advance

4

party of 900 men. There will be several elements in the
Pakistani brigade, and the full contingent of about
4,500 should be on the ground by early September. The
Secretariat is also reviewing offers by Nepal and
Senegal, in particular with regard to the equipment of
their possible contingents.
(spoke in English)
I would now like to turn now to some ceasefire
violations. UNAMSIL has received reports of clashes
between the CDF and the RUF near Tongo fields on 19
April, and at Talia, 9 kilometres east of Mano Junction,
on 6 May. UNAMSIL’s investigations of the first report
of a ceasefire violation determined that the RUF
repelled an attack by CDF forces. At present, the
situation in the area has been stabilized, and civilians
that had fled to Kenema and Mano Junction have
started returning to their villages. UNAMSIL is still
investigating the second report of ceasefire violations.
Reportedly, the CDF had received orders from its
leadership in Freetown to recapture the Kono district
from the RUF. It should be borne in mind that the Kono
district is a key diamond-producing area. The RUF has
claimed that CDF attacks on their position in the Kono
district were carried out with the assistance of Guinean
forces. UNAMSIL has also received reports of artillery
and helicopter gunship attacks by Guinean forces on
RUF positions near the Sierra Leone-Guinea border. It
is hoped that the withdrawal of the RUF from Kambia
will bring these attacks to an end in that area. In the
meantime, we call on all parties involved to exercise
maximum restraint.
The extension of the authority of the Government
of Sierra Leone throughout the country has continued.
Members of the Council may recall that, in his ninth
report on UNAMSIL, the Secretary-General stressed
that the ongoing deployment of UNAMSIL troops is
being undertaken for the principal purpose of
facilitating the restoration of Government authority
throughout Sierra Leone. As a result of UNAMSIL’s
constant pressure on the RUF, Government education
and medical officials have conducted assessment visits,
and national school examinations will soon be
conducted in Makeni and elsewhere. The RUF also
agreed to, and actually called for, the deployment of
the Sierra Leone police force in Lunsar. The postal
service is also in the process of being restored in
Lunsar. However, the lack of resources and capacity on

S/PV.4319

the part of the Government remains a major constraint
in the efforts to extend civil administration.

Ms. McAskie’s mission to the countries of the Mano
River Union, respectively.

With regard to human rights, UNAMSIL forward
deployment upcountry also involved the opening of the
first human rights office in Kenema. This is part of the
efforts to establish a permanent human rights presence
in the provinces to undertake, inter alia, monitoring,
reporting, training and capacity-building in human
rights and international law, with emphasis on the
establishment of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission (TRC). In this regard, it is our intention to
augment the human rights section of UNAMSIL from
14 to 20 professionals.

The President: I now give the floor to
Ms. Carolyn McAskie, Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator.

Significant progress has been made towards
establishing the Truth and Reconciliation Commission,
with an initial assessment of the 54 nominations
received for the four national positions, and the
impending convening by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General of his statutory advisers,
representing the Inter-religious Council, the Council of
Paramount Chiefs and the international community
based in Sierra Leone. These advisers will assist him in
drawing up a shortlist.
Meanwhile, the High Commissioner for Human
Rights has identified three persons considered suitable
as international members of the Commission and is
currently ascertaining their availability. UNAMSIL is
also working with human rights non-governmental
organizations that have formed a TRC working group,
in order to reinforce the feeling of local ownership. A
sensitization campaign on the TRC is also under way.
On the issue of HIV/AIDS, I would like to point
out that the United Nations is stepping up its efforts to
raise the awareness of the troops on the ground with
regard to the risks of HIV/AIDS. UNAMSIL has
conducted sensitization seminars for its troops and
distributed condoms throughout the force and will
shortly be distributing HIV/AIDS awareness cards
designed specifically for peacekeepers, in coordination
with the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS.
Finally, I should like to refer to my colleagues in
the Department of Political Affairs and the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Assistant
Secretary-General
Ibrahima
Fall
and
Deputy
Emergency Relief Coordinator Carolyn McAskie, who
will brief members on the recommendations of the
recent Inter-Agency Mission to West Africa and

Ms. McAskie: I am very pleased indeed to brief
the Council on my recent mission, particularly in
conjunction with my colleagues Mr. Guéhenno and
Mr. Fall, as I think this is a good example of how all
parts of the United Nations Secretariat are working
very closely to address the very complex situation that
is developing in that region.
In accordance with the Council’s request, we
attempted to provide some maps through the use of the
overhead projector, but this room does not lend itself to
that; we tried, but they were absolutely impossible to
read. We do have a map handout, which I have been
told will be with us in a moment. I will have that
circulated, hopefully while we are speaking.
Between 17 and 25 April, I visited the three
Mano River Union countries of Guinea, Sierra Leone
and Liberia. The primary objective of the mission was
to make an assessment of the humanitarian situation in
the subregion and to evaluate the humanitarian
coordination mechanisms among and within the three
countries of the Mano River Union. This was seen as
essential in view of the regional dimension of the
present crisis, the recent changes to the structure of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL),
as well as the findings of the visit undertaken by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and the recent interdisciplinary
mission to West Africa led by my colleague, Mr. Fall.
In addition, the Secretary-General requested that,
during my visit, I collect views and information
relevant to this Council’s request for a response to
paragraph 9 of its resolution 1346 (2001), in particular
on the question of how to take forward the issue of
refugees and internally displaced persons in and around
Sierra Leone, including their return to safe areas.
I was accompanied by one of our major donors,
Ambassador Marika Fahlén, the Swedish Ambassador
for humanitarian affairs, along with staff of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. I should
add that I found it extremely useful for the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to travel to a

5

S/PV.4319

country such as Sierra Leone, where there is a major
peacekeeping mission, and I am recommending that we
do this more often.
In Guinea, we benefited from the fact that we
arrived at the same time as the United Kingdom
Secretary of State for International Development,
Ms. Claire Short, and Mr. Charles Josselin, French
Minister for Francophonie and Cooperation, who were
visiting the region. Again, this was very useful.
I met with senior officials of all three
Governments: in Guinea, the Prime Minister; in Sierra
Leone, the Minister for Foreign Affairs; and in Liberia,
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Planning and the
Joint Presidential Committee on Humanitarian Affairs.
In all three countries, I consulted, of course, as usual,
with the United Nations country team, nongovernmental organizations, local civil society and the
media.
It is painfully evident that the regional approach
being developed is absolutely the right one, particularly
among the three countries of the Mano River Union.
The major finding of my mission is the extent to which
the crisis in each of the three countries is fuelling
crises in the neighbouring countries. There is not a
single border that is not affected, exacerbating the
humanitarian crises with humanitarian consequences
and making it painfully evident that the solutions to
these crises must be looked at in an interrelated way.
Let me deal specifically with the three countries,
very briefly. In Guinea, we found a nation which, after
years of dealing with the spillover from the war in
Sierra Leone and the cost of that, is now, unfortunately,
facing a humanitarian crisis of its own, with numbers
of between 200,000 and 300,000 internally displaced
persons. The further deterioration of the situation in
Liberia may well increase that number. We travelled to
the Languette area — or Parrot’s Beak, as it is known
in Sierra Leone — Kissidougou and Gueckedou, and
we visited camps in the region, including transit
centres in Conakry.
What was painfully obvious, in addition to the
regional nature of the crisis, was the fact that there is a
real dearth of strategic information from one country to
the next. We found that the lack of information inside
Guinea as to what the situation is in neighbouring
countries has often given rise to proposals for the full
return of refugees to their countries of origin. Our
assessment is that conditions for a return to Sierra

6

Leone or Liberia do not exist at this time. We were
very pleased to receive assurances from the Guinean
Government that it is fully committed to meeting its
obligations under the Convention for refugees and, in
fact, is working very closely with UNHCR in its twotrack approach. The two-track approach, of course, is
the dual one of assisting refugees close to the border to
relocate to secure areas deeper within Guinea, while
providing assistance to those who are making their way
voluntarily across the borders. In fact, UNHCR, with
the full support of the Government of Guinea, has the
exercise of moving refugees away from the Languette
well under way; 40,000 have been relocated so far and
they anticipate completing that some time within the
next 10 days.
What we found, however, is that this relocation,
along with news of an improved situation in Sierra
Leone, has also spurred an increase in attempts by
some to return to southern Sierra Leone via areas held
by the Revolutionary United Front (RUF). This is
placing an enormous burden on the humanitarian
community and in fact is creating serious difficulties
for the refugees, who find that their return home is not
an easy one. Refugees are being stopped as they cross
through RUF territory, as the RUF is intent on
registering them. We heard first-hand reports of goods
being stolen and the United Nations on the ground is
investigating the claims made by international nongovernmental organizations that refugees have, in fact,
actually been attacked.
Within Sierra Leone, I would say that there are
five main issues which characterize the humanitarian
situation. First, the community is trying to deal with
the spontaneous returnees, including those who
returned under a planned programme from Conakry to
Freetown. About 55,000 have returned so far and we
expect that those numbers could easily reach 100,000
over the next few weeks. The resettlement of internally
displaced persons in their own villages that are now
safe has begun, but, in addition, there is the potential
for further displacement as the RUF withdraws from
Kambia. Continued relief will be needed for some
400,000 internally displaced persons within the
country. Now, in an unfortunate irony, Sierra Leone is
having to deal with an influx of Liberian refugees
across the border into areas to which the humanitarian
community has judged there to be no room for Sierra
Leone refugees to return. Thus, we are trying to stop
the flow of refugees from Sierra Leone into the south-

S/PV.4319

eastern part of the country and yet we are now faced
with a potential influx of Liberians across the Mano
River itself.

but tangible proof that this would be the case, as we
have not, as members know, had good experiences in
the past.

Within Sierra Leone, it will be recalled that the
Deputy Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral was recently appointed as Humanitarian
Coordinator within UNAMSIL. This was a difficult
decision, but is, in my mind, a very positive
development. The Humanitarian Coordinator will need,
however, to work very closely with those members of
the humanitarian community who are non-United
Nations to assure the broader humanitarian community
that this does not mean any reduction of attention to
their needs. The current individual has been requested
to report back once he has been on the job for a few
weeks, with a view to determining whether the
presence of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs should be strengthened in
support, given the fact that the Deputy Special
Representative carries with his title a very long list of
complex responsibilities, including issues relating to
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and to
governance.

One of the issues we raised as a sign of good faith
is the release of the child soldiers, as well as the girls.
Whenever we talk about the child soldiers, I have
asked the humanitarian community also to emphasize
that girls are being abducted.

What we found is that, over the past few months,
there has developed a noticeably improved relationship
between UNAMSIL and the humanitarian community,
and we were very pleased to acknowledge this. The
humanitarian operations have benefited somewhat from
UNAMSIL logistics capacity. This is welcomed and we
would look for opportunities to increase it.
The mission visited camps for internally
displaced persons. We saw the first internally displaced
persons returning to their own villages — a real sign of
hope. We visited one of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration camps, though it had
very few people in it, and we saw, in the South-West,
some returned refugees being resettled in areas which
are not their homeland, as their homes in the North are
still behind RUF lines.
In Makeni, we met with the RUF leadership, Issa
Sesay and his colleagues. The message that we gave to
the RUF from the point of view of the humanitarians
was to request free and safe access for humanitarian
staff and freedom to undertake assessments and
provide assistance without escort in these areas. I made
it clear that the ability of the humanitarian community
to access areas behind the RUF line would require not
just their word, as they insisted that we would be safe,

I just had word this morning that, apparently, the
RUF has released 97 children to the non-governmental
organization Caritas, in Makeni. I do not know how
many are boys and how many are girls, but this first
release of 97 children is a very good sign.
One of the issues for Sierra Leone that will be
extremely difficult, with the strengthening of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL)
and the hope for a return to a secure environment
within the country, is the extent to which the
Government will be able to resume services. The
humanitarian community is already extremely
overstretched; we have received about 25 per cent of
the funds requested in the consolidated appeal, and we
have been making another appeal for funds to assist in
the humanitarian effort. What we have to remember is
that, as the Government tries to restore services,
government workers themselves are among the
displaced: in the refugee camps in Guinea you find
professionals and government workers, and the
Government, at number 175, is already the lowest on
the Human Development Index scale. That, plus the
ravages of war, will mean that plans to reinstate
government services as UNAMSIL moves forward will
require enormous assistance to the Government:
capacity-building and resources.
The situation in Liberia — unlike that in Sierra
Leone, where you could say that there are strong signs
of hope — is more one of growing despair. The sense
was that the political and military situation was rapidly
deteriorating. The Mission itself, in fact, remained in
Monrovia as it was unsafe to travel to areas affected by
the crisis. Newly displaced persons were featured on
the front pages of the local papers every day, along
with the country’s preoccupation with the sanctions,
particularly as we were there just a few days after the
visit of the Chairman of the Council’s sanctions
Committee, Ambassador Mahbubani. We met with
opposition parties as well as with members of the
Mano River Women’s Peace Network, all of whom are

7

S/PV.4319

seriously concerned about the possibilities of Liberia
falling back into a state of civil war. It was reported to
us that the two main rebel groups, ULIMO-K and
ULIMO-J, which in the past have been fighting each
other, had formed an alliance and that in response
President Taylor is mobilizing the National Patriotic
Front of Liberia, the group that was disarmed in 1997
and 1998.
There is fighting all along the border of northern
Lofa county — the county that borders South-East
Sierra Leone and South-West Guinea. That fighting has
increased the number of internally displaced within
Liberia; the figure we have been given is between
60,000 and 80,000, of which one third to one half have
been created in the past three to four weeks. The
Liberian Refugee, Repatriation and Resettlement
Commission estimates that there are still, in addition,
some 160,000 Liberian refugees in the region and
about 75,000 Sierra Leone refugees in Liberia, of
whom about 50 per cent are receiving assistance from
UNHCR, while the rest are inaccessible. As I
mentioned, some of the Liberians are now fleeing
across the Mano river into Sierra Leone, and it is
conceivable that some Sierra Leone refugees within
Liberia may possibly return with them. The
Government is appealing for assistance, and Liberia
was covered in the West African regional consolidated
appeal, which was launched a month and a half ago at
Geneva. But so far we have received a very small
amount: about 8 per cent of that appeal has been
funded so far.
Let me mention one or two quick conclusions,
and then one or two recommendations from the visit.
First of all, I have thrown out a lot of numbers. The
numbers are extremely confusing; they change from
week to week; they change as people move; and they
change as we get better access and as we estimate
better. So I apologize if the numbers that members
have now are not the numbers they had before; that is
the reason: when you are dealing with problems of
displacement, that is the risk we run. The overall
estimate, however, is that with refugees and displaced
persons, we are dealing with something between 1
million and 1.5 million people in the three countries of
the Mano River Union.
As I said at the outset, the Mission confirmed the
need for the United Nations to address the situation in
that part of the world from a perspective fully informed
by the regional dynamic. An understanding of the

8

regional interplay among the three countries members
of the Mano River Union is critical to addressing the
volatile humanitarian situation in Sierra Leone, Liberia
and now, unfortunately, Guinea.
In that connection, we confirmed that
coordination, information exchange and analysis
required strengthening not just on a country basis but
on a regional basis. Assistance needs are still extremely
high, not just for refugees but for the growing number
of internally displaced persons.
While events in Sierra Leone give cause for
encouragement, developments in the two neighbouring
countries give much cause for concern. And the
encouraging news in Sierra Leone brings its own
problems: the problems of the reinstatement of
Government authority and the enormous costs that will
go along with that if we are to sustain the growing
security in the country.
In terms of the recommendations of the Mission,
it is our recommendation that a subregional capacity
should be established by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) to
provide mechanisms to facilitate the exchange and
analysis
of
strategic
information,
including
Geographical Information System (GIS) data, on
developments in the subregion between the United
Nations and its partners in Guinea, Sierra Leone and
Liberia, and to support subregional contingency
planning and resource-mobilization efforts. That
presence should be linked to the proposed United
Nations office for West Africa, although, depending on
the ultimate location of that office, the OCHA element
need not be co-located with the political office, as the
OCHA office must be based in one of the countries in
crisis.
There is also an urgent need to enable United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations
to provide aid to internally displaced persons and host
communities through funding of the consolidated
appeal process for West Africa and UNHCR. I would
also add that there is a need for donors to support the
Mano River Women’s Peace Network as part of the
effort. We talk a lot about the role of women in peacebuilding, and here we have an opportunity to do
something practical about it.
In addition, OCHA will strengthen its presence in
Guinea and in Liberia, and recommends very strongly
that the international community continue to support

S/PV.4319

UNHCR’s two-track
refugees in Guinea.

approach

for

Sierra

Leone

Finally, pending the resolution of the mechanism
to ensure increased access to UNAMSIL logistics
capacity for humanitarian actors, we are calling on
donors to increase their support for the World Food
Programme (WFP) logistics operation in Sierra Leone.
The relief agencies use WFP helicopters for
assessments and medical evacuations.
Finally, funding is needed also to build the
Government’s capacity to extend basic services to
newly liberated areas. The grave situation of internally
displaced persons, refugees and other vulnerable
communities is exacerbated by endemic poverty and
inadequate government capacity, as well as by the
chronically low international response to appeals for
international assistance.
The President: I give the floor to Mr. Ibrahima
Fall, Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs.
Mr. Fall (spoke in French): Members of the
Council will recall that on 10 April, following the
Mission I had the privilege of leading to West Africa, I
had a first opportunity to brief the Council on that
Mission and to share the details of its terms of
reference, its planning, its unfolding, and its major
findings.
We have often described the West African project
as consisting of three essential aspects: the Mission
itself, the report and, finally, the implementation of the
recommendations. We could say that today we are at
the most critical phase of this three-part project. That
is, the time has come to implement the
recommendations contained in the report.
This is why the Task Force that was set up by the
Secretary-General even before sending the Mission to
West Africa is in the process of continuing to meet and
reviewing the practical ways and means of
implementing the recommendations. This is also why
we have been in communication with the major
potential partners and have sought their viewpoints on
the implementation of the recommendations so that
from the outset there can be a dialogue with all those
involved
in
implementing
the
Mission’s
recommendations.
The recommendations that have been submitted
to the Council cover several aspects. Some of them
come within the direct purview of the Security Council,

and today I would like to focus my briefing on the
recommendations that are of direct interest to the
Security Council. Our departments, services and
agencies are currently identifying who can be
responsible for which recommendations, in accordance
with what timetable and on the basis of what practical
modalities.
In this connection, I would like to emphasize
three categories of recommendations that are of direct
interest to the Security Council. The first is
recommendations on the impact of conflicts on four
West African countries, most of which are to be found
in the Mano River Union. Thus, I think that these
recommendations are complementary to the briefings
just made by my colleagues. The second category of
recommendations includes institutional arrangements
made by the Inter-Agency Mission. Finally, the third
category of recommendations relates to issues that
transcend borders and that call for the Security
Council’s special attention.
The first category relates primarily to the current
deadlock in the dialogue among the various heads of
State in the Mano River subregion. The Council will
recall that, as Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno has
just said, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) recently held a summit in Abuja,
and it established a mediation committee at the level of
heads of State, including those of Mali, Togo and
Nigeria. These heads of State were chosen because
Mr. Konaré is the current Chairman of ECOWAS,
Mr. Eyadema is the current Chairman of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and
Mr. Obasanjo is the President of the country most
involved in peacekeeping in West Africa. I must note
that, in spite of this initiative, it has not yet been
possible to have the three heads of State sit down at the
same table for discussions. Even the idea of organizing
a preparatory meeting of the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of these three countries has not received a
positive response from all the potential partners. This
means that the situation has continued to deteriorate
since the time of the Mission that I led to West Africa.
In the report we suggest that the members of the
Security Council, together with the members of
ECOWAS, see to it that such a dialogue can be
established.
That
is
why
I
reiterate
this
recommendation, especially to members of the Security
Council that might have some influence on one or more
of the heads of State concerned. It is obvious that the

9

S/PV.4319

deteriorating military situation, especially with the
worsening of the situation in Liberia, now allows us,
paradoxically, to begin a dialogue on a basis that might
be much more durable. Along with this, it would be
desirable for the Security Council once again to appeal
to and urge the three heads of State to open a dialogue.
The second aspect focused on in the report is the
situation in Sierra Leone. After the briefings given by
my two colleagues, I shall not address the relaunching
of the peace process or the humanitarian situation,
except perhaps to emphasize that within the framework
of the outcome of the recent Abujan Summit, which
has opened there a window of opportunity for
relaunching the peace process, it is important to plan
elections in Sierra Leone at the end of the year, taking
into account all dimensions and implications. In fact,
the Mission was of the view that due to the prevailing
situation in Sierra Leone it was, at the very least,
premature to consider organizing elections in Sierra
Leone by the end of the year, for much of the country
is under de facto rule by the Revolutionary United
Front (RUF) and much of the population consists of
internally displaced persons and refugees abroad.
Regarding Guinea, the Mission suggested the
holding of an international conference to mobilize
funds in order to help Guinea cope with its
humanitarian and social situation. The Council will
recall that in 1999 an initial round table was held.
Unfortunately, the plan to hold a second international
conference did not materialize, first of all because of
the prevailing political situation in Guinea, and also
because of the deteriorating situation in the Mano
River Union. The Mission is of the view that in the
face of the current threat to stability in the country, and
because of the long-standing impact of refugees there,
where they make up as much as 10 per cent of the total
population, Guinea, which furthermore has been
making
outstanding
efforts
to
improve
its
macroeconomic situation — as the Bretton Woods
institutions acknowledge — deserves greater support.
This is why the Mission reiterates its proposal to hold
such an international conference.
With regard to Guinea-Bissau, which is
geographically outside the Mano River Union, the
prevailing precarious and unstable situation in the
country resulted from a lengthy crisis that occurred in
three stages — the overthrow of the legal Government
of President Nino, the establishment of a long period of
transition dominated by the military and, finally, the

10

organization of presidential and legislative elections to
install a new regime — and has left its mark on the
economic and social structure of the country. Political
instability in particular continues. There is also
economic instability due, on the one hand, to the
decline of the country’s resources, especially the price
of cashews, which has fallen 40 per cent on the
international market, and further, to the fact that donors
have not followed up the commitment they made in
1998 to assist the country. The situation is extremely
fragile. We believe that because of this, and because of
the traditional conditions imposed by financial
institutions on countries emerging from crises, it is
important to organize an international conference on
financing for development and for urgent humanitarian
needs in Guinea-Bissau.
Finally, with regard to Côte d’Ivoire, the Mission
determined that the economic situation should be taken
into account not just as it exists in the country but also
as it has effects beyond its borders. That is to say,
account must be taken of the economic impact of the
Côte d’Ivoire on other countries of the subregion in
general and on those of the West African Economic and
Monetary Union in particular, as Côte d’Ivoire’s
economy represents 40 per cent of the economic power
of the Union. That is why the Mission proposed here
that — in tandem with the pressure and influence
exerted upon the Government of Côte d’Ivoire to bring
it to engage effectively in a dialogue leading to
national reconciliation — it is important to ensure that
the economic and financial crisis of Côte d’Ivoire not
be made worse so as not to further exacerbate its effect
on the Economic and Monetary Union. That is also
why we have also called here for assistance from the
international community.
It turns out that since our Mission ended, the
international commission of inquiry set up by the
Secretary-General has also returned to New York. It is
now in the process of drafting its report and
conclusions on the grave violations of human rights
that took place during the presidential election. The
commission believes that it should be able to submit its
report by the end of the month. Nothing in the talks we
have had with the Chairman of the commission
interferes with the proposal our Mission has made for
the holding of a meeting in support of Côte d’Ivoire.
Those are the recommendations in the first
category. With regard to recommendations in the
second category — namely, those having to do with

S/PV.4319

institutional arrangements — there are essentially two
types.
First of all, the Mission proposed the
establishment of a United Nations office for West
Africa. This is the logical result of the overall approval
garnered for the idea the Council itself initiated after
its mission to the countries of the Mano River Union
last October. The mission received guidelines from the
Secretary-General to consider an overall subregional
and integrated approach to West Africa’s problems,
rather than continuing to act on a sectoral and countryby-country basis. Following the general approval for
such an approach, we proposed the establishment of a
United Nations office for West Africa. The
competencies of that office were clearly set out in the
report and in the recommendations, so I do not feel
there is a need to revisit them.
Since the Mission took place we have shared the
report with the United Nations Economic Commission
for Africa, the Organization of African Unity (OAU),
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the World Bank, the European Union,
United Nations country teams in the field and other
partners. We have done so in order to get their views,
observations and recommendations with regard to
implementing the proposal to create a United Nations
office for West Africa. Of course, comments and
concerns may be expressed with regard to the risk of
bureaucratization of that office. The Mission has
clearly thought about all the implications of setting up
such an office. The office should have as its principal
role gathering, harmonizing and using the synergies
that exist between United Nations bodies already in the
field and other partners so as to create the dynamics for
an overall, integrated approach to cope with West
Africa’s priority needs. This is why the Mission
believes that the office should not simply be an office
that swallows up funds, but one which would have the
minimum number of necessary staff. We hope that the
Council will express to the Secretary-General its
support for the creation of the office.
The second recommendation of an institutional
nature is to create an inter-agency working group. As I
have said, such a group already existed before the
Mission’s trip to the field. But there is today a need to
give it a much more solid foundation, as there is a need
to deal with the economic and financial consequences
of such an expanded base.

Those are the institutional recommendations. I
now come to the last category of recommendations,
those having to do with the most important transborder questions.
The first recommendation has to do with
peacekeeping and security operations in the Mano
River Union region. In that regard, during our Mission
we took note of concerns expressed by ECOWAS heads
of State facing the need to envisage, in the overall
context of an integrated approach, the peacekeeping
and security operations in particular in the region of the
Mano River Union, in a way that takes the
interrelationships into account. I need not repeat here
what was said by Ms. McAskie, who a while ago
stressed the need to take into account the humanitarian
aspect in this interrelationship and who believed that it
would be difficult to deal with humanitarian problems
on a country-by-country basis.
It is exactly in that context that we must place the
proposal made by several of our interlocutors, and
which we echo, to expand the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) to
include Guinea and Liberia. According to those with
whom we spoke, doing so would not only help in
dealing with the problems of Sierra Leone but would
also create the necessary conditions for monitoring the
situation on the borders between Guinea and Sierra
Leone and Guinea and Liberia.
The Mission had no doubts about the very
controversial nature of this proposal and felt itself
duty-bound to report on it to those concerned. Since
our arrival, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Political Affairs
have worked together on this idea, which will require
further analysis. But we should recall once again that
the proposal was made in the context of an integrated
subregional approach, which was the reason why our
mission was sent to the field.
The second recommendation concerns national
reconciliation. Many of us have noted that, in most of
the countries of West Africa, it is the absence of
dialogue and national reconciliation that has led to
marginalization and exclusion, which in turn are
conducive not only to triggering conflicts but also to
aggravating existing ones.
For all of these reasons, we believe that the
United Nations Office for West Africa should focus its
conflict-prevention and conflict-settlement activities on

11

S/PV.4319

the issue of national reconciliation. In this connection,
we were struck by the decisive contribution made by
women’s movements to the promotion of negotiated
settlements, in particular among member States of the
Mano River Union. In her report, Ms. McAskie
stressed the role of women’s organizations, so I do not
need to dwell on this any further.

In this connection, I should like to remind the
Council that one of the conclusions reached the Abuja
meeting, to which Mr. Guéhenno has just referred,
concerns the resumption of the demobilization and
disarmament process in Sierra Leone, and the fact that
perhaps lessons should be learned, so that this time
sufficient resources can be allocated to this process.

I would, however, like to note that goodwill is the
only
resource
available
to
these
women’s
organizations. They are cruelly lacking in funds and in
capacity. Aware of the impact they might have on the
process of the prevention and settlement of conflicts, I
cannot fail to appeal to the international community as
a whole, and to the Council in particular, for consistent
assistance to these civil society groups.

The next element concerns the proliferation of
arms. This is a well-known issue, and, as we are only a
few weeks away from the holding here in New York of
the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, let
us simply recall the efforts made in West Africa by
ECOWAS in the framework of its moratorium to stop
the circulation of arms and monitor them.

The third element is disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration. Our mission was struck by the
criticism made in West Africa of the United Nations. It
was said that we tended to arrive too late and to adopt
mandates that were not in keeping with realities, and
that, as soon as a peace agreement was concluded, we
were too hasty in withdrawing. Finally, and most
importantly, it was said that the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement process
was very often botched because of a lack of financial
resources.

That is why the mission proposed that States
Members of the United Nations, and in particular
members of the Security Council, become more
involved with ECOWAS in this process. The mission
even proposed that sanctions be considered against
those States that might contravene this moratorium, be
they States in the subregion or States that provide arms
outside the region.

Those we spoke with noted that, both in Liberia
and in Sierra Leone, the aborted disarmament and
demobilization process was one of the reasons for the
resumption, prolongation or worsening of conflicts in
West Africa. Indeed, abandoned to their fate, the excombatants, most of them young people, after a few
months’ wait have no other option than to take up arms
once again. Moreover, in an economic environment of
absolute poverty, if a consistent reinsertion and
rehabilitation programme is not contemplated, there is
a real risk that the international community, rather than
being part of the solution to the problem, could be
responsible for its aggravation.
That is why we appeal for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process to be
considered in a much broader context. It should be
considered from a geographical perspective, so as to
involve countries that are interconnected, as is the case
with the Mano River Union, but also from an economic
and social perspective, in order to contemplate the
long- and medium-term reinsertion, of the former
combatants, especially young boys and girls.

12

The penultimate point on which specific crossborder proposals have been made is the problem of
peacekeeping operations. Here we wish to emphasize
in particular the circumstances under which several
West African countries have been urged to take part in
peacekeeping operations. In this connection, we wish
to reiterate what was said by most of those we spoke
with: that the United Nations propose to West African
countries, when they take part in peacekeeping
operations, that they choose the option whereby it is up
to the countries themselves to provide troops, but up to
the United Nations to provide the equipment. This is
what we call “dry” leasing. This option is much more
in keeping with the financial resources available to the
countries of the subregion. Experience in Sierra Leone
has shown that those countries that opted for “wet”
leasing were not able to comply with their obligations
regarding equipment levels.
Since
our
arrival,
the
Department
of
Peacekeeping Operations has been considering this
issue, with a view to further discussions. We hope that
those discussions will give rise to proposals that might
finally solve this problem — which, as a matter of fact,
is often used as a reason for saying that West African

S/PV.4319

countries do not have the necessary equipment to take
part in peacekeeping operations.

delegation believes deserve special attention within the
context of our discussion today.

Finally, a last proposal on cross-border matters.
The United Nations Office in West Africa should
strongly focus on the question of good governance and
human rights, especially in the context of the
prevention, management and settlement of conflicts
and of post-conflict peace-building. Indeed, human
rights violations and poor governance often serve as
the trigger for crises. In this context, it is important for
the United Nations office, working together with
ECOWAS institutions, to play a much more active role
in terms of preventive diplomacy.

First of all, there is an urgent need to resolve the
question of refugees and displaced persons. This matter
was clearly set out by Ms. McAskie, and I would
merely like to emphasize that we, too, believe that it is
imperative to guarantee safe access to refugees and to
promote conditions to facilitate their return to safe
areas in their countries of origin. In this context, we
support the recommendation on strengthening the
presence in Guinea and Liberia of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs with a view to
supporting efforts to meet the growing humanitarian
needs in the West African subregion. Neither can we
fail to endorse the appeal to the international
community and the Governments concerned to support
the actions of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to facilitate the
relocation and voluntary return of Sierra Leonean
refugees in Guinea.

Those are a few of the major recommendations
made by the Mission that I had the honour of
leading — recommendations relating to the countries
particularly affected by the crisis in West Africa,
recommendations of an institutional nature, and crossborder recommendations on priority issues in West
Africa.
The President: I thank Mr. Fall for his briefing
and his summary of the Mission’s recommendations.
I would now like to open the floor for discussion
and comment by members of the Council.
Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): I should
like first of all to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing a public meeting of the Security Council to
consider the overall situation in West Africa. In this
regard, we are grateful to Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
and Ms. Carolyn McAskie, Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for their very useful statements. They
both described a situation that has already been set out
in a straightforward and lucid manner in the excellent
report provided by Mr. Ibrahima Fall, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs.
On the one hand, the report shows very clearly
that the problems facing West Africa are not only
national, but transnational in nature, as the
repercussions of the Sierra Leonean conflict fully
demonstrate. On the other hand, it clearly identifies the
enormous development needs in the subregion and
formulates practical, relevant and, we believe, viable
recommendations.
I should like, on the basis of those two
observations, to emphasize the elements that my

I wish to focus on the need to find lasting
solutions with regard to the priority needs and
problems of West Africa.
First of all, there is a need for peace. As Council
members know, for more than a decade the West
African subregion has been convulsed by many
conflicts whose repercussions include, in particular, the
progressive deterioration in relations between countries
in the Mano River Union. I shall not repeat here all the
initiatives and actions taken by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to try
to resolve these conflicts. I shall confine myself to
stressing the commitment of ECOWAS to finding a
comprehensive political solution involving all the
countries concerned and their partners. I should like, in
passing, to thank Mr. Guéhenno and Mr. Fall for
speaking about this.
Thus, with regard to the situation in Sierra Leone,
it is important — as stipulated in Security Council
resolution 1346 (2001) — that all the parties to the
Sierra Leone conflict intensify their efforts towards the
peaceful implementation of the Abuja Ceasefire
Agreement of 10 November 2000. That reference is
important to us, because we also believe that military
pressure is not enough to bring about a lasting solution
to the Sierra Leonean conflict and its worrying
consequences, in particular the continuation of armed

13

S/PV.4319

raids along the borders of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra
Leone.
As we know, however, peace is not just the
absence of war. There must also be a viable political
and economic framework, that is, the construction and
consolidation of a State based on law, the promotion of
education and health policies and measures to combat
poverty — in short, good governance.
In this regard, it is necessary to strengthen
security and promote economic development within
each country as well as among the countries in the
subregion. In this context, it is essential to strengthen
the local conflict-prevention capability, in particular
through the Mano River Women’s Peace Network,
which Ms. McAskie mentioned, and, more generally,
through the ECOWAS early-warning mechanism,
which is designed to collect and process data through
offices opened in Banjul, Cotonou, Monrovia and
Ouagadougou, and its Moratorium on the Importation,
Exportation and Manufacture of Small Arms and Light
Weapons in West Africa.
It is also essential to provide the countries
concerned with a means of speeding up the peace
process, in particular by implementing disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes. This
was the case in Mali, for example, where, in the wake
of an armed rebellion in the north of the country, the
authorities helped to integrate former rebels into all
areas of the Administration and the national army and
to reintegrate them through a new policy of
decentralization and the financing of effective
development projects.
That notwithstanding, the report of the InterAgency Mission sketches out a comprehensive,
regional and integrated approach to all these questions,
which we fully endorse. We support the
recommendation to open a United Nations office for
West Africa, which could act as the eye of the United
Nations in the area and facilitate useful dialogue with
bilateral and multilateral partners, as well as with
ECOWAS, in particular in relaunching the peace
process and the process of economic development in
West Africa.
We are pleased that the report also stresses the
need to further develop coordination and cooperation
between the United Nations and ECOWAS with a view
to establishing a true partnership, particularly given the
regional implications of the Sierra Leonean conflict. In

14

this regard, we believe that it would be useful to look
further at the ECOWAS recommendation on
broadening the mandate of the United Nations Mission
in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL). We must respond
positively and specifically to the ECOWAS offer of
May 2000 to strengthen UNAMSIL by the addition of
3,000 men, who would have the advantage of knowing
the terrain and would be able to deploy rapidly and
effectively.
Likewise, the political support of the United
Nations — in this case, the Security Council — and the
provision of material and technical assistance by the
international community are essential for the successful
implementation of the ECOWAS initiative to deploy a
multinational ECOWAS Monitoring Group force along
the borders of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.
I would also note that close cooperation between
the United Nations and ECOWAS is necessary to
ensure implementation of the sanctions laid down
against Liberia in resolution 1343 (2001).
In conclusion, I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for having sent the Inter-Agency
Mission to West Africa. I also wish to thank
Mr. Ibrahima Fall and members of that Mission for
their important work in the search for lasting solutions
to meeting the priority needs and issues of West Africa.
We await with interest action on specific measures and
recommendations of the Mission’s report that are
practical, relevant and viable. ECOWAS is ready to
play its part in that work.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): We
have had three very valuable briefings this morning
and I, too, am very grateful for those, which were
based on some very recent experience of all three
briefers in the region. I will go through each in turn,
very quickly.
Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno mentioned
the good progress made at the meeting between the
Committee of Six of the Mediation and Security
Council of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the Government of Sierra Leone,
the United Nations and the Revolutionary United Front
(RUF) at Abuja on 2 May. We very much appreciate
the role of ECOWAS in facilitating that meeting and
are very grateful to Ambassador Ouane for his further
updating this morning.

S/PV.4319

I want to say by way of background that the
United Kingdom remains absolutely determined and
committed to bringing peace to Sierra Leone and its
neighbours through its support for the Government of
Sierra Leone, the United Nations and the international
community’s efforts in the subregion. We have already
committed several hundred million dollars to that
objective and we are not going to stop looking for a
result from that investment in terms of the stability and
the orthodox development of Sierra Leone and its
neighbours — what Ambassador Ouane referred to this
morning as “good governance” throughout the region.
We therefore welcome the RUF’s renewed commitment
at what we call “Abuja II” to complying with the terms
of the Abuja ceasefire Agreement of 10 November and
its agreement to withdraw from Kambia. The RUF’s
agreement to allow the Sierra Leone army, in
coordination with the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL), to deploy to the border area
between Sierra Leone and Guinea will reduce tensions
in that area. It is an important step in protecting the
territorial integrity of Sierra Leone and in calming the
situation in south-western Guinea.
We hope now to see the immediate reinvigoration
of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme in Sierra Leone and, in this regard, we look
forward to hearing the outcome of the meeting in
Freetown on 15 May between UNAMSIL, the
Government of Sierra Leone and the RUF, because that
meeting needs to lead to immediate results on the
ground. The onus is on the RUF to prove to the
international community that it is genuinely committed
to peace and we want to see visible evidence soon that
the RUF is complying with the provisions of the Abuja
agreement of 2 May, namely, freedom for UNAMSIL
deployment throughout Sierra Leone to re-establish the
authority of the Government of Sierra Leone;
immediate disarmament; and the handing back of
weapons and ammunition seized from the ECOWAS
Monitoring Group last year — something that should
have happened six months ago. We hope that it will
indeed be complete by 30 May.
I have a couple of questions here for the UnderSecretary-General. First of all, does he think that the
trend that he is now observing in Sierra Leone with
these agreements and their hope for implementation is
in line with our expectations that the situation can
improve sufficiently for elections, an essential part of
the peace-building process in Sierra Leone, to be held

at least within the next 10 months or so? I have a
second question of detail as regards the alleged Civil
Defence Forces (CDF) attacks on RUF positions in the
east of Sierra Leone. Is it actually clear that the CDF
were responsible for those attacks, because there is
some doubt about the actual events that have taken
place? We say that against the observation that the
RUF has, of course, consistently failed so far to
implement the Abuja ceasefire Agreement.
I am particularly grateful, also, to Carolyn
McAskie for her presentation. The United Kingdom
remains very concerned about the regional
humanitarian situation and sees a strong need for
increased coordination. We agree that this meeting
exemplifies that. We are aware of the growing numbers
of internally displaced persons, especially in Guinea,
and think it essential for the humanitarian effort in
Guinea to be strengthened by the appointment of a
Humanitarian Coordinator in Conakry. Is there a date
for that? We also need a clearer idea of the number of
refugees still to be relocated within Guinea from the
conflict zones and a timetable for completion of that
exercise. We are interested in the idea of a subregional
office for the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. Are there plans to set that up on
a particular timing?
We, too, note in passing her reference to the
impressive and senior membership of the Mano River
Union Women’s Peace Network and we agree with the
link which Assistant Secretary-General Fall has made
between national reconciliation and the potential
impact of such civil society organizations as that one.
I thank, too, Assistant Secretary-General Fall for
his briefing and for his leadership of the Inter-Agency
Mission to West Africa. The Mission report presents a
vivid illustration of the need for a more collective and
integrated United Nations effort, where economic
development and humanitarian dimensions are factored
into the United Nations system’s analysis and
response — in other words, a real regional strategy for
West Africa. Many of his recommendations reinforce
the general findings of the Brahimi report in this
context and build on recommendations outlined in the
report of the Council’s mission to Sierra Leone last
October. I have said before that we support the settingup of an integrated mission task force for that
subregion and we hope that this proposal will now be
followed up urgently.

15

S/PV.4319

Worthy of particular note in his report was the
message conveyed to the Mission by the heads of State
of the region, who thought that greater subregional
integration in the political, security, economic and
social spheres should remain a key objective for the
United Nations family if durable solutions to conflict
and to the tragic humanitarian suffering that
accompanies conflict are to be secured. More and
more, we are seeing evidence of the need to strengthen
regional and subregional institutions in preventing
conflicts and developing comprehensive responses to
shoring up peace-building efforts. The Fall report
underlines this; and yet, we agree with his impression
of a recent deterioration in relationships between
neighbouring countries in the Mano River Union
region. There clearly needs to be more intensive action
on this.
The
report
contains
a
number
of
recommendations which affect the operational arm of
the United Nations effort in West Africa. These
recommendations
merit
serious
and
careful
consideration and the United Kingdom is already
reviewing them. We have noted the report’s findings on
coordination and strategy and we hope that this
important analysis and assessment will be matched by a
serious effort on the part of the United Nations
intergovernmental machinery to take stock of their
implications and to determine how we can best respond
collectively to these challenges.
The capacity of ECOWAS as the regional
institution is an essential aspect of this. The Fall report
calls for the strengthening of ECOWAS in those areas
which should better enable it to act as a driving force
towards subregional integration and for greater
cooperation between the United Nations system and
ECOWAS. We should consider how we, as a Council,
might develop a more operational relationship within
ECOWAS. Here, I hope that the European Union will
pay careful attention to the recommendations in this
area. It is time, I think, for some individual donors also
to see what specific help they can be giving to the
regeneration of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) as an operational institution.
We welcome the proposal for a United Nations
office for West Africa, but it is important that it be
complementary to, and not reduce, the flexibility and
responsiveness of the command structure of a United
Nations mission in the region, such as UNAMSIL. In
addressing the appalling humanitarian situation in the

16

Mano River Union countries, the Fall report
recommends the expansion of UNAMSIL’s functions
and mandate. I note that there was no representative of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations on the Fall
Mission. I have to say that, given the history of
UNAMSIL and the need for concentrated action on the
security situation in Sierra Leone over the next few
months, expansion of the mandate is probably not a
good idea at this stage. There needs to be intensive
political and diplomatic work to restore the
relationships among Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone
before we can consider an expanded peacekeeping
operation. That intensive work should be taken forward
within an ECOWAS framework.
As Ms. McAskie made clear, the humanitarian
situation in Liberia is fast deteriorating. It is now more
important than ever that President Taylor and the
Liberian Government comply with the demands in
resolution 1343 (2001). The Council has made clear its
resolve to ensure that they do so, and we will need to
follow up energetically. We are not yet confident that
President Taylor has got the message of the need for
100-per-cent compliance with that resolution.
Sanctions will be lifted as soon as the Council is
satisfied that its requirements have been met. In the
meantime, it is essential to ensure that the arms
embargo, the travel ban and the diamond embargo are
made to bite. We call on all United Nations Members
to fully implement and enforce those measures; it is
important that the Liberia sanctions Committee should
swiftly designate the list of those subject to the travel
ban. We welcome the fact that the expert panel on
Liberia has now started its work, and we call on all
United Nations Members to cooperate fully with the
panel and to pass on to it any information that might
facilitate its work. The greater the input, the greater the
panel’s ability to put together an independent and
authoritative report.
We note that the President of Liberia has invited
the United Nations and ECOWAS to send border
monitors to Liberia. We are sceptical that this would be
cost-effective; the border is notoriously difficult to
seal. We note that, at present in any case, the United
Nations expert panel exists with a mandate to look at
Liberian compliance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions. However, once the panel’s mandate has
expired we will be ready to look at options for a system
of checks on Liberian ports and airfields.

S/PV.4319

We welcome the accelerating pace of United
Nations action on this subregion and the evidence of
more effective coordination. This morning’s briefings
make it clear that there is still a huge amount of work
to be done. We have enough analysis, enough missions:
let us get on with the action.
Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I join in
thanking Mr. Guéhenno, Mr. Fall and Ms. McAskie for
their important briefings.
The situation in West Africa, as described in this
morning’s briefings and in the excellent report of the
Inter-Agency Mission to West Africa (S/2001/434), is
most alarming. It threatens to grow beyond control if it
is not resolved as a matter of urgency, especially
because it could spread, in a domino effect, which
would endanger the stability and security of the entire
subregion, as the Inter-Agency Mission rightly
observed.
The exceptional complexity of this precarious
situation in terms of security, humanitarian, economic,
social and political matters can no longer be addressed
through piecemeal, sectoral or ad hoc responses. We
have consistently advocated a comprehensive,
integrated, multidimensional approach in order
effectively to address the many challenges to peace and
security, especially in Africa; we endorse the regional
approach advocated by the Inter-Agency Mission and
by Ms. McAskie, who enlarged on this idea in her
briefing. We note too that Mr. Fall stressed the
importance of restoring dialogue among the heads of
State of the subregion in order to resolve this situation.
In our view, the Mission’s recommendations
should be implemented with all due diligence in the
framework of coordinated joint action among all those
involved. In that connection, we consider that the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), under the leadership of President
Konaré — whom we vigorously support in his
sustained efforts to resolve the problems facing West
Africa — should be fully involved in any activities in
the subregion.
That is why my delegation fully supports the
recommendations of the Inter-Agency Mission
regarding the provision of assistance to ECOWAS to
strengthen its institutional, logistical and financial
capacities to enable it to shoulder its weighty
responsibilities. The United Nations and the Security
Council are in fact called upon to support the initiatives

of that subregional organization under Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter, particularly its initiatives
to settle these problems by political means and to put
an end to the unprecedented humanitarian crisis that
the subregion has long been experiencing.
One of the first measures to take in that
connection is to help ECOWAS to deploy an
interposition force along the borders of Guinea, Sierra
Leone and Liberia in order to ease tension and help the
movement or voluntary return of refugees, whose
situation remains a matter of concern, in conditions of
full safety and security.
The Security Council is actively seized of this
matter, and it should focus its efforts on preserving
what has been attained in Sierra Leone and on
preventing an escalation in the subregion. There are
four goals to pursue.
First, the Council should support ECOWAS
mediation efforts and encourage the leaders of the three
countries to engage in constructive dialogue with a
view to resolving pending problems.
Secondly, it should reiterate its appeal to the
States concerned to respect one another’s territorial
integrity, disarm the armed groups that are on their
territory, and work to build a climate of trust among
themselves.
Thirdly, it should follow closely developments in
Liberia, especially the humanitarian crisis that affects
hundreds of thousands of Liberian refugees. Here I
stress the need for regular assessments of the sanctions
and of their effects on the civilian population and on
the country’s economy. We also consider it necessary
to establish an independent verification mechanism to
supervise the Liberian Government’s compliance with
the Council’s demands; the Liberian Government itself
has proposed the establishment of such a mechanism.
And finally, the Council should help find a
solution to the grave humanitarian crisis in the
subregion and should support the Mission’s
recommendation that an international conference be
convened to mobilize donor support for these
countries, and especially for Guinea.
We hope that the working group set up by the
Secretary-General on the implementation of the InterAgency Mission’s recommendations can report on its
work in the near future.

17

S/PV.4319

Mr. Ryan (Ireland): We appreciate this important
meeting, and we are grateful to Under-SecretaryGeneral Guéhenno, Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator McAskie and Assistant Secretary-General
Fall for their valuable briefings.
Assistant Secretary-General Fall’s recent InterAgency Mission report provides an important
framework for addressing the interrelated problems of
the West African subregion. It details the need to
develop a comprehensive and integrated approach to
the priority needs of the subregion and a regional
approach to conflict prevention.
At last September’s Millennium Summit, our
heads of State or Government resolved to achieve a
fully coordinated approach to the problems of peace
and development. The inter-agency report is a
significant attempt by the system to play its part and
act on that promise. The report shows that the political
and the developmental issues faced by the peoples of
West Africa are inextricably linked, and that we cannot
tackle successfully one cluster of issues without being
coherent in our approach to all.
For the United Nations system it is now very
clear that peace-building requires the closest
cooperation and coordination between all parts of the
United Nations system, at Headquarters, in the region
and at country level, in particular the Department of
Political Affairs, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the United Nations
Development Programme and the resident coordinator
system. Other agencies, such as the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS, the United Nations Children’s Fund and
other parts of the United Nations system, can all play
crucial roles. The role of the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund, for example, in relation
to poverty reduction strategies and debt alleviation, can
also be crucial. All parts of the United Nations system
play mutually reinforcing roles at all levels. They can
add value to each other’s work.
As Member States and members of the Security
Council willing to assist, we must, as a minimum,
ensure an entry point for the longer-term development
perspective, both on the ground at a regional level and
at Headquarters. We must ensure that the United

18

Nations has clear lines and definitions of authority, and
clear organizational structures to deal at the same time
with those parts of the region so tragically in crisis and
with the long-term development implications for them
and for their neighbours. In the past several years the
United Nations has had considerable experience in the
areas of crisis management, peace-building and
development. We can now draw on that experience, as
the inter-agency report attempts to do, and learn the
lessons on how to do better in the future. We would
hope, for example, if a new United Nations office is to
be opened in the region, that any deputy or special
representative of the Secretary-General would have
significant development experience to match the
political skills required.
On a national basis, Ireland has increased
significantly our funding to the United Nations funds
and programmes because we see their role, and
particularly the role of the resident coordinator, as
crucial in bringing coherence to the approach of the
international community in partnership with the
Governments concerned. We have also made multiannual commitments to the United Nations funds and
programmes so that their planning will be based on
some predictability of funding. The grant aid nature of
United Nations development work, in our view, can be
a very significant catalyst in the peacebuilding/development area. The United Nations interagency appeal launched this year by OCHA is an
example of an integrated subregional initiative which
could assist coordination efforts and help bridge the
gap from crisis to development. We in Ireland are
currently reviewing our aid programme with a view to
seeing what more we can do. We support the
recommendation in the report calling on the
international financial institutions to review the
conditionalities relating to financing arrangements for
crisis countries. The impact of HIV/AIDS on the
subregion must also be borne in mind.
The inter-agency report also makes a number of
recommendations on targeted sanctions as these relate
to Liberia. The Security Council recently determined
that Liberia had failed to provide satisfactory evidence
of a wholehearted, genuine commitment to
disengagement from the Revolutionary United Front
(RUF) and that, therefore, additional sanction measures
would come into effect. We would urge the Liberian
Government to provide real proof of a change of policy
which would enable the Council to review the

S/PV.4319

sanctions measures and, in the interim, we urge it to
afford its full cooperation to the Panel of Experts
recently appointed by the Liberia sanctions Committee.
We are most grateful for the briefing given by
Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno. There have been
encouraging signs that the two-track approach in Sierra
Leone — the extension of legitimate political authority
and the continuation of dialogue with the RUF to direct
the rebels towards a democratic process — is showing
some positive results. It is essential that the machinery
of civil authority be restored as quickly and effectively
as possible in the areas into which the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) has deployed.
The Abuja ceasefire review meeting on 2 May
produced promising commitments on the part of the
Government of Sierra Leone and the RUF. The
confidence-building measures proposed by the Sierra
Leone Government are welcome. I agree with UnderSecretary-General Guéhenno that we are seeing a good
first step in the right direction. It is important that these
developments be followed through. We are hopeful of
further encouraging signs at the meeting scheduled for
tomorrow in Freetown.
In this context, I might refer to the inter-agency
report recommendation that consideration be given to
expanding the mandate of UNAMSIL. We wish to flag
that a substantial change to the mandate of a
peacekeeping force already in operation presents
practical difficulties which we should very carefully
bear in mind. However, we would echo very strongly
the Mission’s recommendation that the United Nations
and the Government of Sierra Leone maintain the twotrack approach to the resolution of the Sierra Leone
conflict. We, too, are encouraged by the further
deployment of UNAMSIL and the pledges of
cooperation from the RUF interim leader, Mr. Sesay.
But, given the history of the RUF reneging on
agreements, we will remain cautious and watchful. We
note the extremely positive role that the Economic
Community of West African States has been playing in
the peace process.
There are also positive indications of an
improvement in the level of coordination between the
United Nations peacemakers and the development and
humanitarian parts of the system. We welcome the
opening of the humanitarian office at Kenema. This
also is an important step, and we look forward to
continued developments in this direction. The
appointment of a distinguished Deputy Special

Representative of the Secretary-General in Sierra
Leone, drawn from the development community, would
appear to be working well. There are obvious lessons
to be learned here. I agree fully with Assistant
Secretary-General McAskie, that this work will include
close coordination with all players, including nonUnited Nations players; and I note that OCHA’s
presence may be reviewed upward.
We welcome very much the briefing given by
Assistant Secretary-General McAskie. The conflict in
the Mano River Union has created a humanitarian crisis
with between 1 million and 1.5 million refugees and
internally displaced persons in the region. It is
imperative that the Governments in the region be
assisted in developing the capacity to absorb returning
refugees and internally displaced persons when the
security situation permits this. In the interim, it is vital
that all parties to the regional conflicts permit complete
access by the humanitarian agencies to those in need of
assistance, as well as safe passage to those same
refugees and internally displaced persons. We
acknowledge the heavy burdens imposed on countries
in the region in accommodating enormous numbers of
refugees, in particular Guinea and its people.
We have noted carefully Assistant SecretaryGeneral McAskie’s recommendations, including the
strengthening of OCHA’s subregional capacity and the
important
potential
represented
by
women’s
organizations. Assistant Secretary-General Fall also
stressed this point.
The three briefings we have heard today illustrate
very clearly the need for and high value of an
integrated and holistic approach to the priority issues
of West Africa and the interlocking efforts required in
the areas of development and crisis management.
Mr.
Ahsan
(Bangladesh):
Thank
you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting. We, too,
would like to express appreciation for the three
briefings today by Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno,
Assistant Secretary-General Fall and the Deputy
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Ms. McAskie, which
complement each other and highlight the essential
contours of the problems.
We acknowledge with satisfaction the excellent
report on the Inter-Agency Mission led by Mr. Fall. We
agree that without an integrated region-wide approach
to the problems in the Mano River Union countries,
sustainable peace and economic and social

19

S/PV.4319

development cannot be achieved. Dialogue is essential
to this process. At the same time we think the military
pressure, particularly on the Revolutionary United
Front (RUF), has to be continued to achieve the
ultimate objective of sustainable peace in the region.
On Sierra Leone we note that while endorsing the
results of the Abuja ceasefire review Meeting of 2
May, RUF agreed to withdraw all of its combatants
from Kambia, release at least 200 child soldiers by 26
May and return all weapons and equipment seized from
the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) by 30 May. We have to be watchful that
RUF makes good on this promise because their past
record is not very straight.
We are concerned that fighting continues in the
border areas, destabilizing the entire region. Various
armed groups are receiving support and continuing to
fight. This has to stop. We are also concerned that
reports of ceasefire violations are continuing.
We are satisfied that UNAMSIL continues to be
deployed in areas of Sierra Leone that had been
dominated by the rebels. We note the enormity of the
tasks that the Government of Sierra Leone has ahead of
it in that regard. That has been referred to in all three
of today’s briefings. Clearly, the Government of Sierra
Leone needs to be assisted in accomplishing those
tasks.
The countries of the Mano River Union also need
to remain engaged in order to achieve sustainable
peace in the region. All countries in the region should
take action to prevent armed individuals and groups
from using their territory to prepare and commit attacks
on neighbouring countries and refrain from any action
that might contribute to further destabilization of the
situation on their borders, as the Security Council
demanded in resolution 1343 (2001) of 7 March.
We greatly appreciate the role played by the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and its Chairman, President Konaré of
Mali, in promoting peace and stability in the region, as
well as the role it played in the recent meeting in
Abuja. We support the proposal of ECOWAS to deploy
international monitors in the border region and we call
on the United Nations and donors to support that
initiative by providing ECOWAS with the necessary
financial resources and technical assistance.

20

Despite the recent efforts of the Abuja Summit
and the formation of the mediation committee, we
regret to note that the leaders of the three countries
concerned have so far failed to meet.
During the briefings made today we were also
reminded of the importance of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process in
sustaining
peace
and
security.
We
cannot
overemphasize the role of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of former combatants. Specific
actions need to be taken, both by the countries
concerned and by donors, to achieve successful DDR.
The Sierra Leone Government in particular has to take
decisions to ensure the success of the DDR programme
and has to be in a position to extend its authority as the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) withdraws from
areas it dominates. At the same time, donors must
assist the Government in that regard, as that will be
critical to the Government’s ability to provide former
fighters with alternate livelihoods. We particularly
emphasize the need to address the issue of reintegrating
child combatants with enough care.
We are concerned about the humanitarian
situation in the region. We appreciate that the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) continues to help trapped refugees,
especially those in the “parrot’s beak” region of southeast Guinea, by transferring them from insecure border
areas to camps in the interior. It is also useful that the
capacity of the new sites has regularly increased to
keep up with the pace of the relocation exercise. We
fully support the two-track approach taken by UNHCR
with regard to refugees in Guinea, as Ms. McAskie has
mentioned. We recognize that the response to
consolidated appeals has to be greatly improved.
We are encouraged by the information regarding
the release of children abducted by the RUF. We, too,
place great stress on ending the plight of girls who
were abducted and whose human rights were violated.
We also see hope in the role of the Mano River Union’s
Women’s Peace Network in the Union’s countries and
we call for assistance for their efforts.
The human rights situation in the region
continues to concern us. The recent fighting in the
border areas claimed civilian casualties and displaced
thousands. All parties must abide by international
humanitarian and human rights law and end abuses,
including killings and abductions of civilians in areas

S/PV.4319

affected by fighting. In this situation, we note with
satisfaction the opening of the human rights office in
Kenema.

territories it would be conducted and on the basis of a
mandate that includes an enforcement component
based on the authorization of the Security Council.

Today’s briefings have made it clear that
enhanced focus on post-conflict reconstruction and
economic regeneration is absolutely vital. The United
Nations system and the international community should
support long-term development in Sierra Leone and
assist the Government in gradually expanding its
administration and services throughout Sierra Leone
and in creating opportunities for former combatants to
find alternate sources of livelihood.

On the whole, the Russian Federation advocates
strengthening coordination between United Nations
and ECOWAS efforts to settle the situation in West
Africa and in averting and preventing conflicts. We are
impressed by the proposals in that regard contained in
the report of the Inter-Agency Mission to West Africa.

Before concluding, we would like to note that
given the importance of a subregional approach, we
would favour the recommendation to set up a United
Nations office in West Africa. We will be open to
further discussion of this matter.
Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are also grateful to Mr. Guéhenno,
Ms. McAskie and Mr. Fall for their comprehensive
information on the situation in West Africa.
The Russian Federation is deeply concerned
about the difficult situation that has come about in that
subregion, and in particular about the explosive
situation on Guinea’s borders with Liberia and Sierra
Leone. We support the efforts undertaken by the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) to settle this problem on the basis of goodneighbourly relations, a rejection of the use of force
and the development of agreed political measures to
halt the activities of armed rebel groups on the territory
of those States.
A solution to this problem would allow for
substantial
progress
towards
eliminating
the
humanitarian crisis that today threatens the civilian
populations of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. That
would establish conditions for the safe return of
refugees. A personal meeting between the leaders of
the countries members of the Mano River Union could
be essential for achieving this objective.
In our view, building trust in the subregion could
also be furthered by the deployment of a contingent
from the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) to the areas
of most intensive activity by the unlawful armed
groups. We believe that such an operation should be
based on the agreement of all States on whose

There can be no doubt that the most destabilizing
element of the situation in West Africa continues to be
the conflict in Sierra Leone. We greatly value the
efforts of the leadership and personnel of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) to settle
this conflict. We note that there has recently been a
tangible turn for the better in this area. In our view, this
demonstrates the correctness of the strategy, adopted
by the Security Council, to combine strong pressure on
the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) with
encouragement for the process to find a political
settlement of the conflict. Appeals to retreat from such
a strategy would only fan the flames of armed conflict
in the subregion.
As progress is made towards a settlement and as
State administration expands over the territory now in
the hands of the rebels, we expect that the Government
of Sierra Leone will step up its compliance with the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programme for ex-combatants. Those efforts should
have the support of UNAMSIL. We agree in principle
with arguments put forward in the report of the InterAgency Mission calling for a zonal approach to solving
problems related to DDR and other aspects of postconflict peace-building in the Mano River Union
region. However, we have some doubts about the
appropriateness of expanding UNAMSIL’s mandate by
extending its activities to the territory of all three
States of the Union, primarily because of the differing
types of problems that exist in those countries.
We believe that it would be preferable to adopt a
policy that would focus on enhancing the coordination
of the efforts of the international community, with a
key role being played by West African subregional
structures.
Of key significance to the settlement of the
conflict in Sierra Leone is full compliance by Liberia
with the demand of the Security Council that it end its
support for the RUF, as set out in Security Council

21

S/PV.4319

resolution 1343 (2001). Here I would emphasize that it
should end its support, not its contacts, with the Sierra
Leonean rebels, within the framework of collective
efforts to encourage them to achieve peace. This is the
objective of the sanctions with regard to Liberia, and
relevant steps taken by its authorities would be duly
valued by the Security Council.
We take note of Monrovia’s statement on
measures adopted in compliance with resolution 1343
(2001) and of its intention to continue to cooperate
with the Security Council. We deem valid ECOWAS’
recommendation concerning the establishment of a
mechanism for monitoring the implementation of
sanctions and Liberia’s compliance with the demands
of the Security Council.
We call upon all States fully to abide by the
provisions of resolution 1343 (2001) to prevent armed
individuals and groups from using their territory to
prepare and commit attacks on neighbouring countries
and refrain from any action that might contribute to
further destabilization of the situation on the borders
between Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.
Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to thank the representatives of the
Secretariat for their important briefings. I should like
also to thank all of the departments and units that
contributed to the report that is before us today — that
is, the report of the Inter-Agency Mission that visited
West Africa last March.
The contents of the report have convinced us that
what is needed is a subregional approach by the United
Nations system to promote peace and economic
development in the countries of West Africa. The
report contains a wealth of ideas and proposals which
deserve to be fully analysed by the Council. They
should also be studied by other agencies of the
Organization and by other related institutions.
Today I should like to draw attention to the last
paragraph of the report, which discusses follow-up.
Perhaps here one could anticipate the work that will be
done by the Organization in handling other activities
and conflict situations in Africa. It states that following
successful implementation of the report, similar
approaches should be explored in other parts of Africa.
This would certainly be very effective, and, from the
budgetary standpoint, it would probably also be much
cheaper. It would also be relevant to the advancement
of the work of the Security Council itself.

22

I should like to touch on three points that my
delegation considers very important in the promotion
of peace and security in the region.
The first point is the role of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). As we
said earlier, we cannot conceive of a regional approach
to United Nations operations in West Africa that would
not include a broad and dynamic interaction with
ECOWAS. The Inter-Agency Mission has made several
recommendations, mostly geared towards strengthening
the institutional capacity of that regional organization
in various areas, inter alia, conflict management,
promotion of development and electoral assistance.
On this point, I should like to ask some questions.
I should like to ask the representatives of the
Secretariat about the level of cooperation between each
of their departments and ECOWAS. Also, how can we
make the dialogue between the Council and ECOWAS
more productive? Here I would highlight the very
important role being played by the Ambassador of
Mali.
The second point I would take up is illicit arms
trafficking in the region. The arms trade in itself does
not in and of itself give rise to conflicts, but broadranging circulation of arms destabilizes Governments
and aggravates conflict situations. We have noted in
particular the presence in West Africa of hired fighters,
mercenaries and uncontrolled militias. The countries in
the region have committed themselves to a moratorium
on the import of small arms and light weapons.
My questions here are as follows. What
contribution have the arms-exporting countries made to
the moratorium? Does the Secretariat have any
information in that respect? Would it help to draw up
an international list of arms traders, and would
international weapons-control measures not avoid
future expenditures on disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes?
My last point relates to the humanitarian crisis.
There is concern about “donor fatigue” in connection
with humanitarian relief in the region. Various figures
have been mentioned, and there have been meetings
and conferences in various countries calling for greater
resources, but it is well known that donor fatigue
exists. There is also “asylum fatigue” on the part of
countries that take in refugees. Guinea and Côte
d’Ivoire are two recent cases of this, despite their long
history of taking in refugees. Furthermore, the number

S/PV.4319

of internally displaced persons continues to increase
with every new outbreak of fighting.
Here my questions are: How could a regional
strategy help stop these two kinds of fatigue? What is
the local capability to provide humanitarian assistance?
And, finally, is it viable to think about a rapid-response
capability in the region to deal with the humanitarian
crisis?
Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): I
wish at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for your
excellent initiative of holding this very comprehensive
briefing on the situation in West Africa — a briefing
which has brought together the head of Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno;
Ms. McAskie, of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs; and Mr. Ibrahima Fall of the
Department of Political Affairs.
As all of those who spoke before me have noted,
the crisis in the subregion has many different
aspects — political, peacekeeping and humanitarian —
all of which are closely interrelated. As has been
mentioned several times, the resumed fighting in Sierra
Leone has spilled over to the Guinean border over the
last few months, which has given rise to humanitarian
problems with respect to the situation of Sierra
Leonean refugees, in particular those living in Guinea.
Ms. McAskie also noted the recent case of
Liberian citizens who want to settle across the border
in Sierra Leone as refugees. Thus the interrelationship
between humanitarian, military and political problems
continues to aggravate the situation. That is why the
suggestions made by Mr. Fall in the wake of his InterAgency Mission to the region clearly make sense.
Anything that will help us move towards an integrated
approach to the problems must be considered.
For example, Mr. Fall’s proposal to open a
subregional office with a special representative in the
region is sound one, as is the idea of creating an interagency working group in New York. In the same vein,
we must clearly strengthen cooperation between the
United Nations and the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS). We are grateful for the
initiatives taken by ECOWAS in this regard that have
made it possible to relaunch the peace process in Sierra
Leone; I will come back to that point later. We also
welcome the efforts of ECOWAS to bring together the
three heads of State of the Mano River Union
countries.

In this regard, I would like to draw the attention
of the members of the Council to the fact that the
European Union will itself be sending a mission to the
region, headed by the former Ambassador of Sweden to
the United Nations, Ambassador Dahlgren, who is now
Sweden’s Secretary of State. He will lead the mission
on behalf of the presidency of the European Union. The
mission will meet with all the heads of State in the
region, as well as with President Konaré in his capacity
as the current Chairman of ECOWAS. The European
Union thus supports the peace initiatives in the region.
I should also like to mention two other countries
referred to by Mr. Fall: Guinea-Bissau and Côte
d’Ivoire. We fully support Mr. Fall’s proposals in this
regard. In Côte d’Ivoire, for example, we should
promote dialogue for reconciliation. The European
Union has entered into a dialogue with the Ivorian
authorities in that regard.
We were very interested in what Mr. Jean-Marie
Guéhenno said with regard to the most recent positive
developments in Sierra Leone. Again, thanks to
ECOWAS initiatives, the Abuja meeting and the
activities of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL), there are some positive signals
relating to the strengthening of dialogue between
UNAMSIL, the Government of Sierra Leone and the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF). This is very
positive, but, as Ambassador Greenstock said, we must
now move on to the implementation of the
commitments that have been renewed, and we will
follow developments very closely.
One of the commitments undertaken by the RUF
and mentioned by Mr. Guéhenno is of great interest in
the matter of the return of Sierra Leonean refugees in
Guinea. During the Abuja meeting and the Makeni
follow-up meeting, the possibility of the deployment of
UNAMSIL and the Sierra Leone army in the Kambia
district was raised. Mr. Guéhenno referred to the date
of, I believe, 18 May, which is in a few day’s time. I
should therefore like to ask Mr. Guéhenno how
UNAMSIL plans to respond to the RUF withdrawal
from Kambia. Is UNAMSIL going to be deployed in
that district to facilitate the voluntary return of Sierra
Leonean refugees in Guinea who want to use the
Conakry-Freetown route that passes through the district
of Kambia?
My last point relates to what Ms. McAskie said
about the situation of refugees and displaced persons,

23

S/PV.4319

in particular the serious situation that is continuing in
Guinea, where, as Ms. McAskie said, Ms. Short and
Mr. Josselin recently made a joint visit. It is clear that
international assistance must be provided to Guinea, as
Mr. Fall recommended in the report issued following
his Inter-Agency Mission. However, in addition to
humanitarian relief, there is the question of the return
of refugees. That return must, of course, be voluntary.
The return must take place, and the refugees must be
taken in, under the best possible conditions.
In this regard, we have received fairly worrying
information relating to what has happened in
Gueckedou. Ms. McAskie spoke about the different
possibilities, in particular the relocation of some
refugee camps in that area further to the north. We have
received rather disturbing information about the
conditions attached to that relocation. Is it true that the
refugees have been asked to go by foot, more than 150
kilometres under difficult conditions? Is it also true
that to encourage the refugees to move north, they have
been given to understand that those who stay will no
longer receive humanitarian assistance?
My first question thus relates to refugees in
Gueckedou. I have another question, about the refugees
who want to return but from the west of Guinea to
Sierra Leone. I have been told that, until very recently,
there were two boats chartered by the International
Organization for Migration that enabled Sierra Leonean
refugees who wanted to go back home to do so through
the maritime route from Conakry to Freetown. I
understand that there is now only one boat. I would
like to know why the means of transportation have
been reduced for refugees who want to return to Sierra
Leone voluntarily.
I have one last question. Resolution 1346 (2001),
which we adopted several weeks ago, contains one
paragraph — I believe it is paragraph 9 — that requests
the Secretary-General to submit to the Council a report
dealing in particular with the question of the support
that UNAMSIL can provide for the voluntary return of
Sierra Leonean refugees currently in Guinea. We would
like to know when the Council will be receiving that
report.
The President: Before giving the floor to the
next speaker, I would like to note that there are still
seven speakers on my list, and I am sure that we would
like to give our guests at least a brief opportunity to

24

respond to some of the comments and questions that
have been posed.
Miss Durrant (Jamaica): I should like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this open briefing on
the situation in West Africa. Last year’s Security
Council mission concluded that the highest priority
must be given to the coordination of a comprehensive
strategy, with clear objectives to address the regional
dimensions of the conflict in Sierra Leone. My
delegation therefore welcomes the comprehensive
report of the Inter-Agency Mission to West Africa,
contained in document S/2001/434, and the thoughtprovoking analysis and recommendations contained
therein. This report has been very ably complemented
by the presentations made today by the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, the
Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator and the
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, who
led the Inter-Agency Mission.
The report and today’s briefings clearly
emphasize the need for an integrated, holistic strategy
involving the Governments and people of the States
concerned, the United Nations system and the regional
and subregional organizations if we are to achieve a
sustained and lasting solution to the problems in the
region. We agree with the Secretary-General that an
integrated, subregional approach by the international
community is urgently needed to help prevent the
further emergence of conflicts, restore peace and
security and promote economic and social
development. It is in this context that my delegation
continues to support the holding of a meeting between
the Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council. Such a meeting, which we hope will take
place in the near future, could usefully focus on the
situation in West Africa. Today’s meeting is
nevertheless timely, as the Security Council considers
what action it can take with respect to its own
responsibilities for international peace and security.
I now wish to comment on some of the aspects of
the Inter-Agency Mission’s report, as well as on the
briefing we have received. First of all, I wish to
welcome the report by Under-Secretary-General
Guéhenno on the meeting held in Abuja on 10 May
between the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the United Nations, the
Government of Sierra Leone and the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF), aimed at reviewing the
implementation of the Abuja ceasefire Agreement. We

S/PV.4319

sincerely hope that the commitments made by the RUF
will be carried out.

summit, and we hope that this meeting will take place
soon.

Regarding the further forward deployment of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL)
into RUF-controlled areas, we have heard from
Mr. Fall about criticisms of the United Nations
operations and we must again emphasize the
importance of the public information activities of
UNAMSIL aimed at sensitizing the population about
the Mission’s mandate. At the same time, the proposal
for the expansion of UNAMSIL’s mandate into the
neighbouring
countries
deserves
our
serious
consideration.

The situation in Sierra Leone and its effects on
Liberia and Guinea involving the border areas have
escalated into a humanitarian crisis involving
thousands of refugees and internally displaced persons.
Jamaica supports in principle the establishment of an
interposition force along the shared borders of Liberia,
Sierra Leone and Guinea.

Second,
Jamaica
fully
supports
the
recommendation for the establishment of a mechanism
for systematic and regular consultations among entities
of the United Nations system for defining and
harmonizing national and subregional policies.
Frequent consultation with ECOWAS and other
subregional agencies would be critical to developing
cohesive strategies. As was clearly highlighted in the
meeting between the ECOWAS ministers and the
Security Council in February, there needs to be close
collaboration between the Council and ECOWAS in
seeking to bring about a resolution of the conflict
affecting the West African region.
Third, the establishment of a United Nations
political office for West Africa would, in my
delegation’s view, be a step in the right direction. Such
an office could send a positive signal to the West
African region that the United Nations is serious about
enhancing its capacity and collaboration in the
subregion. Such an office must, we believe, be fully
staffed to tackle the wide cross-section of issues. This
should be done on a regional basis and collocated in
Abuja in order to strengthen its linkages with
ECOWAS. We also support, as an interim measure, the
establishment of an integrated mission task force,
which would be a useful mechanism for continuity.
Fourth, my delegation has consistently expressed
concern at the escalating conflict in the region. We
agree that dialogue among the leaders of the region to
devise ways and means to resolve the crisis is of
paramount importance, because peace agreements can
have little effect if there is no political will to effect a
sustained and lasting peace. We would encourage the
mediation efforts of the heads of State of Mali, Togo
and Nigeria, recently appointed by the ECOWAS

We have heard from Ms. McAskie, as well as
from Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno and Assistant
Secretary-General Fall, how this crisis has spread
across borders. We welcome the initiatives taken by
ECOWAS at its meetings last December and in April to
address the mounting concerns and we have noted the
concrete steps being proposed by ECOWAS. We
recognize only too well the dire need for international
assistance in terms of equipment and logistics in order
to mount a successful operation.
Fifth, Jamaica fully subscribes to the importance
of approaching conflict prevention and resolution from
a regional, rather than a national perspective. It is
disheartening, however, to see that there continues to
be a reluctance to devote resources to conflictprevention and peace-building measures, even though
we are prepared to meet the huge costs involved in
dealing with situations after conflicts have erupted. It
is therefore important that our conflict-prevention
strategies should aim at strengthening ECOWAS’s
capacity for conflict prevention, management and
resolution and for ensuring security. The need for the
development of ECOWAS’s early warning capacity is
also of importance.
The report of the Inter-Agency Mission mentions
that
“Cooperation
between
intergovernmental
organizations within the subregion with civil
society organizations in the areas of conflict
prevention and management remains limited and
could
be
strengthened
considerably.”
(S/2001/434, para. 33)
It is our belief that civil society plays a pivotal role in
conflict prevention and that it should be encouraged.
We therefore welcome the initiatives undertaken by
ECOWAS in the Mano River basin aimed at developing
support for civil society.

25

S/PV.4319

Sixth, the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration
of
ex-combatants
are
essential
components of the post-conflict peace-building
process. It is regrettable that, to date, such a
programme in the region has been thwarted, owing
primarily to the lack of funding. We are aware that
conflicts in the region are often fuelled by economic
reasons; war is a lucrative business and, therefore, any
incentive to curb the crisis must involve alternative
sources of gainful employment. We are particularly
concerned about the situation of ex-combatants, child
soldiers and girls, of which Ms. McAskie made
mention. Adequate and sustained funding should be
provided for job training and job creation and for the
counselling, rehabilitation and resettlement of all excombatants. In this regard, I wish to draw attention to
the fact that, in these programmes, we have very often
ignored the fact that women are often ex-combatants as
well as men. We need to address the specific needs and
problems which these women face in the integration
process and to determine what steps can be taken to
address their psychological as well as their domestic
needs.

approach by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, as well as the proposed
presence of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs in the United Nations office for
West Africa.

Seventh, the proliferation of arms in the
subregion continues to be of great concern to my
delegation.
While
we
fully
support
the
recommendations outlined in the relevant section of the
report, aimed, inter alia, at strengthening ECOWAS’s
capacity to monitor and curb the illegal flow of arms,
we feel it to be equally important that efforts be
undertaken by arms manufacturers to cease the export
of small arms to conflict areas.

Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): I, too, would like
to begin by thanking Mr. Guéhenno, Ms. McAskie and
Mr. Fall for their presentations. I would also like
especially to thank Mr. Fall for the excellent report that
he has submitted to us.

As I mentioned earlier, women have become
increasingly effective participants at the peace table
and they have continued to assist in creating an
enabling environment for conflict prevention,
peacemaking and post-conflict peace-building. We
therefore welcome the Mano River Union Women’s
Peace Network, which links women from Guinea,
Liberia and Sierra Leone, and we support the request
made by Assistant Secretary-General Fall and
Ms. McAskie for assistance to be given to that
programme.
Last, the flow of refugees across the borders of
the three countries has fuelled what can be described as
one of the most serious refugee situations in the world.
We believe that any solution to this crisis must also
involve a regional strategy entailing specific criteria
for action. We therefore fully support the two-track

26

We recognize, however — as Ms. McAskie
pointed out — that conditions for the full return of
refugees to Sierra Leone or Liberia do not at present
exist and we are disturbed at Ms. McAskie’s reports of
harassment and thefts experienced by refugees and
internally displaced persons. It therefore must be
impressed upon all armed groups that they must
provide safe access and safe passage to refugees,
internally displaced persons and humanitarian
personnel operating in the areas of conflict.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to commend
the Secretary-General and the agencies concerned for
the initiatives taken to address the situation in the
subregion in an integrated manner. We wish to assure
the Secretary-General, the men and women of
UNAMSIL and the people of the region of Jamaica’s
continued solidarity and support.

There is one main point that I would like to
emphasize in my remarks today: that the Council has
got to ensure that, whatever it does, it does in
cooperation with the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS). The main contribution of
Mr. Fall’s report is that it spells out in great detail the
concerns of the region — the concerns I heard when I
was there personally — and I hope that the Council
will pay attention to the concerns expressed in the
report.
At the same time, looking at West Africa, we see
a paradoxical situation. The paradox is this: it is a
region blessed with excellent reports. Indeed, if you
look at the Security Council mission report of last
October, Mr. Fall’s report and Ms. McAskie’s report,
you will see that they are excellent reports. But if you
look at the contents of the reports, you find lots of bad
news. For example, since no one has referred to this, I
would like quickly to quote from paragraph 13 of the
report:

S/PV.4319

“Throughout the Mission’s visit the gravity
of the political and security situation in the West
African subregion and the potential for the rapid
spread of insecurity and instability, unless urgent
steps are taken to address the causes of conflict
and turmoil in several countries, were repeatedly
underscored. ... The possibility of a ‘domino
effect’, with instability spreading rapidly from
one country to another within the subregion is a
source of deep and widespread concern.”
(S/2001/434)
So the question is, how do we deal with this
paradox? How do we ensure that the next time we meet
we will not just get good reports; that we will get good
news from the region? I guess the underlying purpose
of my comments today is to help resolve that question.
I would like to make four points. The first point is
that, while I think we have received very useful
briefings, I wonder whether in those briefings we can
balance the details that we receive with more
assessment. Having listened to all the briefings today, I
find myself — even though I have just visited the
region — lost in a forest of details. Can we take a
helicopter view of the whole situation to see where we
are vis-à-vis where we were in the past? For example,
it is useful to remind ourselves that it was just a year
ago that soldiers of the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) were taken hostage by the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF). We have clearly
come a long way since then. If you look at the military
situation within Sierra Leone, it looks promising. But
the military situation around Sierra Leone has got a lot
worse. Are there connections between the two? What is
going on here?
I hope that when we review the situation we will
not take just a snapshot view of each situation, but will
try to look at the overall trends and see how they are
going. For example, if you look at the peace process,
again, the peace process within Sierra Leone seems to
have improved; there seem to be, as we have heard
today,
discussions
involving
UNAMSIL,
the
Government of Sierra Leone and the RUF. But the
peace process involving the three countries of the
Mano River Union seems to have deteriorated and, as
several speakers have noted, talks are not taking place
among the three leaders. So how do we piece together
the picture?

My second point is on our working methods.
Both last month and this month we have tried to
improve our working methods to see how we can
ensure that as we meet and discuss a problem we add
value to it. Perhaps, to add value each time we discuss
West Africa, we should begin by asking ourselves:
What have we done in the past? What decisions have
we made? Which have been implemented and which
not? And in the case of those that have not been
implemented, why not? In that regard, Mr. Fall’s report
has brought out many specific criticisms of the United
Nations. Indeed, if you read paragraph 112 you will
notice that several interlocutors were critical of a
number of United Nations policies. The question is:
How do we react to those criticisms? And, if we think
they are not fair or balanced, how do we respond to
them?
At the same time, Mr. Fall’s report has also made
some specific recommendations we have to deal with.
For example, several countries in the region said that
the UNAMSIL mandate should be expanded. We have
heard remarks here, some in support, some not in
support of the expansion of the UNAMSIL mandate.
What will our decision be? How do we respond to that
request from the region? Here, I hope that we will
reflect on these questions that have been brought
before us.
My third point is about long-term indicators. One
of the most vivid impressions I brought back from my
visit to the region was that clearly there are also longterm problems developing in the region. Any good
social scientist, looking at the demographics of the
region, looking at the number of children being born
and the number of children in school, can make
projections and can tell that there are problems that
will be coming to us five, 10, 15 years down the road.
It is useful for us to balance our short-term work with
questions related to long-term projections, and to ask
ourselves whether the long-term trends are positive or
negative. If they are negative, do we have an obligation
not just to address the present snapshot situation of the
day, but to ask what we can do to make sure that the
same problems will not come back to haunt the Council
five years or 10 years down the road?
My fourth and final point relates to the question
of financing. Clearly, West Africa is a region of high
priority for us, and I think that high priority is reflected
in the amount of resources and attention we are
devoting to it. Clearly, the very discussion we are

27

S/PV.4319

having today and the fact that an inter-agency task
force was set up show that the Council is deeply
concerned about the region. But the concern is best
demonstrated by the amount of money we are spending
on the region. Here, it might be useful for us to be
provided with some statistics so that we can see how
we are allocating the funds for the region. For example,
I am told that, as a rough estimate, we will be spending
$800 million this year on the peacekeeping operations.
Possibly, we may be spending up to $100 million over
the next three years on the special court in Sierra
Leone. How do those figures compare with the amount
of money we are spending on the humanitarian side
and with the amount of money we are spending on the
development side? Is the balance right? If you want to
try to find the right long-term solutions for the region,
you ought to ensure that, as you allocate resources, you
allocate them rationally, on the basis of need and not
on the basis of any arbitrary decision.
I hope that the very valuable reports and the very
valuable briefings we have had will not be lost and
that, when we meet next time, we will come back and
try to address some of these questions.
Mr. Wang Donghua (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, we thank Mr. Guéhenno, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Ms.
McAskie, Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, and
Mr. Fall, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for their briefings, all three of which were very
important for the next stage in our effort to find
solutions to the problems of West Africa.
The international community, including the
United Nations, has made tremendous, successful
endeavours to bring peace and stability to West Africa.
We are most grateful to the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) for its efforts. The
March visit by the Inter-Agency Mission to West
Africa marked yet another United Nations effort to find
solutions to the problems of the subregion. The report
of that Mission (S/2001/434) sets out many excellent
and practicable recommendations that merit serious
study and adoption by the Council. This should be
followed up with concrete action.
Now the Council should focus on the security
situation in the border area of Sierra Leone, Guinea and
Liberia and should promptly carry out a study on ways
and means to support the deployment of ECOWAS
forces along the borders of the three countries and

28

effectively to verify Liberia’s compliance with relevant
Security Council resolutions so that those resolutions
can be genuinely implemented.
The report’s recommendation to establish a
United Nations office for West Africa is a very good
one. Such an office should coordinate the work of the
relevant United Nations agencies, of the United
Nations itself and of other agencies, along with
coordinating cooperation between the United Nations
and ECOWAS, to ensure that all action is fully
coordinated. The head of that office, in order to deal
with day-to-day responsibilities, should more
importantly focus on comprehensively resolving longterm problems in this area.
We also support strengthening the presence of the
humanitarian relief agencies in this area, because the
humanitarian problems are integrally linked with the
security situation in the area. Therefore, while
resolving security problems, we should also strengthen
our efforts to solve humanitarian problems.
Mr. Krokhmal (Ukraine): I would like to join the
other delegations in thanking Mr. Guéhenno, Ms.
McAskie and Mr. Fall for their valuable briefings,
which cover various aspects of the situation in the
region and give us a comprehensive analysis of the
crisis in West Africa.
We have given careful consideration to the report
of the Inter-Agency Mission to West Africa and the
recommendations contained therein, which, in our
view, represent a constructive plan of action for the
United Nations system towards developing a
comprehensive approach to durable and sustainable
solutions for priority needs and challenges of the
region.
The recent Inter-Agency Mission to West Africa
clearly demonstrated that the multidimensional nature
of the crisis in the region demands effective
coordination and partnership among the United Nations
family, the regional organizations and the other
relevant stakeholders. We therefore welcome the
submission of the report of the Mission to the
Economic and Social Council and its communication to
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the Organization of African Unity (OAU),
the World Bank, the European Union and other major
multilateral and bilateral partners.

S/PV.4319

My delegation took careful note of the
recommendations of the Mission, in particular those
falling within the primary competence of the Security
Council concerning peace and security in West Africa.
I would like to make a few comments on the specific
issues within this area.
We agree with the conclusion that resolution of
the conflicts in the Mano River Union area is crucial in
any approach aimed at addressing priority needs and
challenges in the subregion.
Members may recall that upon return from its
visit to West Africa, the Security Council Mission
made it very clear there is an urgent need to develop a
comprehensive, coordinated strategy for Sierra Leone.
This report reaffirms the importance of a two-track
approach to the resolution of the Sierra Leone conflict,
promoting both military deterrence and political
dialogue between the parties to the Abuja Agreement.
My country, as it participates in the United Nations
peacekeeping operation in Sierra Leone, will continue
to support this strategy.
We believe that some specific recommendations
concerning the resolution of the conflict along the
borders of the Mano River Union countries and the
expanded role of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) should be further studied by the
appropriate departments of the Secretariat. Such an
analysis would be particularly useful for the Security
Council to act in the most effective way.
We maintain that, in light of the nature of the
deteriorating political, security and humanitarian crisis
in the region, it is imperative that a solution to the
situation in the subregion should be sought by the three
leaders of the Mano River Union countries without
further delay.
The report raises a number of issues concerning
conflict prevention, peacekeeping, peace-building,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and
implementation of sanctions, which together with the
problems of governance and human rights,
humanitarian assistance for the refugees, as well as
economic development and regional integration, will
constitute important elements of a subregional
approach to the problems faced by West Africa.
We are of the view that, in line with the efforts to
develop a comprehensive subregional strategy, there
should be in place an effective coordination mechanism

in the region to implement it. We support the idea of
establishing a United Nations office for West Africa as
a welcome step towards intensifying collaboration of
the United Nations system activities with those of
ECOWAS and other subregional and relevant
organizations. We entirely agree with the analysis of
the Mission that a prime factor in addressing priority
needs and challenges of West Africa is effective
subregional integration in the political, security,
economic and social spheres where ECOWAS has a
central role to play.
It is also important for the international
community to support and assist ECOWAS activities
and initiatives, in particular those related to capacitybuilding measures for the ECOWAS secretariat, and for
promoting mechanisms of early warning and conflictprevention, as well as law, judiciary and human rights
issues and regional economic integration.
In conclusion, we hope that today’s very broad
discussion with the family of United Nations organs
and agencies, relevant institutions and Member States
will be a step forward to the successful implementation
of a fully integrated and broad-based subregional
approach aimed at addressing the multifaceted
problems confronting the region and promoting durable
peace and sustainable development in West Africa.
The President: I want to note that we are now at
1 o’clock, and I intend to continue this meeting without
a break. I ask that the remaining speakers be brief so
that we can give time to the Secretariat. I commit
myself to greatly shortening the statement that I was
going to make at the end of this meeting in my national
capacity.
Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): In response to your
appeal, Mr. President, I will try to shorten my
statement and will limit myself to making some
observations relating to the inter-agency report.
First, I would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Jean-Marie Guéhenno, Assistant SecretaryGeneral Ibrahima Fall, and the Deputy Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Ms. Carolyn McAskie, for their
important briefings this morning. With regard to the
report of the Inter-Agency Mission to West Africa, I
wish to highly commend Mr. Fall and members of the
inter-agency team for the comprehensive and farreaching report. We appreciate in particular the depth
and analytical quality of the report. We fully endorse
all of its recommendations.

29

S/PV.4319

The report confirms beyond any doubt that the
conflicts in West Africa must be addressed in an
integrated and regional perspective. We believe that is
also true of the Great Lakes region, and that we will in
due course have to look at possibilities there as well.
The priority now should be to develop the necessary
strategies to implement the recommendations of the
inter-agency report in a time-bound manner. I would
like to ask Mr. Ibrahima Fall whether reflection is
already taking place in the Secretariat on an
implementation plan for the this important report.
Mauritius has always advocated in the Council
the need to involve regional and subregional
organizations in peacekeeping and peace-building
efforts. We commend the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) for its vision for the
maintenance of peace and security in West Africa and
for the promotion of economic and social development
in the subregion. ECOWAS must be fully supported by
the United Nations system and the international
community in that endeavour.
Finally, I would like to mention that we are
disappointed that the tribunal for Sierra Leone has not
yet been established. We appeal to the donor
community to come forward once again and support
the establishment of the tribunal for Sierra Leone.
Mr. Kolby (Norway): I shall also shorten my
statement.
Like others, we believe that it is not possible to
look at developments in one country without taking the
situation in the entire region into consideration.
Norway encourages close cooperation within the
United Nations system and close contacts between the
United Nations and regional organizations. The role of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) is of particular importance. Norway
encourages efforts to strengthen that organization.
Adequate funding is needed for the United
Nations to fulfil its obligations in the region. It is
therefore with great concern that we note that the
appeals for Sierra Leone and West Africa have not
received the needed donor support. Norway, for its
part, will continue to provide humanitarian support for
the international humanitarian efforts in the region. We
strongly encourage all Member States to increase their
contributions.

30

Easy access to small arms fuels conflicts
throughout the West African region. Preventing the
proliferation of small arms is therefore a paramount
issue in conflict prevention. Several countries in the
region, Mali being one of them, have shown a strong
commitment to that important issue. An important
factor in reducing the number of small arms is the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
of former combatants. We believe that an effective
DDR programme is a precondition for the successful
completion of the United Nations peace operation in
Sierra Leone. However, in Sierra Leone that process is
not progressing as expected. We would therefore
appreciate more information. If indeed needed, Norway
is prepared to consider providing additional support to
the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL), particularly in the field of DDR.
New developments after the Abuja ceasefire
review meeting give us hope that the DDR process will
now be revitalized. The implementation of an
agreement in this field and the possible deployment of
the Sierra Leone Army in the Kambia district will be of
significant importance for the many internally
displaced persons and returnees in the country. If a
substantial repatriation and resettlement operation is
started, it will be crucial that steps be taken by local
Governments, in cooperation with UNAMSIL, to
ensure the security of the returning populations and of
the personnel of the humanitarian agencies. We also
believe that it is of the utmost importance that Sierra
Leonean refugees who originate from areas that are
declared secure get assistance to leave their internally
displaced persons camps and reintegrate into their
home regions as soon as possible. However, the
demobilization process is moving at a slow pace. The
unwillingness of the Revolutionary United Front (RUF)
to let the Government of Sierra Leone rebuild
institutions in the new areas of UNAMSIL deployment
is a matter of concern, as it is seriously undermining
reconstruction and reconciliation efforts.
Developments in the region continue to give us
reason for concern. The Security Council and the
United Nations as a whole must therefore continue to
follow the situation in West Africa closely. We believe
that the new sanctions imposed by resolution 1343
(2001) are the result of the emphasis the Council puts
on the need to have a comprehensive approach to
developments in West Africa. Political stability and
development in the countries of the region can come

S/PV.4319

only as a result of the collective efforts of local
political leaders and the international community to
build peace and to commit the needed resources to
secure economic development for the long-suffering
people in that part of the world.
The President: I would now like to make a brief
statement in my national capacity.
I will not review all the elements that have been
discussed. I think we have a pretty clear idea of the
kinds of things that need to be done in West Africa. But
I did want to note that we are not talking about a
natural disaster here; we are talking about a man-made
disaster that was created by the people of the region by
and large, many of whom are still there. It cannot be
solved outside the region. We need to find a way to
support those in Sierra Leone and in the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) who
are looking for a solution.
The United States is committed to that. We have
devoted significant resources to this effort and we will
continue to do so. We want to see results on the
ground — practical, concrete results — in the areas of
humanitarian assistance and human rights. That
includes providing the safety required for refugees to
return, which has been promised for so long, as well as
results in the area of security and in the political
field — first and foremost in security, because that is
the precondition to moving forward.
We were glad to hear what Under-SecretaryGeneral Guéhenno had to say about the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL). UNAMSIL
needs to be credible. It is an instrument of the resolve
of the international community and the belief that the
crisis in Sierra Leone pits an elected Government
against a violent insurgency. The goal is, and has to
remain, the extension of the authority of that
Government.
We found the Fall report very thought-provoking.
It addresses many of the concerns that also came up in
the Security Council mission report, now more than six
months ago. I think we all agree on the need for
coordination and integration. That approach is clear,
but it is not clear that the right arrangements are in
place, or coming into place, even after those six to
eight months. We look forward to progress in that area.

We also strongly support the efforts made in the
field by ECOWAS to deal with the problems that we
have discussed today. Its role is essential.
With regard to the idea of extending UNAMSIL’s
mandate throughout the region, like the United
Kingdom and some others we are doubtful that that is
the right way to go. In our view, what we really need at
this point is a stronger political process and political
effort in the region, as foreseen by ECOWAS and in the
tasking of its mediation committee. We hope for results
from that effort.
Looking to the future, the United States will not
treat victim and aggressor in the same fashion. We will
not support a party’s abdicating a peace agreement
while demanding its protections and privileges. We
oppose treating President Taylor of Liberia, who is
responsible for the founding and maintenance of the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF), as both arsonist
and firefighter in Sierra Leone. We take note of the
sanctions that have come into effect. Like others, we
hope for their early implementation, and we hope for
early and convincing actions by the Government of
Liberia to stop destabilizing its nature and persecuting
its own people.
The President: I now resume my functions as
President of the Security Council.
I shall give the floor to our guests to respond to
the questions asked and the comments made. Again,
unfortunately, I must remind our guests of the hour.
I call on Mr. Guéhenno.
Mr. Guéhenno: First, I will address the questions
put by the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom. He asked a factual question on clashes in the
east. There have been three series of clashes. The first
took place on 19 April in the Tongo area. The Civil
Defence
Forces
(CDF)
allegedly
attacked
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) positions in
response to what was perceived as a RUF build-up in
the area. The RUF retaliated and dislodged the CDF,
which is now based in Lago.
The second series of clashes occurred in Talia, 9
kilometres east of Mano Junction, on 6 May. It was
also a CDF operation.
The third ceasefire violation is being investigated
by the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL), further north in the Kono district.

31

S/PV.4319

According to press reports quoting the chief of staff of
the Sierra Leone Army, operations were carried out by
the Donsos — people from Guinea — against the RUF
to open up the corridor to return to Guinea. Presently
UNAMSIL is investigating those reports and this
particular ceasefire violation.
With respect to the elections, are we on the right
track? As I said in my briefing, what we have seen is
indeed a first step, as is the positive atmosphere at the
Abuja review meeting. It needs to be followed, as Sir
Jeremy said, by very concrete action on the ground,
namely ensuring freedom of movement throughout the
country; the surrender of weapons; and active
progress — real, substantive progress — in the
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programme. I will come back to that in reply to the
question posed by the Permanent Representative of
Norway. Failing that, all we will have is fine words. If
concrete progress follows on the ground, then we will
be in a position to exploit the next window of
opportunity, which will be the next dry season — that
is, between October and May. If at that time there is
full deployment of UNAMSIL, if the authority of the
Government of Sierra Leone has been established
throughout the country, if there is full disarmament of
the RUF as well as of the CDF, and if the electoral
preparations have been completed, then I think we
should, and could, have the elections as anticipated.
The second series of questions was put by the
Permanent Representative of Colombia, and I will
answer those that were specifically addressed to me, on
coordination with ECOWAS. That coordination
happens at two levels: at the level of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Adeniji. There are actually frequent consultations at the
top political level. There is also participation by
ECOWAS in the coordination mechanism that has been
established between the United Nations and the
Government of Sierra Leone, and ECOWAS has a
representative in Freetown.
There is also coordination with ECOWAS in the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations here in New
York. We have sent teams to assist ECOWAS with
technical advice at various meetings to prepare for
deployment.
Making a broader political point, I want to stress
the importance we attach to cooperation with
ECOWAS, and I take this opportunity to express the

32

appreciation of the Secretariat for the efforts of
ECOWAS in securing greater cooperation between the
key players in this conflict. Without cooperation
between those key players, it would indeed be quite
difficult to implement a regional strategy. The relative
success of UNAMSIL in Sierra Leone has been based
on the very close coordination in Sierra Leone and on
the possibility of implementing the Ceasefire
Agreement, as agreed on 10 November last. Lacking
such a basis, it is indeed very difficult to foresee any
real progress at the regional level.
(spoke in French)
The representative of France asked questions on
the practical measures that UNAMSIL could take to
ensure the return of the refugees to the Kambia zone
after the disarmament of the RUF in that zone. I can
say that UNAMSIL will first of all carefully monitor
the withdrawal of the RUF and the deployment of the
Sierra Leone Army. It will step up patrolling in that
zone, eventually using a set point of departure, which
could be established in Kambia itself.
Ensuring the security of refugees is the
responsibility of the Sierra Leone Army, but
UNAMSIL will monitor developments, and the
humanitarian community will, of course, see to the
hosting of those refugees. Let me also add in that
respect that we can expect that a significant number of
the returning internally displaced persons — about
13,000 — will be coming from Lungi, since a number
of people from Sierra Leone had left the Kambia zone
for the Lungi zone, which is near the capital, Freetown.
The last question was posed by the Ambassador
of Norway on the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme.
(spoke in English)
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
does continue, but, unfortunately, at the moment it is
down to a trickle, and the issue is really to move in a
higher gear to make it substantive, so that the ceasefire,
as agreed, is fully implemented. Both UNAMSIL and
the Government of Sierra Leone are ready to do more
in the next phase of organized disarmament. Some
funds are available, but more will be needed in future if
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process is to be more than bringing people to account
and actually reintegrating them into society, which is
the real, long-term fundamental issue if we want to

S/PV.4319

have success in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration.
The World Bank in that respect is likely to
convene a donors’ conference in the near future.
UNAMSIL has the leading role on the ground through
the role of the Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Doss.
The President: I call on Ms. McAskie.
Ms. McAskie: Let me thank the representatives
of Mali and Jamaica and the other speakers who have
given their support for the strengthening of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA).
I can assure the Council that these words are actually
extremely useful to us, and that OCHA, although it is
mostly voluntarily funded, is a Secretariat department
and must abide by Secretariat rules and regulations and
go through the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions (ACABQ), the Fifth
Committee and so on to establish posts in the field. So
concrete measures of support from the Council on our
operations are extremely useful to us in speeding up
these processes.
The United Kingdom asked specific questions
about the appointment of a humanitarian coordination
and the timing of the establishment of a subregional
office. On the latter, we are working now to establish a
small unit in Abijan that would work on early warning
and contingency planning but would also provide a
base to an OCHA person, whom we would base in one
of the three Mano River Union countries to provide the
information and strategic analysis functions and a link
to the United Nations Office for West Africa. We are
working on that now. The appointment of the
humanitarian coordinator is under discussion with the
concerned agencies, and we would hope to make it
quickly; I cannot give a specific date.
The United Kingdom also asked a question about
the movement of refugees out of the Languette. With
40,000 already moved out, we are anticipating that
another 30,000 will move in the next two weeks. I will
come back to that in response to the questions from the
representative of France.
In response to Colombia’s question about the
relationship of the United Nations Secretariat with the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), speaking very specifically for OCHA,
although we do not have direct cooperation with

ECOWAS on humanitarian delivery, obviously — that
is not their role — we are working very closely with
them on early warning and, in fact, are assisting them
in strengthening early-warning mechanisms.
The representative of France asked some very
specific questions about refugee return movement. I
can assure him that I think we all agree that this is a
major concern. We all agree on the basic principle of
voluntary return and on the need for security in the
country of asylum, which has often been linked to the
question of proximity to borders. As Council members
know, there is a paragraph in the Organization of
African Unity Convention that refers to an estimated
distance from borders, recommended at 50 kilometres.
The situation that arose in the Languette proves the
usefulness of that particular guidance, and as such the
movement of refugees to areas away from the border
has been ongoing now since 3 May. It is true that
original plans included the possibility of only the ablebodied walking, with the others being trucked. But in
fact arrangements have been made to truck everyone
out, so people are being driven to the new camps. That
is why the exercise is taking slightly longer; it actually
would have been faster if they had moved on foot. A
major obstacle has been finding the trucks. As to
whether this means that the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
would no longer provide assistance to refugees in the
Languette, the answer is, yes, it would not. When we
have a major policy with the Government of Guinea
and the international community to move them away,
an offer of assistance to refugees in the Languette
would mean the failure of the project. We cannot offer
assistance to the same people in two spots; it is not
consistent. That does not mean that those in need of
humanitarian assistance within those areas will not be
getting some assistance. A number of major nongovernmental organizations, supported by the United
Nations, will continue to operate in the area —
Médecins sans Frontières, Action contre la Faim and
Caritas — for example, will continue to offer
assistance with our support.
On the question of the slowing down of the boat
traffic — yes; there are very few candidates, actually,
for return by boat. It is not a deliberate policy of
UNHCR or the International Organization for
Migration to stop the boat traffic. The population of
Forecariah has diminished, but in addition the Guinean
Government is trying to encourage refugees to stay

33

S/PV.4319

away from Conakry because of the overcrowding there.
I believe my colleague covered the point on the
Kambia crossing. There is no doubt that the opening of
the Forecariah-Kambia route in the future will offer a
significant opportunity for the safer and more
comfortable return of refugees. Finally, the report
being prepared by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, with support from OCHA, in accordance
with paragraph 9 of resolution 1346 (2001), should be
ready in a few days.
The last question of which I took note was the
question from Singapore about juxtaposing the
expenditure of UNAMSIL and the tribunal and
spending on development and humanitarian aid.
Obviously, I do not have a figure for the totality of
development and humanitarian aid for the region,
because much of it comes from non-United Nations
sources. Suffice it to say that for this year, if we add up
the funds that we have collected from the appeal for
Sierra Leone and the appeal for the region, it totals
about $25 million, and we are already well into the
month of May. So we will be actively seeking
additional support.
Finally, I was very pleased to hear the support for
the regional approach. I think we are all aligned on
that. But that should not blind us to the fact that
solutions must also play out at the country level. In
Sierra Leone, the end of war is only the beginning. I
think that we have in Sierra Leone a classic example of
where the international community, the international
institutions and the United Nations need to work
together to avoid any question of a humanitarian gap.
As I said, this is a classic test case for the international
community.
The lesson we have learned in Guinea is that the
international community has tools at its disposal to
assist refugees and countries in crisis, but not to assist
host countries of refugees. Guinea has suffered from
this for a long time, and now that it has a humanitarian
crisis of its own, we have to look at the link between
massive underdevelopment and regional instability.
Finally, on Liberia, the third of the three
countries, the deteriorating humanitarian situation is
only the tip of the iceberg. Given its long isolation,
there is very little capacity in Government, civil society
or the international agencies present on the ground.
When conditions permit — and I realize that some of

34

those conditions are quite strict — there will be a need
for a long-term and in-depth approach to Liberia.
If you, Mr. President, will permit me to do so, I
should like to end on a lighter note in our discussion of
a serious subject. You referred to the fact that this was
a man-made disaster, not a natural disaster. I can assure
you that that is one expression on which we are not
seeking gender equity.
The President: I will remember that next time.
I give the floor to Mr. Fall.
Mr. Fall: First of all, I would like to express my
full agreement with Ms. McAskie’s comments that the
regional approach should not be a substitute for the
national approach. Rather, it should be a
complementary way to strengthen the national
approach.
Turning to the questions, I will be very brief. As
far as the issue of proposing the geographical extension
of the mandate of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone is concerned, the issue before the Mission was
not actually its composition. Its composition reflected
all the departments concerned, including the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations — the Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General was a
member of the Mission. Rather, the issue was about
giving fair treatment to concerns expressed in the
region by the leaders. It is just for that reason that we
thought it would be fair to express those concerns.
Secondly, how do we improve the dialogue
between the United Nations and Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS)? I think UnderSecretary-General Guéhenno has already responded
about the different levels of cooperation between the
United Nations and ECOWAS. I would like to add two
comments: the first is that we should perhaps continue
to make better use of those frameworks, and the second
is that the Council has already begun a fruitful dialogue
with ECOWAS. I think that that can also be improved.
Last but not least, the establishment of the United
Nations office for West Africa will certainly be critical
to improving that cooperation.
With regard to the role of countries that export
arms in West Africa, I recall that paragraph 102 of the
report deals with that. It is clearly mentioned that

S/PV.4319

“Concerted measures should be taken by the
appropriate United Nations organs, including the
Security Council, and international and national
partners to identify those engaged in the illicit
trade of arms to West Africa and to stem their
activities.” (S/2001/434, para. 102)
How can we make sure that a regional strategy
can alleviate the double fatigue in humanitarian
assistance, both among the host countries and among
the international donors? I think that Ms. McAskie
might like to respond to this question, which was raised
by the representative of Colombia. What I can say is
just that it seems to me that, as far as the host countries
are concerned, the international humanitarian agencies
are already trying to help by including host
communities in their humanitarian assistance in order
to alleviate their fatigue in supporting the refugees.
The representative of Mauritius asked if
reflections are ongoing in the Secretariat on the
implementation plan. Yes, we have the interim interagency mission task force, which is working every
week and devising ways and means of implementing
the recommendations, including in terms of human
resources; yes, because we have already developed a
matrix of the different recommendations; yes, because
the report has already been distributed on the ground
and to the different partners to request their

contribution to the implementation; and, last but not
least, yes, because the Secretary-General has already
designated the Deputy Secretary-General to coordinate
the efforts of all concerned towards the implementation
of the recommendations.
Last but not least, several interlocutors raised the
issue of cooperation and strengthening ECOWAS and
the issue of sanctions against Liberia. Members will
note that I did not develop those issues because, first,
with respect to the sanctions against Liberia, the
Council has already had a meeting that took our
recommendations into account; and because, secondly,
with respect to strengthening the capacity of ECOWAS,
this is really the underlying pattern of the entire report
and I did not think it was necessary to underline it
again.
The President: I thank all of our briefers today
for elucidating their views on the subject. We can all
see that there is a lot of work still to be done here and
we look forward to cooperating with them all as we
move ahead.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.

35
