S/2019/797

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 October 2019
Original: English

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction and Mission priorities
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), by which the Council established the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and requested me to report at regular intervals on the
implementation of its mandate. The report covers the activities of UNMIK, and
developments related thereto, from 16 May to 15 September 2019.
2.
The priorities of the Mission remain to promote security, stability and respect
for human rights in Kosovo and in the region. In furtherance of its goals, UNMIK
continues its constructive engagement with Pristina and Belgrade, all communities in
Kosovo and regional and international actors. The Organization for Security an d
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Kosovo Force continue to perform their roles
within the framework of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). The European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) continues its presence in Kosovo,
in line with the statement by the President of the Security Council of 26 November
2008 (S/PRST/2008/44) and my report of 24 November 2008 (S/2008/692). The
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes work closely with the Mission.

II. Key political and security developments
3.
The reporting period was marked by the resignation of the Prime Minister of
Kosovo, Ramush Haradinaj, on 19 July. The Prime Minister cited as a major reason
his invitation to be interviewed by the Specialist Chambers and the Specialist
Prosecutor’s Office, and clarified that he would continue to perform his functions
pending the formation of a new government. On 5 August, in response to a request by
President of Kosovo, Hashim Thaçi, to propose a new candidate for Prime Minister,
the President of the Assembly of Kosovo announced that the governing coalition
comprising the Democratic Party of Kosovo , the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo,
the Socialist Democratic Initiative of Kosovo, the New Kosovo Alliance and the
Serbian List, would not continue under a new Prime Minister. This was followed by
the dissolution of the Assembly on 22 August and a subsequent announcement by the
President of Kosovo that early parliamentary elections would be held on 6 October.
4.
On 10 September, the Central Election Commission certified 25 political entities
(20 political parties, including 3 representing Kosovo Serbs, 4 pre-election coalitions,

19-16705 (E)

081019

*1916705*

S/2019/797

including 1 representing Kosovo Serbs, and 1 independent candidate) for
participation in the parliamentary elections. To date, the following registered political
parties and coalitions have announced their respective candidates for the position of
Prime Minister: Albin Kurti for the Movement for Self-Determination (Vetëvendosje),
Vjosa Osmani for the Democratic League of Kosovo, Kadri Veseli for the Democratic
Party of Kosovo, Ramush Haradinaj for the coalition betwe en the Alliance for the
Future of Kosovo and the Social Democratic Party of Kosovo and Fatmir Limaj for
the coalition between the Socialist Democratic Initiative of Kosovo and the New
Kosovo Alliance. The electoral lists of all certified political entities also met the
required 30 per cent representation of women, as required by the Law on General
Elections. On 9 September, the Central Election Commission issued an instruction
that only identification documents issued by Kosovo authorities would be accepted
during the vote. The Serbian List protested the instruction as violating the Law on
General Elections and submitted an appeal to the Election Complaints and Appeals
Panel. The Panel upheld the instruction, following which the Serbian List sent an
appeal to the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court had not issued a decision at the time
of writing.
5.
Following the Prime Minister’s resignation, international actors stressed the
importance of resuming the dialogue with Belgrade as soon as a new government is
in place. However, persistent tensions between Belgrade and Pristina have continued
to undermine prospects for the resumption of the dialogue, while reviving concerns
about the overall stability of the situation on the ground. As Belgrade and Pristina
have remained entrenched in their positions regarding the conditions under which the
dialogue could be resumed, another controversy arose concerning the reported refusal
by the Kosovo police to allow holders of Serbian passports to enter Kosovo, which
led to protests by Belgrade.
6.
On 13 August, the Governments of France, Germany, Italy, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America issued a joint
statement calling on Pristina and Belgrade to avoid actions hindering the resumption
of the dialogue. They pressed upon Pristina authorities to suspend the 100 per cent
tariff on goods from Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, which has remained in place
since November 2018, and on Belgrade authorities to halt the “de-recognition
campaign against Kosovo”. In another joint statement, issued in Pristina on
30 August, they stressed the need to rise above populist and nationalist rhetoric,
underlining that the next government would need flexibility to negotiate and the
ability to articulate a positive vision of its future relationship with Belgrade.
7.
Meanwhile, on 27 June, the Constitutional Court of Kosovo declared
unconstitutional the mandate and competences of Pristina ’s negotiating team for the
dialogue with Belgrade, which had been established in December 2018. This was
followed by the resignation of the co-chairs and the members of the team. The Court
concluded that “representation of foreign policy is the responsibility of constitutional
institutions”, and that powers to reach an international agreement cannot be
transferred from constitutional institutions to “special mechanisms”, such as the
negotiating team. While Pristina’s negotiating position remains to be determined by
the new government when it is established, political parties in Pristina, in positioning
themselves for elections, advocated adherence to the 100 per cent import tariff, with
some proposing an even more forceful “policy of reciprocity” towards Belgrade,
including in the area of trade. In response, the President of Serbia, Aleksandar Vučić,
expressed doubt that the dialogue could resume soon and reiterated Belgrade ’s
position that it would not return to the negotiating table until Pristina has lifted the
tariff.
8.
Following the announcement of the new leadership of European Union
institutions in July 2019, political leaders in Pristina reiterated their commitment to
2/20

19-16705

S/2019/797

Kosovo’s European perspective. The Prime Minister used the opportunity to also
reiterate his position that the dialogue with Belgrade should result in an agreement on
mutual recognition “within existing borders”. While participating in the Western
Balkans Summit within the framework of the Berlin Process, held from 3 to 5 July in
Poznań, Poland, the Prime Minister emphasized the complexity of trade relations with
Belgrade, arguing that they could not be addressed separately from the European
Union-facilitated dialogue. In response, the Prime Minister of Serbia, Ana Brnabić,
questioned Kosovo’s willingness to continue the dialogue and stressed that the
outcome of a dialogue process could not be predefined.
9.
Prior to its dissolution on 22 August, the Assembly of Kosovo ratified an
agreement for European Union financial assistance through the Instrument for
Pre-accession Assistance, which foresees support for democracy and good governance,
in line with the European reform agenda for Kosovo, as well as alignment of the rule
of law and fundamental rights in Kosovo with European standards. The ratification
followed the publication, at the end of May, of the 2019 European Commission report
on Kosovo, in which Pristina’s progress in the rule of law and public administration
reforms was acknowledged, while Kosovo’s fight against corruption and organized
crime was still recognized in the report as being “at an early stage”. During the
reporting period, representatives of the international community in Pristina continued
to express concern about political influence over senior-level appointments for
independent institutions in Kosovo.
10. On the morning of 28 May, Kosovo police conducted an operation targeting
suspects of smuggling and organized crime at different locations in northern Kosovo.
The operation was conducted under warrants issued by the Basic Court of Pristina
and following an investigation by the Police Inspectorate of Kosovo into misconduct
involving Kosovo police officers. According to the Kosovo Police Service, it led to
the arrest of 29 suspects, including 19 local police officials. Two Kosovo police
officers and approximately 10 civilians were injured in the course of the operation. In
addition, two members of UNMIK staff, an international staff member and a local
civilian staff member, were arrested and detained by Kosovo authorities for alleged
obstruction of the police operation in two separate locations in the Zubin Potok
municipality. Applicable immunities of the staff from arrest and detention and from
legal process were not observed. My Special Representative issued a statement noting
this, calling for the immediate release of the detained UNMIK staff and also urging
all parties to abide by the principles of the rule of law. Both UNMIK staff members
were subsequently released. During their arrest and detention, both suffered serious
injuries that required hospitalization. The international staff member received
medical treatment in local hospitals and was subsequently transferred to a hospital in
Belgrade. He was declared “persona non grata” by Kosovo authorities, a doctrine that
is not applicable to, or in respect of, United Nations personn el. The local staff
member, along with five other defendants, was brought before the Basic Court of
Mitrovica on 29 May for a hearing in connection with their detention. The Court
ordered their immediate release on the basis that their continued detention at the
request of the Mitrovica Basic Prosecutor’s Office was unfounded. The local staff
member was taken back to the Mitrovica North Medical Centre on the same day,
where he remained until 3 June for further treatment. In August, the Mitrovica Basic
Prosecutor expanded the investigation against eight individuals, including the two
UNMIK staff members, for participating in a crowd, committing a criminal offence
and hooliganism. At the end of the reporting period, judicial proceedings against the
two UNMIK staff members were still ongoing, despite reiterated assertions of
immunity. My Special Representative appointed an ad hoc investigation team in July,
comprising United Nations legal, investigative and security experts from outside
UNMIK to ascertain all the facts regarding the two incidents involving the arrest and
detention of the two UNMIK staff. The investigation team visited the mission area to
19-16705

3/20

S/2019/797

collect information and meet with all parties concerned. At the time of writing, the
investigation had not been concluded. The authorities of the Member State whose
national was affected also initiated a national investigation.
11. During the reporting period, there were a number of incidents targeting religious
sites and cemeteries. Unknown perpetrators vandalized a Serbian Orthodox Church
in the municipality of Prizren on 28 May and a mosque in the municipality of Ferizaj/
Uroševac on 18 June. On 13 July, unknown perpetrators damaged 19 tombstones in a
Kosovo Serb cemetery in the town of Lipjan/Lipljan. On 4 Augu st, 15 Muslim
gravestones were vandalized in Pristina. These incidents are being investigated by the
Kosovo Police Service. International actors, including my Special Representative,
condemned the desecration of gravestones and called on law enforcement in stitutions
to ensure a swift investigation and to bring those responsible to justice.
12. The Mission continued to monitor, in coordination with the United Nations
Kosovo team and international partners, the reintegration process for the 110 persons
(74 children, 32 women and 4 men) who had been repatriated from the Syrian Arab
Republic to Kosovo in April 2019. The 74 children continue to live with relatives. On
26 July, the Basic Court of Pristina extended the house arrest of 24 of the repatriated
women, on suspicion of participation in terrorist groups. On 3 September, one of them
received a suspended sentence of two and a half years of imprisonment. Among the
remaining eight women, four must report regularly to the police, while another four
were released from house arrest. The four men continue to be detained in a high security prison while investigations are ongoing. According to the competent
authorities, all returnees received appropriate medical attention, which revealed that
most of the children suffer from post-traumatic stress disorder.
13. In a separate development, on 30 August, the Basic Court of Pristina sentenced
an individual to six months in prison for posting terrorism -related material on social
media. On 4 September, the Basic Court of Pristina convicted six individuals (five
men and one woman) on terrorism-related charges and sentenced them to a total of
25 years and nine months in prison. Reportedly, the Special Prosecution Office of
Kosovo charged the six individuals with attempting to set up terrorist groups in
Kosovo, North Macedonia and Albania, and with allegedly planning terrorist attacks
in Kosovo Serb-majority areas and against Kosovo Force troops. The defendants were
arrested in late June 2018 in Kosovo, following a joint interna tional police operation.
On 12 September, the Basic Court of Pristina sentenced another individual to
20 months in prison for posting terrorism-related material on social media. He was
also convicted of using social networks to issue threatening messages against the
Prime Minister of Kosovo.

III. Northern Kosovo
14. On 19 May, extraordinary mayoral elections took place in North Mitrovica,
Zubin Potok, Leposavić/Leposaviq, and Zvečan/Zveҫan, resulting in the Serbian List
winning over 90 per cent of the vote in all four municipalities in northern Kosovo.
The absence of other Kosovo Serb political parties in the elections prompted the
representatives of France, Germany, Italy, United Kingdom and United States to issue
a joint statement on 20 May, in which they recalled the serious concerns expressed by
the European Union Election Observation Mission in 2017 about intimidation in many
Kosovo Serb-populated areas, especially against political parties competing against
the Serbian List. The statement pointed out that these and other electoral
shortcomings, such as the lack of up-to-date voter registries and clear election-related
procedures, remained unaddressed, resulting in restricted electoral competition and
limited political participation. The four elected mayors took office on 19 June and the

4/20

19-16705

S/2019/797

respective municipal assemblies resumed regular sessions one week later, almost six
months after the suspension of activities in response to the imposition of the 100 per
cent tariff by authorities in Pristina. In protest against Pristina ’s import tariff, shops
and private businesses operated by Kosovo Serbs in the four northern municipalities
were closed on 1 and 2 July.

IV. Normalization of relations between Belgrade and Pristina
15. During the period under review, no high-level meetings were held between
Belgrade and Pristina within the framework of the European Union -facilitated
dialogue. Consequently, there was no progress on efforts to implement existing
agreements nor to engage constructively in dialogue for the normalization of relations.
A meeting in Paris planned for early July, in follow-up to the meeting of Western
Balkans leaders in Berlin at the end of April (S/2019/461, para. 15), was cancelled.
16. At an informal meeting of Foreign Ministers of the European Union, with the
participation of Western Balkan officials, held in Helsinki on 30 August, the High
Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and VicePresident of the European Commission, Federica Mogherini, reiterated the
importance of a timely resumption of the Belgrade-Pristina talks. For his part, the
Commissioner for European Neighbourhood Policy and Enlargement Negotiations,
Johannes Hahn, called on both parties to avoid unilateral actions that undermine the
normalization of relations.

V. Returns, reconciliation and cultural heritage and
community relations
17. During the reporting period, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) recorded 31 voluntary returns by members of
non-majority communities who had been displaced within and outside Kosovo. The
returnees included 19 women and 12 men (25 Kosovo Serbs, 5 Kosovo Roma and 1
Kosovo Albanian). This brings the total number of displaced members of
non-majority communities who have found durable solutions in Kosovo since 2000
to 28,185, including 13,834 women and 14,351 men (12,004 Kosovo Serbs,
7,581 Kosovo Egyptians and Ashkali, 3,935 Kosovo Roma, 1,875 Kosovo Bosniaks,
1,464 Kosovo Gorani, 1,282 Kosovo Albanians, 21 Kosovo Montenegrins, 19 Kosovo
Turks and 4 Kosovo Croats). There remain 16,193 displaced persons within Kosovo
(7,479 women and 9,714 men), as well as 69,627 persons with displacement -related
needs across the Western Balkans region, out of the approximately 200,000 displaced
persons from Kosovo residing in the region, most of them in Serbia.
18. The government of Kosovo, with support from OSCE and UNHCR, provided
training to 40 municipal officials from Prizren, Pristina and Gjilan/Gnjilane regions
aimed at ensuring effective implementation of the government regulations on the
return of displaced persons and on durable solutions. In addition, out of Kosovo ’s
38 municipalities, 32 now have established municipal commissions on returns with
assistance from OSCE.
19. On 13 June, UNMIK, in partnership with UNHCR, organized a workshop on
challenges and good practices in facilitating the return of displaced persons at the
local level. The workshop was chaired by my Special Representative and attended by
representatives of 18 municipalities and the international community. Participants
recommended that the Ministry of Communities and Returns develop and maintain a
database and a case management system for all displaced persons and voluntary

19-16705

5/20

S/2019/797

returnees in Kosovo. On 26 June, the United Nations development coordinator,
UNHCR, the International Organization for Migration (IOM) and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) co-chaired a round-table discussion with the
Minister for Communities and Returns, on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement, with the
participation of displaced families and representatives of receiving communiti es, as
well as relevant international actors. The discussion focused on ways of promoting
sustainable solutions for internally displaced persons and receiving communities.
20. During the reporting period, the government of Kosovo expanded the mandate
of the independent commission on degrees issued by the University of Mitrovica to
include accreditation of all secondary-level educational institutions operating in the
Serbian language. The certificates can be used by graduates to apply for positions in
public institutions in Kosovo. The independent commission continues to receive
support from the European Centre for Minority Issues, an international
non-governmental organization, in implementing its expanded mandate.
21. The Implementation and Monitoring Council, which oversees the special
protective zones surrounding religious sites, met on 3 July. In follow-up to previous
discussions, the Council noted no further objections to issuing a permit for the
construction of a residential building inside the special protective zone of the Serbian
Orthodox Church of the Presentation of the Virgin in the municipality of Lipjan/
Lipljan. The Council also discussed the proposed construction of an administrative
centre for the Islamic community in the same special protec tive zone and reiterated
the need for an amicable solution to be found between the two religious communities.
During subsequent meetings, the representatives of the two communities reached an
agreement on the matter. At the same meeting, representatives of the Serbian
Orthodox Church reiterated their concern about the plans of the municipality of
Deçan/Dečani to build a transit road to Montenegro through the special protective
zone of the Visoki Dečani monastery. In response, the Council reiterated the need to
uphold the Law on Special Protective Zones and the need for the consent of the
Serbian Orthodox Church before any construction can commence. The Council also
discussed the non-implementation of the Constitutional Court ruling of 19 May 2016
in favour of the Church’s ownership right to 24 ha of land, concluding that the
decisions of the Court are final and binding, and therefore, must be implemented.
22. During the reporting period, the Eparchy of Raška-Prizren expressed concern
over restoration works carried out by the Archaeological Institute of Kosovo on the
remains of St. Nicholas Church in Novo Brdo/Novobërdë municipality. The Eparchy
argued that the restoration was not compliant with the Law on Special Protective
Zones. In addition, on 2 August, the Eparchy issued a communiqué expressing
disappointment about a Catholic liturgy that took place in the same Church on
1 August, which in their view had undermined interfaith relations in Kosovo.
23. From 15 June to 15 July, the municipality of Pristina offered free civil
registration for members of Ashkali, Egyptian and Roma communities. UNHCR also
continued to support members of these communities in obtaining civil documentation
and resolving civil status issues so as to enable their access to public servi ces.
UNHCR assisted 111 individuals (42 women and 69 men) in obtaining civil
documentation. In addition, UNHCR provided legal assistance and counselling to
30 individuals from these communities (14 women, 16 men), including assistance to
9 returnees in resolving issues related to their property rights. UNHCR also provided
psychosocial support to 35 members of Ashkali, Egyptian and Roma communities,
with a special focus on enhancing their access to education.
24. UNHCR organized 15 focus group discussions across Kosovo, with the
participation of 352 members of Ashkali, Egyptian and Roma communities
6/20

19-16705

S/2019/797

(108 women, 244 men) to raise awareness about the importanc e of, and about access
to, services relating to birth registration and child protection. On 2 July, UNHCR
facilitated a panel discussion with the former President of Kosovo, Atifete Jahjaga,
the United Nations Development Coordinator, civil society organiz ations and
10 women representing the Ashkali, Egyptian and Roma communities, aimed at
empowering women to identify and implement solutions to problems faced by their
communities.
25. The Mission intensified its engagement with Ashkali, Egyptian and Roma
communities, including with members of grass-roots organizations, educators and
health service providers, as well as international partners working with these
communities in the Mitrovica region, where health and education indicators remain
precariously low, especially among women and children. UNMIK has continued to
advocate the full exercise by the Ashkali, Egyptian and Roma communities of their
social, economic and cultural rights.
26. Efforts continued to attract voluntary contributions for the trust fund in support
of the Ashkali, Egyptian and Roma communities affected by lead poisoning in
Kosovo, established in 2017 pursuant to the recommendations of the UNMIK Human
Rights Advisory Panel. Following an initial contribution received in May 2019, no
further contributions were received during the period under review.

VI. Rule of law and human rights
27. Kosovo institutions have continued efforts to strengthen the judiciary. The
Special Departments of the Basic Court of Pristina and of the Court of Appeals, which
were established under the new Law on Courts on 18 December 2018 in order to
ensure the standardization of court practice, became operational in July. The
departments have jurisdiction over all cases falling within the competence of the
Special Prosecution Office of Kosovo, including war crimes, organized crime and
corruption cases. On 30 May, the Assembly of Kosovo adopted the Law on the Special
Chamber of the Supreme Court of Kosovo on Privatization Agency Related Matters.
The Law allows for panels of judges to be composed entirely of local judges, therefore
unblocking the work of the Chamber, which had not been functional since the
departure of international judges in June 2018.
28. On 3 July, the Basic Court of Prizren, consisting of local judges, adjudicated a
war crimes case concerning the 1998 abduction and murder of a Kosovo Albanian
suspected of collaborating with Serbian forces. The Court convicted a former Kosovo
Liberation Army commander of war crimes against the civilian population and
sentenced him to 14 years of imprisonment.
29. On 24 June, the Assembly of Kosovo approved a report previously submitted by
an investigative committee of the Assembly on the expulsion of six Turkish nationals
in March 2018. The report cites 31 breaches of law and procedures, including alleged
violations of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Convention
for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (European
Convention on Human Rights) and the Constitution of Kosovo, by Kosovo
authorities. In August, the Police Inspectorate of Kosovo submitted to the Special
Prosecution Office of Kosovo criminal reports against 22 members of the Kosovo
Police Service in relation to the expulsion of the Turkish nationals.
30. On 27 June, the Assembly of Kosovo, with support from the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF), adopted the Law on Child Protection, which aims to
ensure a well-coordinated government system of child protection to improve the
prevention of and response to all forms of violence against boys and girls.

19-16705

7/20

S/2019/797

31. During the reporting period, UNMIK continued to support efforts to determine
the fate of missing persons in Kosovo. On 24 May, UNMIK part icipated in the
forty-ninth meeting of the Working Group on persons who are unaccounted for in
connection with events in Kosovo, during which the delegations from both Belgrade
and Pristina called upon my Special Representative to continue to facilitate
assessments of potential sites of interest through ground-penetrating radar surveys.
At the meeting, the International Committee of the Red Cross reported that
1,653 persons out of 6,063 remained missing as of May 2019. During the reporting
period, the Kosovo Institute of Forensic Medicine, with support from EULEX,
assessed possible mass grave sites in Deçan/Dečane, Ferizaj/Uroševac, Mitrovica,
Podujevë/Podujevo, Prizren, Suharekë/Suva Reka, Vushtrri/Vučitrn and Viti/Vitina
municipalities. The assessment resulted in the discovery of human remains at four of
those sites, for which DNA testing is pending. A site assessment was also conducted
by Serbian authorities in Kiževak, Serbia.
32. On 18 June, the government of Kosovo adopted a concept paper on the issu e of
missing persons, which foresees an amendment to the Law on Missing Persons, as
advocated by the families of the missing and by international actors, to align the status
and entitlements of the families of the missing with those of other groups of peop le
who had suffered as a consequence of the conflict.
33. In August, the Office of Good Governance, Human Rights, Equal Opportunities
and Non-Discrimination in the Office of the Prime Minister issued its first report on
human rights in Kosovo. The report was initiated following a public appeal to the
Prime Minister by the Ombudsperson Institution of Kosovo. While the report reveals
the need for more regular and comprehensive monitoring and reporting by the
government, using consistent methodology, it represents a positive step by Kosovo
authorities to enhance accountability in applying international human rights standards.
During the reporting period, the Ombudsperson Institution of Kosovo, the Committee
on Human Rights, Gender Equality, Missing Persons and Petitions, and UNDP have
continued to reach out to central and local level institutions to raise awareness of the
importance of implementing the Ombudsperson’s recommendations as they pertain
to the promotion, protection and upholding of fundamental right s and freedoms.

VII. Women and peace and security
34. During the reporting period, the Kosovo government commission responsible
for the verification and recognition of the status of survivors of conflict -related sexual
violence received 75 applications, bringing the total number of applications received
since its establishment to 1,057. To date, 406 applicants (394 women and 12 men)
have been granted survivor status. Challenges persist in terms of assessing and
evaluating applications owing to the sensitivity and complexity of cases.
35. On 1 July, the Islamic Community of Kosovo organized an interfaith gathering
entitled “All together in one voice” aimed at supporting survivors of conflict-related
sexual violence. The event resulted in a joint declaration by representatives of
different religious groups in Kosovo in support of the survivors and their continued
integration within their families and society. During the conference, UNMIK
reiterated its commitment to maintain its support for the survivors and that combating
sexual violence was a matter of human rights and dignity.
36. The Mission also supported a project, implemented by the Jahjaga Foundation,
in cooperation with civil society partners, which helped to economically empower
more than 50 women survivors of conflict-related sexual violence from majority and
non-majority communities, including through their participation in professional
training sessions and the provision of assistance to five survivor-led small businesses.
8/20

19-16705

S/2019/797

The support enabled the beneficiaries to overcome isolation, contribute to the w ellbeing of their families and elevate their status and role within their community.
37. During the reporting period, the United Nations continued to help empower
women professionals in Kosovo. On 5 July, with support from UNMIK and the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN -Women),
Kosovo women parliamentarians marked the fourteenth anniversary of the women ’s
caucus with a symbolic exhibition outside the Assembly of Kosovo, followed by a
ceremonial session in the Assembly plenary hall. From 10 to 17 July, international
experts engaged by UN-Women provided training to prosecutors from the Special
Prosecution Office of Kosovo responsible for the prosecution of war crimes, as well
as to investigators from the Kosovo Police war crimes unit, on interviewing witnesses
and on the handling of confidential information.
38. On 5 July, within the framework of a project supported by the Peacebuilding
Fund on “Empowering youth for a peaceful, prosperous and sustainable future in
Kosovo”, UN-Women, UNDP, UNICEF and the United Nations Volunteers
programme organized an extraordinary session of the Assembly, with 70 young
women. The session, which served as an intergenerational dialogue between decision
makers and young women aspiring to become leaders, highlighted the need for the
increased involvement of young women in decision-making. Similarly, in August,
under the same project, UN-Women organized two separate advocacy training
sessions in Prizren for 30 young women from different communities and
municipalities. In addition to equipping the young women with advocacy tools a nd
strategies to increasing their influence in decision-making, the training sessions
helped to foster cross-community dialogue and cooperation.

VIII. Trust-building, partnerships and cooperation
39. During the reporting period, UNMIK, in close collaboration with the United
Nations Kosovo team, advanced the implementation of the recommendations arising
from the United Nations Kosovo Trust-Building Forum, held in Ljubljana in May
2018. Efforts included the implementation of trust-building programmatic activities,
in particular in the areas of language rights, youth empowerment and inter community
dialogue, gender equality, access to justice and human rights.
40. In June, UNMIK, in partnership with IOM and the Office of the Language
Commissioner, completed the first phase of a trust-building initiative aimed at
promoting the learning of both official languages in Kosovo. As a result, the first
online Albanian-Serbian and Serbian-Albanian dictionary, containing 20,000 words,
and an associated online language course, were developed. On 5 August, a
documentary produced by UNMIK, entitled “With Throat in Strawberries: A Test of
Multilingualism in Kosovo”, highlighting the value of multilingualism among
communities and individuals, was featured during the international film festival
DokuFest in Prizren. The screening of the documentary was followed by a high profile panel discussion, organized jointly by UNMIK, IOM and the Embassy of the
United Kingdom in Pristina, on the importance of multilingualism in Kos ovo.
41. During the reporting period, UNMIK, in collaboration with UNICEF, advanced
the implementation of its strategy in support of the youth, peace and security agenda
in Kosovo. It supported the implementation of six innovative youth -led projects
stemming from the third United Nations Youth Assembly in Kosovo, which took place
on 24 April. The projects, which brought together some 300 young people from
different communities (195 women and 105 men), aimed to foster reconciliation
through creative activities, including the establishment of the first multi-ethnic
astronomy club in Kosovo and a series of masterclasses in the areas of business, arts
19-16705

9/20

S/2019/797

and culture. In addition, in order to encourage the participation of young people in
local decision-making processes, UNMIK funded a capacity-building project that
focused on supporting some 30 members of municipal youth councils (17 women and
13 men) from five ethnically mixed municipalities, with community advocacy and
engagement tools and strategies.
42. During the reporting period, as part of a project funded by UNMIK and
implemented by Women’s Rights, a local non-governmental organization, a
multi-ethnic women’s advocacy group, developed gender equality action plans for
each of the four municipalities in northern Kosovo. The plans, which are based on the
shared priorities of more than 200 women and men from rural areas and villages
across Albanian, Serb, Bosniak, Gorani, Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian communities,
were presented at a conference in Gračanica/Graçanicë on 14 June.
43. During the reporting period, UNMIK supported cooperation between media
representatives and aspiring entrepreneurs from different communities through
confidence-building projects funded by the Mission. A local non-governmental
organization, the Centre for Communities’ Development, brought together 20 women
media professionals representing diverse communities in Kosovo, who signed a joint
pledge to commit institutions and individual journalists to improve access to
information, gender responsiveness and ethical reporting on crimes and security
incidents. In addition, a local non-governmental organization, LINK, established the
Mitrovica Innovation Centre and trained more than 50 youth from all communities in
the region in information technology skills, with a focus on improving young people’s
access to entrepreneurial opportunities. Another local non-governmental organization,
an association of business women known as “Sabor”, facilitated business partnerships
between Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo Serb producers, connecting small and
medium-sized enterprises to larger production chains and new markets.
44. In the area of justice, from 17 to 19 June, UNMIK supported the holding of an
annual seminar of Court of Appeals judges, facilitated by the Kosovo Academy of
Justice. The seminar, which brought together judges from different communities, was
a positive step towards the standardization of judicial practice throughout Kosovo. In
partnership with UNICEF, UNMIK also funded a workshop with a view t o providing
assistance in drafting secondary legislation to enable the implementation of the
Juvenile Justice Code.
45. With respect to the Ljubljana trust-building recommendations on the
environment, on 27 June, with support from UNMIK and the United Nati ons Kosovo
team, a local non-governmental organization, Let’s Do It, organized a forum entitled
“EverGreen Kosovo”, which connected environmental activists from different ethnic
backgrounds with decision makers and donors. The forum discussed the environme ntal
challenges in Kosovo and resulted in a call for action on the environmental priorities
and commitments agreed by the participants. In September, as a follow -up to the
forum, UNMIK supported another local non-governmental organization, GAIA, in
organizing a multi-ethnic youth initiative, with the participation of some 30 young
persons from different municipalities in Kosovo to discuss creative solutions to
environmental challenges.
46. The Mission continued to provide document certification services. D uring the
period under review, a total of 845 documents were processed, including 484 relating
to pensions and 361 to civil status, such as high school and university diplomas and
marriage, birth and death certificates. UNMIK also continued to facilitate b ilateral
police cooperation between Kosovo authorities and the Ministry of Interior of Serbia,
with a total of 61 requests received and processed. UNMIK facilitated the issuance of
31 Red Notices and 19 extradition requests from States members of the Inter national
Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) to Kosovo. It also opened 559 cases for
10/20

19-16705

S/2019/797

investigation within the INTERPOL database, bringing the total number of open cases
related to the territory or people of Kosovo to 1,432, and processed 4,434 items of
official correspondence related to its INTERPOL liaison function during the reporting
period.

IX. Observations
47. Elections, when free and fair, provide an opportunity to advance democracy and
to encourage debate on policies and programmes as well as public dialogue. I call on
all parties in Kosovo to use the opportunity offered by the early parliamentary
elections scheduled for 6 October to focus on tackling social and economic priorities
and ensuring the strengthening of good governance, the rule of law and effective and
accountable public institutions. I encourage the timely formation of a new
government in Kosovo following the elections, so that the dialogue with Belgrade can
resume promptly.
48. The long break in the formal talks facilitated by the European Union between
Belgrade and Pristina has stalled the progress towards the normalization of relations,
which in turn risks undermining stability on the ground. I strongly value the
commitment of the European Union to continue engaging the parti es and helping to
temper adversarial rhetoric and actions from both sides. All obstacles to dialogue
should be removed. I welcome efforts aimed at ensuring greater involvement in the
political process by wider segments of society. I particularly encourage women to
engage and lead in the democratic governance of Kosovo.
49. Many young women and men in Kosovo have a vision for a better future, which
has inspired the efforts of UNMIK, under the leadership of my Special
Representative, to help empower young change-makers. I welcome the contributions
made by UNMIK and the United Nations Kosovo team to take forward the
multifaceted recommendations of the United Nations Kosovo Trust -Building Forum
of 2018 to promote youth empowerment, multilingualism, intercommuni ty dialogue
and respect for human rights. Creative initiatives have already shown results in
empowering all those determined to work together towards a more peaceful,
prosperous and inclusive society.
50. Trust-building cannot be successful if the rule of law is not strengthened and if
the judiciary is not perceived as credible, independent and impartial. The efforts
undertaken by several actors in Kosovo to uphold the rights to reparation and help
address the needs of survivors of conflict-related sexual violence are encouraging and
should continue to be supported. However, Kosovo’s reparations process falls short
of being fully inclusive and needs a strengthened rights-based approach. It currently
excludes cases of sexual violence that occurred in the aftermath of the conflict. The
absence of non-majority communities in the verification and compensation process is
also of concern. I urge all stakeholders to ensure an inclusive approach to supporting
survivors of conflict-related sexual violence, starting by changing the applicable law
to enable all survivors to equally benefit from the government reparations scheme.
51. The United Nations remains committed to the protection of religious sites,
which is also in line with my global initiative, the United Nations Plan of Action to
Safeguard Religious Sites, “In Unity and Solidarity for Safe and Peaceful Worship ”,
launched in September 2019. I call upon all relevant stakeholders in Kosovo to protect
religious heritage and ensure that places of worship are sa fe and that all communities
are able to observe and practice their faith in peace.
52. I note the progress made by the Specialist Prosecutor ’s Office in furthering its
important investigations into the crimes committed during the Kosovo conflict. I call

19-16705

11/20

S/2019/797

upon all relevant parties, Kosovo institutions and international actors to extend their
full support and cooperation for these efforts, which are essential for the peaceful
future of Kosovo.
53. I welcome the ongoing efforts of the Working Group on persons who are
unaccounted for in connection with events in Kosovo and encourage continued
sustained attention to determining the fates of missing persons. This is essential for
achieving long-term reconciliation. I also welcome the planned amendment to the
Law on Missing Persons by the government of Kosovo, which aims to better protect
the rights and entitlements of the concerned families.
54. I am disappointed by the paucity of contributions to the United Nations trust
fund in support of the Ashkali, Egyptian and Roma communities affected by lead
poisoning in Kosovo. It is our shared responsibility to support the Roma, Ashkali and
Egyptian communities in Kosovo and ensure that they receive the assistance that they
need. I once again call upon Member States, other actors and organizations to
contribute to the trust fund.
55. The arrest and detention of UNMIK staff members on 28 May, the injuries they
suffered and the continued legal proceedings against them by Kosovo authorities are
of serious concern. I take note of cooperation by Kosovo authorities and other actors
with the ad hoc investigation team established to ascertain the circumstances of the
detention of the UNMIK staff. I urge the Kosovo authorities to ensure respect for the
privileges and immunities of United Nations staff. I will consider any follow-up
action once my Special Representative has received the report of the team.
56. I thank my Special Representative and all UNMIK staff for the energy, creativity
and dedication they put into the Mission’s work. I reiterate my gratitude to the longstanding partners of the United Nations in Kosovo, the Kosovo Force, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the European Union Special
Representative and offices on the ground, and to the United N ations Development
Coordinator, as well as to the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, for
their continued teamwork and collaboration with UNMIK.

12/20

19-16705

S/2019/797

Annex I
Report of the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs
and Security Policy to the Secretary-General on the activities of
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo from 16 May
to 15 September 2019
1.

Summary
The European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) continued its
monitoring of selected cases and trials in the justice system, finding progress in some
high-profile cases given that trials had been scheduled and conducted after longer
periods of inactivity. After a year-long gap, as of 12 July the Special Chamber of the
Supreme Court became operational again, composed entirely of local judges after
references to international (EULEX) judges were removed in an amendment to the
law regulating its work. Since the establishment of the Special Department of the
Basic Court of Pristina in July, the Mission identified a number of concerns that would
require further attention by judicial authorities.
In its work to monitor, mentor and advise the Kosovo Corr ectional Service, the
Mission found that the preferential treatment of high -profile inmates remained an
issue, in particular, during the hospitalization of inmates. Furthermore, despite EULEX
advice to close down old correctional facilities, as new ones ha ve been opened, the
Kosovo Correctional Service continued to maintain a large number of facilities,
placing a strain on staff resources despite a recent influx of correctional officers.
In support of the European Union-facilitated dialogue, progress was made in
completing the construction of two of the three common crossing points foreseen to
be hosted by Pristina, although Serbian authorities remained in their temporary
premises owing to political reasons. The integration of 36 former Serbian Ministry of
Interior administrative staff was completed, as the staff were formally recruited into
civil servant positions in northern Kosovo municipalities. Meanwhile, following
EULEX advice, the President of the Court of Appeals in Pristina has taken a decision
to also include Kosovo Serb criminal judges in the deliberation of cases in Pristina,
thereby correcting a previous decision and acting in line with the Justice Agreement.
Within the scope of the work of the operations pillar, the Mission continued to
facilitate international police cooperation matters with the Kosovo police. EULEX
contributed to the work of the Institute of Forensic Medicine in the identification of
missing persons, with two missing persons identified in the reporting period. The
formed police unit of EULEX maintained its capability as a second security responder
in Kosovo, and responded to a request by the Kosovo Police Service to increase its
patrols in northern Kosovo after a Kosovo police operation in the area on 28 May.
EULEX also continued to provide logistical and operational support to the
Specialist Chambers and the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office.

2.
2.1.

Activities of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
Monitoring
The Mission continued its close monitoring of selected cases and trials in the
justice system of former EULEX cases and other ad hoc cases.
Progress has been marked as hearings in some high-profile cases, inactive for
years, were scheduled and conducted. Considering the hearings monitored by the
Mission, a clear improvement could also be observed in the ratio of productive versus
non-productive hearings, averaging 30 per cent of non-productive sessions in 2019

19-16705

13/20

S/2019/797

compared with 50 per cent in 2018. A number of shortcomings remain a concern,
however, including the overall slow progress in adjudicating high -profile cases, as
investigations often take a very long time, and in some cases, suspicions are raised
that investigations are being obstructed, something wh ich remains nevertheless
difficult to prove. Furthermore, some prosecutors of the Special Prosecution Office
of Kosovo display a passive attitude towards defendants, hearings are often adjourned
for no evident legal reasons, and courts tend to issue lenien t sentences or acquittals.
The amended law on the Special Chamber of the Supreme Court was finally
adopted by the Assembly in May and has been in force since 12 July, thus ending the
blockade of the Chamber, following the end of the mandate of EULEX inte rnational
judges therein. However, the Special Chamber of the Supreme Court still lacks 10 or
11 judges, who are mainly needed to replace the EULEX international judges. The
Mission has repeatedly urged the authorities to speed up the process of recruitmen t
of judges.
The Mission offered further support to the Kosovo Police Service in better
qualifying hate crimes, as it became evident that awareness and knowledge in this
field were still lacking in large parts of the Kosovo police structure. An assessmen t
by EULEX revealed that an inter-institutional cooperation agreement with a view to
better coordinating the work of all relevant authorities and civil society actors in this
field, signed in 2018, has hardly been implemented, and in some cases officers we re
not even aware of its existence. A major impediment has been the prevailing
understanding within the judicial system that crimes qualify as hate crimes only when
the motives relate to ethnicity or religion. EULEX will continue monitoring this issue
and has agreed with the Kosovo police that all possible hate crimes should be brought
to the attention of the Mission for advice, as appropriate.
The Mission has been closely monitoring the establishment of the Special
Department within the Basic Court of Pristina, which is expected to deal with Special
Prosecution Office of Kosovo cases. While the Department has been declared as
functional since July, the Mission’s robust monitoring has detected some areas of
concern, including, among others, regarding the process of transferring cases from
the different Basic Courts to the Special Department and the considerable backlog of
Special Prosecution Office of Kosovo cases, especially those transferred from
EULEX after its executive mandate ended.
The Mission continued to monitor, mentor and advise the senior management of
the Kosovo Correctional Service, with a view to supporting the further development
of a consolidated and professional senior management team.
The recruitment processes within the Kosovo Correctional Service improved
slightly. Several key positions were filled, while two key positions of Deputy Directors
General of the Kosovo Correctional Service were finally advertised in August.
The assessment, intelligence and economic units were not officially established;
this is expected to happen once the new Law on Execution of Penal Sanctions
becomes effective.
The issue of preferential treatment of high-profile inmates was still present. The
Mission observed poor oversight procedures and non-adherence to regulations during
the hospitalization of inmates, as well as, in some cases, failure by the Kosovo
Correctional Service to inform the Mission regarding the suspension of sentences,
hospital transports or inmates being on leave. This matter has been r aised with the
senior management of the Kosovo Correctional Service, which has recommitted to
full cooperation in line with the EULEX mandate. The Kosovo Correctional Service
has been working on finding solutions with the University Clinic Centre of Kosovo

14/20

19-16705

S/2019/797

to have special rooms in a number of different wards, where prisoners would be placed
and held securely during their hospitalization.
Rehabilitation activities continued, yet too many were still being organized by
non-governmental organizations and little attention was being given to adjusting the
activities to individual needs. The insufficient number of social workers within the
Kosovo Correctional Service structure is an additional impediment.
The facilities and human resources of the Kosovo Correctional Service were
still not being managed fully in line with European Union best practice, and, to date,
the Kosovo Correctional Service has not endorsed EULEX recommendations to take
the necessary steps towards closing down old and partially derelict fac ilities,
reallocating staff currently employed there to other existing and modern detention
centres and prisons. The 119 new correctional officers who had completed their
training in July started working in the high security prison and in the Gjilan/Gnjila ne
detention centre in August. This improved the situation in the new facilities, yet even
this considerable addition will not suffice to staff all the positions in the current
facilities of the Kosovo Correctional Service.
The Mission continues to facilitate the implementation of the integrated border
management technical protocol stemming from the European Union-facilitated
dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade. In this regard, EULEX continued to facilitate
contacts between the authorities involved at all six common crossing points between
Kosovo and Serbia.
Given that no joint meetings have taken place since April 2018, continued
engagement by EULEX has become essential in guaranteeing regular contact with
both parties in line with the integrated border management technical protocol, and in
ensuring the necessary minimum exchange of information between the two sides,
thereby enabling their respective authorities to more effectively carry out their regular
work at the six common crossing points.
The construction work of two of the three permanent common cross ing points
hosted by Pristina were finally completed in July. While the Kosovo Border Police
and the Kosovo Customs Service moved into their new premises at the common
crossing points Merdarë/Merdare and Mutivodë/Mutivode, the Serbian authorities
have been instructed to remain in their interim premises and not move into the newly
built common crossing points. Owing to these issues at the Merdarë/Merdare and
Mutivodë/Mutivode common crossing points and because of the lack of communication
between the two sides, long tailbacks of passenger vehicles and lengthy waiting times
were experienced at the common crossing points throughout the summer season.
The Mission continued to support the technical implementation of the European
Union-facilitated agreements related to freedom of movement. EULEX continued to
advise the Ministry of Internal Affairs on renewing various expiring decisions, which
enable the Kosovo Serb population, in northern Kosovo in particular, to gain access
to Kosovo civil registry documents necessary for their free movement in and out of
Kosovo. The long pending integration of former Serbian Ministry of Interior
administrative staff (36 people) was completed in mid -May. The 36 staff members
were formally recruited into civil servant positions at the four northern Kosovo Serbmajority municipalities. Upon the completion of this process, EULEX again reiterated
to all involved parties the importance of establishing fully staffed civil status offices
located in the respective centres of the municipalities. This is currently the case only
in Mitrovica North, whereas those in the other three municipalities remain
understaffed and are located in isolated Kosovo Albanian-majority villages.
The Mission continued to support the President of the Mitrovica Basic Court
and the Head of the Court of Appeals Division in Mitrovica in the implementation of
19-16705

15/20

S/2019/797

the European Union-facilitated Justice Agreement. In mid-May, as foreseen by the
Justice Agreement and in line with EULEX recommendations, the President of the
Court of Appeals in Pristina made a corrective decision to involve Kosovo Serb
criminal judges from the Court of Appeals Division in Mitrovica in the deliberations
of cases in regular review panels in Pristina, in addition to their duties in Mitrovica.
The latest decision was thus a step forward in ensuring the full implementation of the
Justice Agreement, after the President of the Court of Appeals in Pristina had rendered
a decision effectively ruling out that possibility earlier in the year.
2.2.

Operations
The Mission continued to support the Kosovo police in international police
cooperation. The Mission facilitated the exchange of information between the Serbian
Ministry of Interior and the Kosovo Police Service in line with the protocol on police
cooperation between the Kosovo police and the Serbian Ministry of Interior. In this
regard, EULEX identified some progress in the functioning of the protocol on police
cooperation between the two parties. EULEX also facilitated information exchange
between the National Central Bureaus of International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL) and the Kosovo Police International Law Enforcement Coordination
Unit under the umbrella of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) INTERPOL Liaison Office.
The Institute of Forensic Medicine intensified its work on locating and
identifying missing persons. EULEX experts supported local counterparts in five site
assessments and contributed to recovering two missing persons as a result of
conducting three exhumations. In addition, forensic support was provided in Ferizaj/
Uroševac, where four bodies were exhumed.
The draft regulation on the internal organization of the Institute of Forensic
Medicine, supplementing the Law on Forensic Medicine adopted in April 2016,
remains to be signed by the Office of the Prime Minister. EULEX leadership
repeatedly addressed the outstanding issues of the by-laws directly with the Prime
Minister.
The formed police unit of EULEX maintained its rapid intervention capac ities.
The unit continued to conduct joint exercises with the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization Kosovo Force and the Kosovo Police Service in order to ensure their
combined required readiness as first, second and third security responders. On
28 May, upon the request of Kosovo police, EULEX acted as second security
responder in northern Kosovo by increasing the frequency of formed police unit
patrols for more than a week, following the Kosovo police anti -smuggling operation
conducted on the same day. Within the framework of support provided to the Regional
Police Directorate for Mitrovica North on crowd and riot control capacity and
capability, the formed police unit designed an exercise scheme in cooperation with
the Kosovo police, aimed at enhancing the capabilities of the Kosovo police quick
response team. In this regard, a number of exercises were conducted between June
and August.
The Mission also provided logistical and operational support to the Specialist
Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor’s Office in line with relevant legislation and
within its means and capabilities.

16/20

19-16705

S/2019/797

Annex II
Activities of the Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor’s
Office from 16 May to 15 September 2019
Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor’s Office
A major milestone was reached during the reporting period when, on 11 June,
all staff and operations of the Specialist Chambers and the Specialist Prosecutor ’s
Office were transitioned from the temporary premises to the permanent premises in
The Hague. After the move, the security system testing and training was completed.
Courtroom testing was conducted over a two-week period, culminating in a mock trial
held on 3 July.
On 28 June, the President, the Registrar and the Specialist Prosecutor hosted a
visit of the Political and Security Committee of the European Union. The ambassadors
of the Political and Security Committee were shown the new courtroom and were
briefed on the progress being made. During the visit, the President, inter alia,
emphasized the critical importance of State cooperation to the institution ’s ability to
carry out its mandate. The Specialist Prosecutor further explained the importance of
States responding to his requests for international legal assistance, in order to enable
him to move his investigations forward. The Registrar noted in this regard that
agreements between States and the Specialist Chambers to facilitate the protection of
witnesses must be finalized. During the visit, the States members of the European
Union reiterated their strong support for the work of the Specialist Chambers and of
the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office.
The judges continue to be engaged in a variety of ways in the preparation for
the conduct of efficient and expeditious proceedings.
On 4 and 5 July, the Specialist Chambers hosted its court information network.
The network, established in 2018 and consisting of 15 representatives of
non-governmental organizations from Kosovo and Serbia, assists the Specialist
Chambers by providing regular feedback on its outreach programme and activities,
and provides information on affected communities and expertise on the best outreach
approaches. The focus of the 2019 workshop was on evaluating the outreach material
and activities of the past year and suggesting i mprovements thereto.
Outreach activity has remained high throughout the reporting period.
Representatives of the Specialist Chambers met in June with civil society, journalists
and students in several locations in Kosovo. In July, the Victims ’ Participation Office
organized an information session in Pejë/Peć with Roma students and later in the
reporting period with minorities in Prizren and in Velika Hoča/Hoçë e Madhe.
On 2 September, the electronic court management system, Legal Workflow, was
activated across the Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor’s Office. Prior to
this launch, in May, having consulted with the President and the judges, the Registrar
adopted the Practice Direction on Files and Filings before the Kosovo Specialist
Chambers. In June, the Registry instruction on access to Legal Workflow was issued.
Close cooperation with the host State continued with the negotiations regarding the
finalization of the cost provisions for the detention services.
With increased activity from the Specialist Prosecutor ’s Office, the Specialist
Chambers Defence Office received requests for legal aid during the reporting period.
After detailed assessments of indigence, six requests for legal aid were granted and
one request was denied. The processing of applications for the Lists of Counsel (both
Defence Counsel and Victim’s Counsel) remains open and is ongoing. There are
currently 148 counsel admitted to the public Lists of Counsel, 73 of whom are
19-16705

17/20

S/2019/797

qualified to represent victims. The Defence Office further assisted a working group
of counsel with the drafting of the constitution of the independent representative body
of specialist counsel.
In the first half of July, an external expenditure verification in relation to t he
European Union grant agreement CFSP/2018/12 for the Kosovo Specialist Chambers
(reporting period 15 June 2018 to 14 June 2019) was conducted by the Specialist
Chambers’ external auditors. On 22 July, they issued an expenditure verification
report, in which no findings were identified.
Throughout the reporting period, the Specialist Prosecutor ’s Office continued
its investigation into the allegations contained in the report of the Parliamentary
Assembly of the Council of Europe, entitled “Inhuman treatment of people and illicit
trafficking in human organs in Kosovo”, requesting the presence of suspects, victims
and witnesses for questioning, and collecting and reviewing evidence. The Specialist
Prosecutor’s Office is fulfilling its mandate in an independ ent and impartial manner.
Recently, its activities have increasingly generated media and more general interest
in both Kosovo and the wider region. The then Prime Minister of Kosovo, Ramush
Haradinaj, announced on 19 July that he would be resigning in orde r to attend a
summons from the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office in The Hague, thereby heralding an
early election in Kosovo.
In order to fulfil its mandate and properly expedite the investigation, the
Specialist Prosecutor’s Office requires the increased engagement and support of the
international community, international organizations and individual States in all its
activities, including in particular for the expeditious clearing of documents requested
by the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office for use in court and with respect to allowing
former staff of diplomatic missions or international organizations involved in Kosovo
during the mandate period to give comprehensive witness statements and to testify at
future trials. Delay in such clearances will significantly impede the ability of the
Specialist Prosecutor’s Office to complete its investigation in a timely fashion and
make an informed and timely decision on bringing charges.

18/20

19-16705

S/2019/797

Annex III
Composition and strength of the police component of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(as of 15 September 2019)
Country

Women

Men

Total

Austria

1

–

1

Finland

–

1

1

Germany

2

–

2

Hungary

–

1

1

Russian Federation

1

1

2

Ukraine

–

1

1

Total

4

4

8

Composition and strength of the military liaison component of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(as of 15 September 2019)

19-16705

Country

Women

Men

Total

Czechia

1

1

2

Poland

–

1

1

Republic of Moldova

–

1

1

Romania

–

1

1

Turkey

–

1

1

Ukraine

–

2

2

Total

1

7

8

19/20

S/2019/797

20/20

19-16705
