United Nations

A/52/PV.92

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-second Session

92nd plenary meeting
Tuesday, 8 September 1998, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Udovenko . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ukraine)

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Expression of sympathy to the Governments and
peoples of Bangladesh and China
The President: May I, on behalf of all Member
States, extend our deepest sympathy to the Governments
and peoples of Bangladesh and China for the tragic loss of
life and extensive material damage which have resulted
from the recent floods. May I also express the hope that the
international community will show its solidarity and
respond promptly and generously to any request for help.

Agenda item 120 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/52/785/Add.11)
The President: In a letter contained in document
A/52/785/Add.11, the Secretary-General informs me that
since the issuance of his communications contained in
documents A/52/785 and addenda 1 to 10, Seychelles has
made the necessary payment to reduce its arrears below the
amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly takes
note of this information?
It was so decided.

98-85731 (E)

Agenda item 8 (continued)
Adoption of the agenda of the fifty-second regular
session of the General Assembly and organization of
work
Letter from the Chairman of the Committee on
Conferences (A/52/340/Add.2)
The President: I should now like to draw the
attention of representatives to document A/52/340/Add.2,
which contains a letter dated 19 August 1998 addressed
to me by the Chairman of the Committee on Conferences.
As Members are aware, the Assembly, in paragraph
7 of its resolution 40/243, decided that no subsidiary
organ of the General Assembly should be permitted to
meet at United Nations Headquarters during a regular
session of the Assembly unless explicitly authorized by
the Assembly.
As indicated in the letter I have just mentioned, the
Committee on Conferences has received a request from
the Executive Board of the United Nations Children's
Fund to meet in New York from 8 to 11 September 1998.
The meeting of the Executive Board straddles two regular
sessions of the General Assembly.
Therefore, so as to enable the Executive Board to
meet without the interruption that would be necessary if
the request were submitted for approval to the Assembly
at its fifty-third session, the request is being transmitted
to the Assembly at its fifty-second session.

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned, within one month of the date of the meeting, to the Chief of the Verbatim
Reporting Service, Room C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a
consolidated corrigendum.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
May I take it that the General Assembly authorizes the
Executive Board of the United Nations Children's Fund to
meet in New York during the main part of the fifty-third
session of the General Assembly?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 39 (continued)
Oceans and the law of the sea
(a) Law of the sea
Note by the Secretary-General (A/52/968)

92nd plenary meeting
8 September 1998
The President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 51/204 of 17 December 1996, I now
call on Mr. Gritakumar E. Chitty, Registrar for the
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea.
Mr. Chitty (International Tribunal for the Law of
the Sea): It is indeed a pleasure and an honour for me to
address the General Assembly at its fifty-second session
on behalf of the International Tribunal for the Law of the
Sea on the occasion of the consideration by the Assembly
of the draft resolution on the Agreement on Cooperation
and Relationship between the United Nations and the
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea. I do so in
particular on behalf of the President of the Tribunal,
Judge Thomas Mensah, and the other Judges. President
Mensah regrets his inability to be present here today.

Draft resolution (A/52/L.80)
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Germany to introduce draft resolution A/52/L.80.
Mr. Henze (Germany): It is my pleasure and honour
to introduce a draft resolution on the Agreement on
Cooperation and Relationship between the United Nations
and the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea to the
General Assembly today. Thirty-eight countries are listed as
sponsors on the draft resolution. In addition to these,
Panama, the Philippines and Sri Lanka have also signed,
bringing the number to 41. I am very happy and grateful
that there has been such broad support for the draft.
The United Nations and the International Tribunal on
the Law of the Sea signed an Agreement on Cooperation
and Relationship last December. In that context, may I
recall resolution 51/34 of December 1996, in which the
General Assembly invited the Secretary-General to conclude
such an agreement. Meanwhile, the Agreement was
approved by the Tribunal in March and by the States
Parties to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea this year. The text of the Agreement, which is attached
to the draft resolution, by and large follows the lines drawn
in the Agreement concerning the Relationship between the
United Nations and the International Seabed Authority. This
latter agreement was approved without a vote by the
General Assembly in its resolution 52/27 of November
1997.
It is my firm belief that the draft resolution represents
a totally uncontroversial item. I therefore request
delegations to kindly lend it their support.

2

On behalf of the Tribunal, I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for your very positive remarks and the kind
words addressed to the Tribunal during the discussion last
December by the General Assembly of the item “Oceans
and the law of the sea”, and for the distribution of the
statement of the President of the Tribunal on that
occasion. He was not able to deliver it in person due to
the institution of proceedings before the Tribunal in a
case submitted to it. I also wish to express my personal
congratulations to you, Sir, for your leadership in bringing
this challenging fifty-second session to a successful
conclusion.
Our special thanks also go to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, for his continuing support and direct and
personal interest in the work of the Tribunal, and most
importantly, for bringing about the early conclusion of
this Agreement on Relationship and Cooperation between
the Tribunal and the United Nations. His warm
congratulations to the Tribunal on its achievements on the
occasion of its first anniversary augured well for the
Tribunal. Shortly thereafter, the Tribunal received and
commenced deliberations on its first case.
I would like to express the special gratitude of the
Tribunal to the Permanent Representative of the Federal
Republic of Germany for the initiative taken in
sponsoring this draft resolution. The Tribunal is very
appreciative of the generous assistance and hospitality
accorded to it by the German Federal Government and the
Senate of the Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg. The
Tribunal looks forward to the move, at the beginning of
the year 2000, to the excellent facilities of its permanent
headquarters, which are presently under construction.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
The Tribunal is also appreciative of the strong support
extended to it by the 41 Member States that have sponsored
draft resolution A/52/L.80, which it is hoped will shortly be
adopted with widespread approval.
The Agreement on Cooperation and Relationship finds
its origins in the draft prepared by the Preparatory
Commission for the International Seabed Authority and for
the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea.
Negotiations between the Office of the Legal Counsel of
the United Nations and the Registry of the Tribunal
proceeded on the basis of this draft. The negotiations were
constructive and expeditious and resulted in early agreement
upon the terms for conclusion of the relationship
Agreement. On behalf of the Tribunal, I would like to
convey special thanks to the Office of the Legal Counsel
for the cooperation it extended at all times.
The Agreement was signed at United Nations
Headquarters on 18 December 1997 by the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations and the President of the
Tribunal. Article 14 of the Agreement requires that the
General Assembly and the Tribunal approve the Agreement
as a condition for its entry into force. The Tribunal
confirmed its approval of the Agreement on 12 March
1998. The approval of the Agreement today by the General
Assembly would conclude the process, which has been
marked by a spirit of cooperation in the negotiations, which
the Tribunal looks forward to as being the hallmark of the
implementation of the relationship Agreement between the
United Nations and the Tribunal.
The Agreement formalizes the essential cooperation
and interaction between the Tribunal and the United
Nations, just as the Convention on the Law of the Sea itself
foresaw the need for such an arrangement in establishing
the new institutions under the Convention and in entrusting
substantial functions to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations. The Tribunal is most grateful for the support of
the United Nations in various and diverse respects. This is
exemplified by the support of the Legal Counsel of the
United Nations, Mr. Hans Corell, and the Division for
Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea during the start-up,
preparatory and organizational phases of the Tribunal with
the temporary assignment of staff to the Tribunal.
The Tribunal also extends its appreciation to the
Director of the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of
the Sea, Mr. Ismat Steiner, and the members of the
Division for the assistance provided during the important
period of the constitution of the Tribunal and for their
ongoing support.

92nd plenary meeting
8 September 1998
The approval of the Agreement by the General
Assembly will pave the way for further and more efficient
cooperation. The Agreement provides, inter alia, for the
exchange of information and documents between the
United Nations and the Tribunal and for cooperation on
a range of matters. These provisions will promote the
Tribunal's objective to be a user-friendly, cost-effective
and efficient institution. The Tribunal has placed great
importance on these principles in its rules of procedure
and has endeavoured to achieve efficiency and
effectiveness by setting short time limits for each step in
the proceedings before the Tribunal. The rules provide for
prompt hearings and recognize the opportunities that
modern technology has to offer in expediting and
facilitating proceedings before the Tribunal.
These initiatives are reflected in the expeditious
disposal by the Tribunal of the first case submitted to it,
a case concerning the prompt release of an arrested vessel
and its crew. The judgement of the Tribunal at the
conclusion of the proceedings, which lasted less than four
weeks, was complied with, and the vessel and crew were
subsequently released. Following the proceedings on the
prompt release of the vessel and its crew, the parties, by
joint agreement, have submitted the dispute on the merits
of the case to the Tribunal.
I shall be most pleased to inform the Tribunal of the
deliberations of the General Assembly and of its decisions
at the fifty-second session under this item when the
Tribunal convenes in Hamburg in two weeks for its sixth
session.
The Tribunal would welcome and appreciate the
widest possible support for this draft resolution. It is most
fitting that this Agreement should enter into force during
the International Year of the Ocean.
I thank you and wish this session of the General
Assembly a successful conclusion.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
the draft resolution contained in document A/52/L.80,
which was just introduced by the representative of
Germany. Since there are no speakers in explanation of
vote, the Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution, entitled “Agreement on cooperation and
relationship between the United Nations and the
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/52/L.80?

3

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/251).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item
(a) of agenda item 39 and to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 39 as a whole?
It was so decided.

92nd plenary meeting
8 September 1998
appropriate intergovernmental regional bodies, to conduct
a general review of the regional commissions at its
substantive session of 1998, bearing in mind the relevant
provisions of resolution 50/227 and the individual reviews
each commission had already carried out, in order to
consider the competencies of the regional commissions,
taking into account the competencies of global bodies and
other regional and subregional intergovernmental bodies,
and to submit a report thereon to the General Assembly
before the end of its fifty-second session.

Agenda item 58
Restructuring and revitalization of the United Nations
in the economic, social and related fields
Letter from the President of the Economic and
Social Council (A/52/1022)
The President: I would like to draw the attention of
delegations to a letter dated 21 August 1998 from the
President of the Economic and Social Council addressed to
me. This letter is contained in document A/52/1022, to
which is annexed Economic and Social Council resolution
1998/46 entitled “Further measures for the restructuring and
revitalization of the United Nations in the economic, social
and related fields”.
May I take it that the General Assembly takes note of
document A/52/1022?
It was so decided.
The President: Before giving the floor to the first
speaker on the list of speakers, I should like to congratulate
the Economic and Social Council on its success in
negotiating resolution 1998/46 on the reform and
revitalization of the Council and its subsidiary bodies.
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): The Assembly will
recall that in its resolution 52/12 B the Assembly, inter
alia, invited the Economic and Social Council to consider,
at its organizational and substantive sessions in 1998 — as
part of the review of the mandates, composition, functions
and working methods of its functional commissions and
expert groups and bodies, as mandated by the General
Assembly in resolution 50/227 — the recommendations of
the Secretary-General relating to the reform of these
subsidiary bodies and to report thereon to the Assembly as
early as possible during its fifty-second session.
In that same resolution, the Assembly also invited the
Council, in consultation with Member States and

4

As a Vice-President of the Economic and Social
Council, I was entrusted with the responsibility of
conducting consultations as mandated by Assembly
resolution 50/227 and later reinforced by resolution 52/12
B on United Nations reforms. The process started back in
March 1997 and ended successfully with the adoption of
a resolution at the last substantive session of the Council
in July. The mandate, although an arduous one, was
carried out in time.
Any reform initiative of the United Nations, in order
to withstand the test of time, must involve the entire
membership of the United Nations. The enthusiasm with
which the Member States engaged in this prolonged
activity is a testimony to the seriousness and commitment
with which they view the importance of measures that are
needed for making the United Nations more efficient and
effective. The broad participation in the negotiation
process, the rich inputs provided by the membership and
the support and contribution of the delegations made this
undertaking a success. It is an achievement for all of us.
The review has resulted in an agreement on specific
measures to streamline and improve the working methods
of the subsidiary machinery of the Economic and Social
Council. The adoption of this package resulted in a
decrease in the number of members of one of the
subsidiary bodies, the Commission on Science and
Technology for Development, from 53 to 33. The
Committee for Development Planning has been renamed
the Committee for Development Policy with retention of
its acronym CDP. It is comprised of 24 independent
experts with a good mix of expertise who are to be
nominated by the Secretary-General after consultation
with the interested Governments and then approved by
ECOSOC. The review process resulted in the termination
of mandates of two subsidiary bodies: the Committee on
Natural Resources and the Committee on New and
Renewable Sources of Energy and on Energy for
Development. It gave rise to a new body, named the

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources for
Development, with the acronym CENRD.
In addition to the achievement of an increase in the
efficiency and effectiveness of the subsidiary bodies, it has
been estimated by the Secretariat that the process would
result in a reduction in real terms of more than $150,000
during the biennium 1998-1999. This is the first time we
are saving money while also looking forward to an efficient
and effective functioning of the system.
By the Council's action at its last substantive session,
we completed one of the most complex, laborious and
substantive exercise for the review of the subsidiary bodies
of the Council. This is the first time since the creation of
these bodies that such an extensive and important review
has been undertaken and — I must emphasize —
successfully completed.
The fifty-second session of the Assembly, which we
are concluding today, has been called the reform Assembly.
The action by the Council has contributed in a very
effective way to the reform process being pursued so
vigorously at the United Nations. It is our hope that the
momentum and positive interaction generated by this review
of the subsidiary bodies of the Economic and Social
Council will be maintained and continued in the days
ahead, so that the efficiency and effectiveness of the bodies
engaged in the economic and social fields contribute
substantially to the objectives of international cooperation
for development.
In closing, I would like to express my deep gratitude
to all delegations for their constant support in making this
result possible.
Mr. Manz (Austria): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union. The Central and Eastern
European countries associated with the European Union —
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia,
Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia — and
the associated country Cyprus, as well as the countries of
the European Free Trade Association members of the
European Economic Area, Iceland and Norway, align
themselves with this statement.
Let me, at the outset, commend Ambassador
Chowdhury for his engagement and very able leadership in
steering us through the process of reviewing the subsidiary
machinery of the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC).

92nd plenary meeting
8 September 1998
The European Union has always considered
resolution 50/227 and resolution 52/12 B as important
steps in, among other things, strengthening and
revitalizing ECOSOC. We see the intergovernmental
machinery as an integral part of the overall reform
process, in tandem with and mutually supportive of the
reform efforts at the organizational and managerial levels.
The proliferation of the subsidiary machinery of ECOSOC
which has taken place over the years has resulted in
weakening the Council's overall guidance and
coordination role. The European Union has therefore
attached high importance to the review process mandated
by resolutions 50/227 and 52/12 B and has sought to
contribute substantively to the negotiations.
The review process did not result in far-reaching
institutional changes. Nevertheless, the outcome represents
a first step forward in improving the efficiency and
effectiveness of the intergovernmental structure.
Let me now make some specific remarks on the
measures contained in the three annexes to ECOSOC
resolution 1998/46, reproduced in document A/52/1022.
With regard to the four priority bodies, we would
like to highlight the merger of the Committee on New
and Renewable Sources of Energy and on Energy for
Development and the Committee on Natural Resources
into a single expert body. With ensured coherence
between the respective work programmes of the
Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD) and the
new Committee on Energy and Natural Resources for
Development, the output of the latter body should be
more useful in the intergovernmental process. The new
arrangements for the Committee for Development
Planning should also help to bring the work of this body
much better in line with the needs and interests of the
intergovernmental bodies, in particular ECOSOC. The
work of the Commission on Science and Technology for
Development, by concentrating on the needs of the CSD
and the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development (UNCTAD), should become more focused.
This should also be facilitated by the reduction in its
membership.
We hope that the recommendations which came out
of the review of the functional commissions with
conference follow-up responsibilities will ensure a better
use of their potential within the overall United Nations
structure and give their work added value in the
implementation of United Nations conferences. Focusing
on the exchange of experiences in the implementation of

5

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
the conference outcomes and on the review of progress in
this respect should help them to fulfil this task. This
process should be supported by improved working methods
such as refocusing the general debates and expanding
interaction with experts and civil society. The role of the
bureaus of the functional commissions, as well as enhanced
coordination among them and the bureau of ECOSOC, will
be crucial not only for a more effective role of the
individual commissions but also for increasing the overall
coherence of their work.
It should be clearly understood that each functional
commission should be encouraged to adopt practices best
suited to its particular mandate and responsibilities. The
recommendations contained in the respective annex may
therefore not necessarily be appropriate or sensible for all
functional commissions to adopt in every case.
While the distinct nature of each of the regional
commissions and its main responsibility towards the needs
of the region are recognized, the regional commissions
should also contribute to improving the United Nations
overall relevance and effectiveness. The measures contained
in annex III should help in this respect by determining the
Secretariat's responsibilities, which should consequently
lead to a more focused division of labour between
Headquarters and the regional and national levels.
We welcome the efforts by the Secretary-General to
overcome the shortcomings in coordinating regional
activities within the United Nations system. However,
arrangements proposed to this end — such as the yearly
meetings among the relevant United Nations entities
engaged in regional activities held under the direct aegis of
the Secretary-General — should be determined by the needs
of each region and should build on already existing
coordination mechanisms and focus on issues where
coordination is required at the regional level. The
recommendation on close cooperation between the regional
commissions and other, non-United Nations regional or
subregional bodies should help to reinforce synergies and
avoid duplications, thereby ensuring an optimal use of
resources. We hope that the measures contained in the final
part will improve not only the interaction between
ECOSOC and the regional commissions, but also among
the regional commissions themselves.
The review process has not been completed. We
should strive for its completion as soon as possible. We still
have to address the remaining Track 2 proposals of the
Secretary-General which aim to strengthen the coordination
role of ECOSOC as well as the rationalization of its

6

92nd plenary meeting
8 September 1998
subsidiary machinery. As to the outcome of the review
process, it is clear that the focus must be now on the
implementation of these measures. But at some point in
time, preferably in 2001, the effectiveness of these new
arrangements will have to be reviewed.
Mr. Hapsoro (Indonesia): I am pleased to take the
floor in order to address a few brief remarks to the
Assembly on the resolution entitled “Further measures for
the restructuring and revitalization of the United Nations
in the economic, social and related fields”.
Let me, on behalf of the Group of 77 and China,
express heartfelt appreciation to Ambassador Karim
Chowdhury of Bangladesh, who has been a valuable
resource to all of us in the very complex and prolonged
negotiations on this resolution during the substantive
session of the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC)
last July. Under his stewardship we have made
considerable progress in the efforts to undertake a review
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 50/227
of the mandates, composition, function and working
methods of the Council's functional commissions, expert
groups and bodies and of the regional commissions.
Indeed, thanks to Ambassador Chowdhury's
considerable skills and expertise we have been able to
move forward in several areas, although we recognize that
due to the complexity of the undertakings, additional time
will be needed. The Group would therefore like to agree
with the statement made by Ambassador Chowdhury, that
this is the first time in our history that such an
undertaking — such an overview — has been successfully
completed.
The Group of 77 and China are of the view that
given the progress achieved thus far, and with additional
deliberations, we can work together to improve the
coordination of the activities of ECOSOC and strengthen
and harmonize its work with a view to strengthening
efforts in restructuring and revitalizing the United Nations
in the economic, social and related fields. In this regard
we would like to express our confidence that the
measures we have adopted will enhance the positive
interaction among the organs within the United Nations
system which deal with the aforementioned issues.
I believe that it is safe to say that while the
negotiations that we have undertaken over the past several
months have not been easy, we have nevertheless
managed to reach a consensus on several critical and
important issues. We are also encouraged by the spirit of

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
partnership and flexibility, which was quite remarkable
during the negotiations and which facilitated our work so
that we were able to arrive at a consensus.
We note that we have remaining tasks ahead,
mandated by resolutions 50/227 and 52/12 B, but we are
optimistic that with additional time and further refection on
the respective positions on outstanding items, we are well
positioned to successfully complete those tasks.
My statement would not be complete without
mentioning the critical issues on which we have not been
very successful so far. The Assembly may recall that when
we adopted resolution 50/227, we did so with the
conviction that its successful implementation required the
implementation of all its provisions. So far the provision on
resources has been left behind and the implementation has
fallen short. It is therefore very urgent that this issue, too,
be addressed in the near future. In this context we hope that
the discussion during the fifty-third session on funding for
operational activities will facilitate the full implementation
of resolution 50/227.
In conclusion, the Group of 77 and China will
continue to work to improve, restructure and revitalize the
work of the United Nations in the economic, social and
related fields. It is our expectation that as we approach the
year 2000, we can benefit from the successful
implementation of what we adopted today, and it is our
earnest hope that we will come to a successful conclusion
in our endeavour.

92nd plenary meeting
8 September 1998
issues and for the effective oversight of its many
subsidiary bodies. We look forward to working with all
of our partners to pursue and fully implement this role for
ECOSOC as one of this institution's principal organs.
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Document
A/52/1022 contains some mistakes, and I believe that it
is appropriate for me to bring them to the attention of the
Assembly. In annex III, the last sentence of paragraph 13
contains two mistakes: instead of “these resources” it
should read “implementation of these recommendations”,
and 1996” should read “1999”. The sentence should
read:
“In this regard, the Council encourages the
Secretary-General to take into account the
implementation of these recommendations in his
report under the agenda item entitled Regional
Cooperation' in 1999.”
The President: The recommended corrections will
be noted by the Secretariat and a corrigendum will
accordingly be issued at a later stage.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item
58?
It was so decided.

Reports of the First Committee
Ms. King (United States of America): The United
States welcomes the outcome of the work of the Economic
and Social Council as described in the letter from the
President of the Council. In 1996, with the adoption of
General Assembly resolution 50/227, the United Nations
began to realize the role of the Economic and Social
Council originally set out in the Charter. With the
additional impetus of the Secretary-General's reform
proposals, and under the skilful leadership of Council
Presidents Karel Kovanda, Valdimir Galuška and Juan
Somavía, these reforms have begun to take effect. My
delegation would like to give special recognition to
Ambassador Chowdhury for steering these deliberations
over the last several years.
More remains to be done, but the measures taken
today represent an important achievement in making the
Economic and Social Council the key coordinating body for
the extensive and vital work of the United Nations on
development, economic issues, human rights and social

The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the reports of the First Committee on agenda
items 73 and 83.
I request the Rapporteur of the First Committee, Mr.
Miloš Koterec of Slovakia, to introduce the reports of the
First Committee in one intervention.
Mr. Koterec (Slovakia), Rapporteur of the First
Committee: It gives me great pleasure to introduce to the
General Assembly the reports of the First Committee on
agenda items 73 and 83 as contained in documents
A/52/602/Add.1 and A/52/612/Add.1. As delegates may
recall, in December 1997 the General Assembly
suspended consideration of these two items until the
resumed session of the First Committee in summer 1998.
It was further decided that the Disarmament
Commission would also report to the resumed session on

7

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
the result of its deliberations on the issue of the
revitalization, rationalization and streamlining of its work
in accordance with the request contained in General
Assembly resolution 52/12 B of 19 December 1997.
During the period between December 1997 and June
1998, the Chairman of the First Committee, assisted by the
Bureau members, conducted intensive consultations with all
interested delegations. As a result of these efforts and goodwill cooperation extended to him by delegations, the
Chairman was able to produce and present to the resumed
session a text which commanded broad-based understanding
and support.
At the 1998 substantive session of the Disarmament
Commission, the Committee of the Whole considered the
issue of the rationalization of its work. The Chairman of the
Commission also conducted a series of informal, openended consultations. The result of these consultations was
reflected in the final report of the Disarmament
Commission as the Chairman's text. Accordingly, the
Chairman was strongly encouraged by the delegations to
continue his efforts during the time remaining before the
resumed session. Consequently, an intensive round of
informal consultations prior to the resumed session
produced a consensus text.
The resumed session of the First Committee, held on
29 June 1998, considered and adopted by consensus two
documents: a draft decision entitled “Rationalization of the
work and reform of the agenda of the First Committee”,
submitted by the Chairman of the First Committee; and a
draft decision entitled “Review of the implementation of the
recommendations and decisions adopted by the General
Assembly at its tenth special session: Report of the
Disarmament Commission”, submitted by Algeria, Belarus,
Croatia, Ecuador, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Ireland, Luxembourg, Peru, South Africa, Spain, the Syrian
Arab Republic and Uganda.

92nd plenary meeting
8 September 1998
The President: If there is no proposal under rule 66
of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the General
Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of the First
Committee which are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be limited
to explanations of vote.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the First Committee have been made
clear in the Committee and are reflected in the relevant
official records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its vote
only once, that is, either in the Committee or in
plenary meeting unless that delegation's vote in
plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Committee.”
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the First
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that we
are going to proceed to take decisions in the same manner
as was done in the First Committee, unless the Secretariat
was notified otherwise in advance.

Agenda item 73 (continued)
With these brief remarks, I present two outstanding
reports of the First Committee to the General Assembly for
consideration, contained in documents A/52/602/Add.1 and
A/52/612/Add.1.
Lastly, allow me once again to express my gratitude
to all delegations; the Chairman of the First Committee,
Mr. Mothusi Nkgowe; fellow members of the Bureau, the
Under-Secretary-General; the Secretariat staff and others,
who during the last year have contributed to the work of
the First Committee.

8

Review of the implementation of the recommendations
and decisions adopted by the General Assembly at its
tenth special session
Report of the First Committee (Part II)
(A/52/602/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft decision recommended by the First
Committee in paragraph 4 of Part II of its report
(A/52/602/Add.1).

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

92nd plenary meeting
8 September 1998

The First Committee adopted the draft decision,
entitled “Report of the Disarmament Commission”, without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 73?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 83 (continued)
Rationalization of the work and reform of the agenda of
the First Committee
Report of the
(A/52/612/Add.1)

First

Committee

(Part

II)

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft decision recommended by the First
Committee in paragraph 4 of Part II of its report
(A/52/612/Add.1).
The First Committee adopted the draft decision
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 83?
It was so decided.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on agenda
items 114, and 114 together with 153 and 157, as well as
118.
I request the Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee,
Mr. Djamel Moktefi of Algeria, to introduce the reports of
the Fifth Committee in one intervention.
Mr. Moktefi (Algeria) (interpretation from Arabic):
I have the honour to introduce today the reports of the Fifth

Committee on its deliberations at its third resumed fiftysecond session. The Fifth Committee held its third
resumed session for a period of one week, from 17 to 21
August 1998.
Because the relevant reports of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on
some issues on its agenda for the last part of the resumed
fifty-second session — as contained in document
A/C.5/52/L.57 — were unavailable, the Committee
decided to defer their consideration and to concentrate
only on the following questions:
First, the proposed United Nations Code of Conduct,
under agenda items 114, “Review of the efficiency of the
administrative and financial functioning of the United
Nations”, 153, “Human resources management” and 157,
”United Nations reform: measures and proposals”;
secondly, the question of improving the working methods
of the Fifth Committee; thirdly, item 114 on the question
of strengthening external oversight mechanisms; and,
finally, item 118 on the Joint Inspection Unit.
With regard to the proposed United Nations Code of
Conduct, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of the draft resolution entitled
“Revisions to article 1 of the Staff Regulations and
chapter 1 of the 100 series of the Staff Rules”, as
indicated in paragraph 7 of the report of the Committee,
contained in document A/52/955/Add.1.
Under agenda item 114 — “Review of the efficiency
of the administrative and financial functioning of the
United Nations” — the Committee recommends to the
General Assembly one draft decision concerning the
question of improving the working methods of the Fifth
Committee, contained in paragraph 5 of document
A/52/746/Add.4.
Regarding the item on the Joint Inspection Unit, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly a draft
decision, as indicated in paragraph 5 of the report of the
Committee, contained in document A/52/842/Add.2.
Finally, with regard to the strengthening of external
oversight mechanisms, the Committee agreed to resume
consideration of this question during the fifty-third session
of the General Assembly.
The President: If there is no proposal under rule 66
of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the General

9

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of the Fifth
Committee which are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be limited to
explanations of vote.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Fifth Committee have been made
clear in the Committee and are reflected in the relevant
official records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered in
a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its vote
only once, that is, either in the Committee or in
plenary meeting unless that delegation's vote in
plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Committee.”
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance with
General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that we
are going to proceed to take decisions in the same manner
as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless the Secretariat
was notified otherwise in advance.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
decision recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph
5 of Part V of its report, in document A/52/746/Add.4.
The draft decision is entitled “Improving the working
methods of the Fifth Committee”. May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to adopt the draft decision?
The draft decision was adopted.
Ms. Wensley (Australia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the delegations of Canada, New Zealand and
Australia in explanation of position on the procedural
decision just taken on improving the working methods of
the Fifth Committee.

10

92nd plenary meeting
8 September 1998
Our delegations regret that the Fifth Committee was
unable to make more progress on this issue during the
fifty-second session and that a substantive decision did
not prove possible. The need for the Fifth Committee to
have a good look at itself and to take practical steps to
improve the way it works has never been greater, as
observed by its own Chairman in his closing remarks at
the third resumed session. We agree fully with
Ambassador Chowdhury that if the Committee fails to
meet this challenge and improve drastically its own
working methods, it must face the prospect of future
irrelevance.
While there are limits to what can be achieved
through legislative action, there are, we believe, concrete
measures that could be taken. Delegations, the Bureau,
the Secretariat and relevant subsidiary and expert bodies
could be reminded of their respective roles and
responsibilities. The chronic problems with availability of
documentation could be addressed. The respective
scheduling of sessions of the Fifth Committee and the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions could be reviewed. Work of the Fifth
Committee could be prioritized, and much better use
could be made of the time available.
Indeed, these proposals and others have been under
discussion in the Fifth Committee and appeared to present
little difficulty for most delegations. Our delegations were
surprised, therefore, that at the final hour some
delegations were unable to accept a very modest package
of proposals to enhance the Committee's working
methods. Such a package could have served as a
beginning to a process of renewal and reorientation in the
Fifth Committee.
Our delegations stand ready to continue the task of
improving the working methods of the Fifth Committee
in the next session of the Assembly, and to that end we
look forward to working closely with the incoming
Bureau. But we do trust that any resumption of this work
will be accompanied by the requisite desire and will to
change and to work for the common good on the part of
all delegations. We remain optimistic that this is possible,
given the solid foundations laid by the outgoing Chairman
of the Fifth Committee, Ambassador Chowdhury, for
whom we have the greatest admiration and to whom we
wish to express our gratitude.
Mr. Atiyanto (Indonesia): It would be remiss if my
delegation did not say a few words concerning the issue
of improving the working methods of the Fifth

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Committee. Let me first, however, express our deep
appreciation and thanks to Ambassador Anwarul
Chowdhury of Bangladesh, Chairman of the Fifth
Committee for the fifty-second session of the General
Assembly, for his tireless efforts in leading the discussion
on improving the working methods of the Fifth Committee.
My delegation holds the view that we should not be
disheartened that our consideration of this subject could not
be completed during the session. Rather, we are heartened
that discussion on this subject has received serious attention
and great interest from many delegations.
We do not believe that the importance of improving
the working methods of the Fifth Committee could not be
shared by the delegations. We do not believe that the
Member States are of the opinion that the work of the Fifth
Committee could not be further improved. However, we do
believe and understand that our discussion on improving the
working methods of the Fifth Committee has not been
perfect. Therefore, what has become fundamental for us is
to find any common ground that could be recognized by
and meet the concerns of all. Our understanding must be
for the best interests of the Organization and a true
reflection of the wishes of the Member States.
Having said that, my delegation maintains — and I
believe that other members of the Group of 77 and China
share the view — that it is important for us to continue our
joint efforts to make the work of the Fifth Committee better
and more productive in the fifty-third session of the
General Assembly. In this regard, the collegial spirit and
partnership that has permeated the delegations so far has, in
fact, already proved to be an important asset and, therefore,
must be maintained.
The President: We have heard the last speaker on this
agenda item. May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 114?
It was so decided.

Agenda items 114, 153 and 157 (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Human resources management
United Nations reform: measures and proposals

92nd plenary meeting
8 September 1998
Report of the Fifth Committee (Part II)
(A/52/955/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 7 of Part II of its report
(A/52/955/Add.1). The draft resolution is entitled
“Revisions to article I of the Staff Regulations and
chapter I of the 100 series of the Staff Rules”.
The Fifth Committee adopted this draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
52/252).
Mrs. Powles (New Zealand): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the delegations of Canada, Australia
and New Zealand.
Our delegations welcome the adoption by the
General Assembly of revisions to article I of the Staff
Regulations and chapter I of the Staff Rules, originally
proposed by the Secretary-General as the United Nations
Code of Conduct.
We are pleased that the Fifth Committee has been
able to approve these amendments by consensus before
the end of the fifty-second session of the General
Assembly, rather than taking the well-worn route of
deferment to yet another session. Indeed, it is our sincere
hope that this overdue attempt by the Fifth Committee to
focus and prioritize its work in order to conclude agenda
items will be the norm rather than the exception in the
forthcoming session.
Our three delegations would like again to pay tribute
to the Chairman of the Fifth Committee, Ambassador
Anwarul Chowdhury, the Permanent Representative of
Bangladesh, for his dedication in bringing this agenda
item to a close, thereby paving the way for the General
Assembly to endorse a key element of the SecretaryGeneral's Track 2 reforms. We also wish to thank the
delegate of Algeria, Mr. Djamel Moktefi, for his effective
coordination of the agenda item in the Fifth Committee,
and all delegations who worked together in the spirit of
cooperation and friendship.
Our delegations have spoken many times about the
importance of a total commitment of excellence from
United Nations managers and staff to their duties. These

11

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

92nd plenary meeting
8 September 1998

amendments to Staff Rules and Regulations, just approved,
chart the boundaries of expected and appropriate behaviour
for persons in positions of responsibility in the United
Nations. They are standards of ethical and professional
conduct set in a framework of accountability for
performance and are designed to avoid real or apparent
conflict of interest. These standards should not be
contravened. We expect that this clearer definition of rights
and obligations will be welcomed by United Nations staff
members.
The principles of integrity, competence and efficiency
are enshrined in Article 101 of the United Nations Charter.
The revised text of the Staff Rules and Regulations will
serve to give greater effect to these principles. The
Secretary-General has often pointed out that United Nations
staff are the most important resource of this Organization.
We agree, and we will continue to value highly the
professionalism and, as important, the loyalty to the
Secretary-General shown by his dedicated and hard-working
staff.
Mr. Sulaiman (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation
from Arabic): My delegation would simply like to draw the
attention of the Secretariat to a translation mistake in
paragraph (f) of the draft resolution A/C.5/52/L.59, which
is contained in the report of the Rapporteur, document
A/52/955/Add.1. The Arabic version of this paragraph
mentions “financial status” whereas in fact it should say
“financial situation”. We had asked that this term be
corrected, but this has yet to be done.

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft decision recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 5 of Part III of its report.
The draft decision was adopted by the Fifth
Committee without a vote. May I consider that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 118?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 57
The situation in Burundi
The President: Members may recall that on 19
September 1997 the Assembly decided to include this
item in the agenda of the present session. In view of the
fact that the Assembly is expected to consider at its fiftythird session a request from Burundi contained in
document A/53/290 to delete this item from the agenda of
the fifty-third session, may I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude our consideration of agenda
item 57?
It was so decided.

The President: I thank the representative of Syria for
drawing the Secretariat's attention to the translation of this
document. His statement will be taken into consideration
when the final document is prepared.

Agenda item 61
Question of Cyprus

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda items
114, 153 and 157?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 118 (continued)
Joint Inspection Unit
Report of the Fifth
(A/52/842/Add.2)

Committee

(Part

III)

The President: Members may recall that on 19
September 1997 the Assembly decided to include this
item in the agenda of the present session but deferred a
decision on the allocation of the item to an appropriate
time during the session.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable to
defer consideration of this item to the fifty-third session.
May I take it, then, that it is the wish of the Assembly to
defer consideration of this item and to include it in the
draft agenda of the fifty-third session?
It was so decided.

12

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
The President: This concludes our consideration of
agenda item 61.

Agenda item 117
Improving the financial situation of the United Nations

92nd plenary meeting
8 September 1998
It is my understanding that it would be desirable to
defer consideration of this item to the fifty-third session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to defer
consideration of this item and to include it in the draft
agenda of the fifty-third session?
It was so decided.

The President: Members may recall that on 19
September 1997 the Assembly decided to include this item
in the agenda of the present session.

The President: This concludes our consideration of
agenda item 134.

It is my understanding that it would be desirable to
defer consideration of this item to the fifty-third session.
May I take it, then, that it is the wish of the Assembly to
defer consideration of this item and to include it in the draft
agenda of the fifty-third session?

Agenda item 154

It was so decided.
The President: This concludes our consideration of
agenda item 117.

Agenda item 128

Financing of the Military Observer Group of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala
The President: Members may recall that on 19
September 1997 the General Assembly decided to include
this item in the agenda of the present session.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable to
defer consideration of this item to the fifty-third session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to defer
consideration of this item and to include it in the draft
agenda of the fifty-third session?

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Somalia II
It was so decided.
The President: Members may recall that on 19
September 1997 the Assembly decided to include this item
in the agenda of the present session.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable to
defer consideration of this item to the fifty-third session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to defer
consideration of this item and to include it in the draft
agenda of the fifty-third session?
It was so decided.
The President: This concludes our consideration of
agenda item 128.

Agenda item 134
Financing of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Rwanda
The President: Members may recall that on 19
September 1997 the Assembly decided to include this item
in the agenda of the present session.

The President: This concludes our consideration of
agenda item 154.

Agenda item 162
Election of judges of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations
Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States
between 1 January and 31 December 1994
The President: Members may recall that on 2 June
1998 the Assembly decided to include this item in the
agenda of the present session.
Members are also aware that the Security Council
was not in a position to submit to the Assembly at its
fifty-second session the nominations for judges for the

13

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
International Tribunal for Rwanda in accordance with
article 12 of the Statute of the Tribunal.
Bearing this in mind and also bearing in mind that this
item has already been included in the provisional agenda of
the fifty-third session, may I take it that it is the wish of the
Assembly to conclude consideration of agenda item 162?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 163
Election of judges of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991
The President: Members may recall that on 2 June
1998 the Assembly decided to include this item in the
agenda of the present session.
Members will also recall that in his letter of 27 August
1998 addressed to me, contained in document A/52/1023,
the President of the Security Council transmitted the text of
Security Council resolution 1191 (1998), adopted
unanimously by the Security Council at its 3919th meeting,
held on 27 August 1998, which, inter alia, forwarded to the
General Assembly the nine nominations for judges of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in
accordance with article 13(d) of the Statute of the
International Tribunal.
As Member States were not in a position to duly
consider the nine nominations in order for the General
Assembly to elect the three additional judges during its
fifty-second session, may I take it that it is the wish of the
Assembly to defer consideration of this item and to include
it in the draft agenda of the fifty-third session?
It was so decided.
The President: This concludes our consideration of
agenda item 163.

Agenda items that remain for consideration during the
fifty-second session of the General Assembly
The President: I should like to remind delegations
that the following agenda items, on which action has been

14

92nd plenary meeting
8 September 1998
taken at previous meetings, have remained open for
consideration during the fifty-second session: items 10,
11, 16, 20, 36, 37, 43 to 45, 47, 104, 112, 113, 115, 116,
119 to 127, 129 to 133, 135 to 143, 159 and 161.
As members are aware, these items, with the
exception of item 115, entitled “Programme budget for
the biennium 1996-1997”, have been included in the
provisional agenda of the fifty-third session.
May I take it that the Assembly considers that
discussion of these items at the present session is
concluded?
It was so decided.

Closing address by the President
The President: We are about to conclude the fiftysecond session of the General Assembly, leaving behind
us a year of hard work, intensive discussions, momentous
decisions and, occasionally, cautious “indecisions”.
The session has taken place against the background
of complex international transformations, where positive
trends and promising developments have often been
overshadowed by new threats to international peace and
security and alarming social and economic upheaval. On
the one hand, international relations continued to reap the
benefits brought about by the end of the cold war and the
collapse of the bipolar system. On the other hand,
however, the past year has given us a fresh, sobering
testimony that the end of one era and the onset of a new
millennium do not automatically bring with them an end
to conflict and adversity. As we held our deliberations in
this Hall, fresh crises, manmade or natural, broke out, just
as old conflicts and problems continued to fester,
constantly thrusting this Organization into the midst of
new, complex tasks and challenges.
It is a convincing testimony to the relevance of this
most representative body of the United Nations that
during the fifty-second session it worked with dedication,
persistence and creativity on an imposing list of matters
of great importance to the international community. In the
course of this session the General Assembly has
considered a total of 163 items, holding 92 plenary
meetings and 22 meetings in the format of open-ended
informal consultations of the plenary. The Assembly
adopted 298 resolutions and 146 decisions. Without
pretending to provide an exhaustive analysis of the

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
outcome of its work, I would like to highlight briefly some
of the issues that received special prominence at this
session.
In the field of international peace and security, the
General Assembly has taken a major step forward by
adopting a resolution on the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Antipersonnel Mines and on Their Destruction. In a decision
designed to further promote the regime of nuclear
nonproliferation, the Assembly adopted a consensus
resolution supporting the initiative to establish one more
nuclear-weapon-free zone, in Central Asia. The significance
of that step became even more apparent in the light of the
recent nuclear tests in southern Asia.
Throughout the past year, United Nations
peacekeeping activities have remained under the permanent
focus of the Assembly and its relevant bodies, which
continued to address in full their different aspects and acute
problems, ranging from the financing of the peacekeeping
operations to the issues of gratis personnel.
Taking into account that 1998 marks the fiftieth
anniversary of United Nations peacekeeping, it should be
noted that this session has also made a sizeable contribution
to the preparation for the forthcoming commemorative
meeting to mark that solemn occasion, to be held on 6
October. In particular, I have in mind the elaboration of the
declaration in commemoration of those who served in the
United Nations peacekeeping operations, to be adopted at
that meeting. And I am proud that the initiative to adopt
that document belongs to my country, Ukraine.
The Assembly's continued concern about the situation
in the Middle East found its reflection in the resumption of
the meetings of its tenth emergency special session,
bringing once again the issues of settlements, the rights of
the Palestinian people and the observance of international
humanitarian law into sharp focus.
Another example of the immediate pertinence of the
Assembly's work at this session was the adoption by the
Assembly of the International Convention for the
Suppression of Terrorist Bombings. The need for urgent
international action on this matter has been underscored by
the recent series of terrorist bombings in Kenya, Tanzania
and South Africa.
In the battle against the scourge of crimes against
humanity, the establishment of the International Criminal
Court was a historic step towards making the rule of law

92nd plenary meeting
8 September 1998
the rule of all lands on this planet. It came as a result of
more than two years of intensive preparatory work at the
United Nations and followed over 50 years of sporadic
efforts to create such an institution. And only a few days
ago, in a first for any international court, the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda handed down a judgement
on the crime of genocide.
Those two events demonstrated the will of the
international community to act without delay on that vital
issue, as well as the ability of the United Nations to
create effective mechanisms for establishing a workable
international legal system and further promoting universal
human rights. In this regard, I cannot help but mention
the decision made at this session reiterating the
importance of the upcoming fiftieth anniversary of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The
commemoration of this historic document is certain to
become one of the landmark events of the next session.
Clearly, these are examples of encouraging signs of
international cooperation in addressing global problems.
Another vivid example of this approach was the twentieth
special session of the General Assembly on the world
drug problem, held during the Assembly's current session.
By adopting by consensus three fundamental documents,
Member States set ambitious yet clear objectives and
targets for joint action and approved a well-designed
strategy comprising a package of measures and goals to
be achieved within a specific timetable.
The challenge of ensuring sound economic and
social development remained paramount during the
Assembly’s work at the fifty-second session. In order to
review and appraise the implementation of the Programme
of Action of the International Conference on Population
and Development, the Assembly decided to convene next
year a special session at the highest level of participation.
As a direct result of another decision of the session, a
high-level dialogue on the social and economic impact of
globalization and interdependence and their policy
implications will be held at the beginning of the new
session, underscoring the crucial importance attached by
the United Nations to this issue. Once again, the
relevance of those decisions was punctuated by the
financial crisis in Asia, whose repercussions were acutely
felt all over the world and which were followed by
market tremors in such far-flung places as Russia and the
United States.
During the current session of the General Assembly,
much attention was attached to the problem of Africa.

15

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
The Security Council held two meetings dedicated to the
situation in that part of the world. There are still persistent
problems that continue to negatively impact the situation in
many countries of the continent, especially the world's
poorest nations.
It is my hope that the General Assembly and other
relevant organs and bodies of the United Nations will
continue to give adequate attention to Africa's problems and
facilitate its transformation in the context of creating the
conditions for its peaceful economic and social
development. In this regard, I would like to welcome the
election of Nelson Mandela, the President of South Africa,
as Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement. This will
undoubtedly greatly contribute to the solution of worldwide
problems, African in particular.
If there was one single topic, one underlying theme
that distinguished this session from others, it was the issue
of revitalizing the United Nations. After Secretary-General
Kofi Annan submitted his package of far-reaching measures
and proposals to the Assembly, questions relating to the
renewal of the world Organization dominated discussions
during the session. I would like to take this opportunity to
commend the Secretary-General for his unswerving
commitment to the cause of reform and his readiness to
cooperate closely with the Assembly during its
consideration of this vital subject.
As a result of innovative thinking, a new format of
deliberations — the open-ended informal consultations of
the plenary — has been introduced. It has enabled all
delegations to participate in the discussions on the
important issue of United Nations reform and to contribute
actively to the final outcome. I think that this format has
proved its effectiveness and may be preserved during
further deliberations on reform matters at the fifty-third
session. Following intensive informal consultations of the
plenary and a number of informal informals conducted by
my Office, and with the help of the Friends of the
President, the General Assembly adopted two resolutions
which not only demonstrated that the reform process was
clearly on track, but also inspired widespread expectations
that the spirit of consensus would guide us towards new
substantive progress at this juncture.
We should admit, however, that the reality proved to
be far more mundane. Although the Secretary-General's
proposals were warmly welcomed by the membership, after
almost nine months of further intensive consultations,
consuming enormous amounts of time, efforts and
conference services, all we could offer was the decision to

16

92nd plenary meeting
8 September 1998
send a considerable bulk of them for additional
consideration during the fifty-third session.
What is particularly regrettable is that these delays
concern not only the long-term proposals, but also the
Secretary-General's recommendations on vital and urgent
measures in the administrative and budgetary fields.
Some, perhaps, may argue that the delays were inevitable
because the issues before the General Assembly had been
either too complicated or utterly confusing, and that the
time allotted was too brief to resolve them. I believe,
however, that this would be a weak excuse, neglecting the
fact that any substantial progress towards meaningful
decisions was thwarted by mistrust and suspicion that
continued to exist among the Member States, as well as
by our inability to move beyond the narrow positions of
delegations and groupings in an effort to reach a common
goal. This has been one of my big disappointments, which
I feel compelled to share with the General Assembly.
Future deliberations on reform issues will serve as a
litmus test of the political will of the membership to go
ahead with genuine renewal of the Organization and an
indication of Member States' readiness to seek mutually
acceptable compromises in the true spirit of consensus
that emerged in the course of the main part of the fiftysecond session. The same fully applies to the work of the
Open-ended Working Group on the reform of the Security
Council.
It has been rightly said that any reform of the United
Nations will be incomplete without the reform of its main
organ responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security: the Security Council. In the course of
the general debate at this session alone, almost 160
speakers, including many Heads of State and Government,
raised that issue in their statements. But once again, for
all the eloquent appeals for change, we can report no
visible movement from words to deeds. After 65 lengthy
meetings held by the Working Group over the course of
the session, the body charged with the task of preparing
a blueprint for transforming the Council was once again
unable to submit any agreed recommendations on any of
the substantive issues related to Security Council reform.
While progress has been made in some areas, a
number of major stumbling blocks prevented the Group
from fulfilling its mandate. Among the most intractable is
the problem of finding a magic number that would
increase the representative character of the Council
without impairing its efficiency. Beyond the question of
the total size of an enlarged Council, controversy is still

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
brewing around the creation of new permanent seats,
rotational arrangements to fill those seats and, of course,
the highly-charged problem of the veto right with respect to
both current and prospective permanent members.
Given the fundamental nature of these differences,
reform of the Security Council is probably one of the most
difficult issues faced by the United Nations in its history.
Obviously, its resolution requires much more than
negotiating skills or, for that matter, a magician's sleight-ofhand. It will take political will and courage on the part of
sovereign States to move ahead to a renewed Security
Council that can better reflect the realities of the new
century and more effectively serve the entire international
community.
Let us also not forget that whatever ambitious reforms
we may envision, the United Nations cannot function
effectively unless it is adequately provided with financial
resources in order to carry out its functions. Since Member
States' annual contributions remain the only source of the
United Nations regular budget, there is very little that can
be done to overcome the financial crisis without Member
States fulfilling their obligations under the United Nations
Charter in full and without any preconditions.
No conclusive results were achieved in another ad hoc
body of the Assembly, the Working Group on An Agenda
for Peace. Extensive consultations on the remaining part of
the Group's mandate convinced me that a number of
significant differences in the positions of Member States
remain. In particular, I refer to the problem of reconciling
the principle of national sovereignty with the possibility of
launching timely preventive action without obtaining the
consent of the Government concerned. Another area of
controversy is post-conflict peace-building. The major
sticking point was the issue of assigning the key role in this
area to the General Assembly. At this point, my
recommendation to my successor is to continue to consult
on the matter during the fifty-third session of the Assembly.
Delegates have probably noticed that in my concluding
remarks I have devoted some time to the theme of
unfinished tasks and deferred decisions. Undoubtedly, the
fifty-second session can boast significant accomplishments
in many important areas, but I felt that a measure of critical
self-analysis could prove more salutary than an attempt at
self-congratulation.
On the last day of my presiding at this podium, I
would also like to take this opportunity to note with
satisfaction the continuing trend towards strengthening the

92nd plenary meeting
8 September 1998
role of the General Assembly presidency. In following up
resolution 51/241, some practical measures have already
been put into effect towards these ends.
For my part, as President of the General Assembly
I tried to direct and organize our proceedings in such a
way as to expedite and make more effective our
deliberations on the issues of crucial importance to the
Organization. In line with the recommendations of the
Assembly, I made every effort to improve coordination
with the Presidents of other main organs of the United
Nations, especially the Presidents of the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council, with whom I held
regular consultations throughout the session.
On a personal note, I would like to say that
presiding over this session has proved to be an extremely
gratifying but challenging experience. After long hours of
intensive — and sometimes tense — consultations and
negotiations, and no less arduous work to resolve a
myriad of organizational and procedural matters, I would
strongly disagree with those who might view this post of
President of the General Assembly as largely ceremonial.
In the course of the year I had to share my time
between my duties as President of the General Assembly,
Foreign Minister of Ukraine and Chairman of the
Committee on Human Rights of the Ukrainian Parliament.
All this commanded a great deal of my physical,
psychological and intellectual capacities, and I sincerely
hope that this multiplicity of responsibilities did not affect
the efficiency of my work as President of the General
Assembly.
In view of my shift to parliamentary work, I am sad
to say that this was probably my last session of the
General Assembly. At the same time, I am very proud
that I have been involved in multilateral diplomacy for
almost 40 years. Each and every one of them, and
especially this year of my presidency, has explicitly
proved to me the ever-growing importance of the United
Nations system in today's world and in the years to come.
Standing at the end of my long diplomatic career, I am
convinced that Member States of the universal
Organization must do everything possible to preserve and
strengthen the whole machinery of the United Nations in
all its variety and diversity.
I also strongly believe that the present United
Nations membership is capable of accomplishing what the
Commission that worked to establish this world
Organization after the 1945 San Francisco Conference

17

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
said in its final report: to be fully effective the United
Nations would have to capture the imagination of the
world. It was true then and it is still vital today as we strive
for a new, revitalized United Nations.
Before concluding the fifty-second session of the
General Assembly, let me extend my sincere appreciation
to all the delegations for their assistance and very
instrumental cooperation and for their active work during
these months.
I would also like to express my special thanks to
Secretary-General Kofi Annan, whose close cooperation I
have enjoyed throughout the whole 12-month period of our
work. Since his appointment we have constantly witnessed
the increased role of the United Nations in the world
affairs. His dedication and tireless efforts towards making
this Organization stronger and better prepared to cope with
the complex challenges of a new millennium deserve our
full appreciation and support.

92nd plenary meeting
8 September 1998
My words of gratitude also go to all the VicePresidents of the General Assembly and all Chairmen,
Vice-Chairmen and Rapporteurs of the Main Committees
for their excellent contribution to our common
achievements. Greater, more regular involvement of the
Vice-Presidents as Acting Presidents of the General
Assembly enabled them to be more closely connected to
the activities of the Assembly and ensured its smooth
functioning throughout the year.
And finally, I would like to thank the United Nations
Secretariat, particularly the Department of General
Assembly Affairs and Conference Services and its
General Assembly Servicing Branch, and I would like to
thank personally all interpreters, translators and
Conference Services officers, as well as security officers,
who often remain unnoticed but without whom the
smooth functioning of the Assembly session would have
been impossible.
I thank you all.

Minute of silent prayer or meditation
The President: We are now coming to the end of
the fifty-second regular session of the General Assembly.
May I invite representatives to stand and observe one
minute of silent prayer or meditation.
The members of the General Assembly observed one
minute of silent prayer or meditation.

Closure of the fifty-second session
The President: I declare closed the fifty-second
session of the General Assembly.
The meeting rose at noon.

18
