A/RES/76/113

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
17 December 2021

Seventy-sixth session
Agenda item 82
Report of the International Law Commission on the work
of its seventy-second session

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 9 December 2021
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/76/473, para. 12)]

76/113.

Provisional application of treaties
The General Assembly,
Having considered chapter V of the report of the International Law Commission
on the work of its seventy-second session, 1 which contains the Guide to Provisional
Application of Treaties,
Taking note of the recommendation of the International Law Commission
contained in paragraph 49 of its report,
Emphasizing the continuing importance of the codification and progressive
development of international law, as referred to in Article 13, paragraph 1 (a), of the
Charter of the United Nations,
Noting that the subject of the provisional application of treaties is of major
importance in international relations,
Underlining the essentially voluntary and optional nature of the provisional
application of treaties,
1.
Welcomes the conclusion of the work of the International Law Com mission
on the provisional application of treaties, and its adoption of the draft guidelines and
draft annex constituting the Guide to Provisional Application of Treaties, and the
commentaries thereto;
2.
Expresses its appreciation to the International Law Commission for its
continuing contribution to the codification and progressive development of
international law;

__________________
1

21-18669 (E)

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-sixth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/76/10).

271221

*2118669*

A/RES/76/113

Provisional application of treaties

3.
Takes note of the views and comments expressed in the debates of the Sixth
Committee on the subject, including those made at the seventy-sixth session of the
General Assembly, 2 after the International Law Commission had completed its
consideration of this topic in accordance with its statute;
4.
Also takes note of the Guide to Provisional Application of Treaties,
including the guidelines, the text of which is annexed to the present resolution, brings
the Guide to the attention of States and international organizations for their
consideration, and encourages its widest possible dissemination;
5.
Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a volume of the United Nations
Legislative Series compiling the practice of States and international organizations in
the provisional application of treaties, as furnished by the latter over the years,
together with other materials relevant to the topic.
49th plenary meeting
9 December 2021

Annex
Text of the guidelines on provisional application of treaties
Guideline 1
Scope
The present guidelines concern the provisional application of treaties by States
or by international organizations.
Guideline 2
Purpose
The purpose of the present guidelines is to provide guidance regarding the law
and practice on the provisional application of treaties, on the basis of article 25 of the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties and other relevant rules of international
law.
Guideline 3
General rule
A treaty or a part of a treaty is applied provisionally pending its entry into force
between the States or international organizations concerned, if the treaty itself so
provides, or if in some other manner it has been so agreed.
Guideline 4
Form of agreement
In addition to the case where the treaty so provides, the provisional application
of a treaty or a part of a treaty may be agreed between the States or internation al
organizations concerned through:
(a)

a separate treaty; or

(b)

any other means or arrangements, including:

__________________
2

2/4

See A/C.6/76/SR.16, A/C.6/76/SR.17, A/C.6/76/SR.18 and A/C.6/76/SR.19. The statements made
in the Sixth Committee are available in full (in the original languages) on the website of the
Sixth Committee, at www.un.org/en/ga/sixth/.
21-18669

Provisional application of treaties

A/RES/76/113

(i) a resolution, decision or other act adopted by an international organization
or at an intergovernmental conference, in accordance with the rules of such
organization or conference, reflecting the agreement of the States or
international organizations concerned;
(ii) a declaration by a State or by an international organization that is accepted
by the other States or international organizations concerned.
Guideline 5
Commencement
The provisional application of a treaty or a part of a treaty takes effect on such
date, and in accordance with such conditions and procedures, as the treaty provides
or as is otherwise agreed.
Guideline 6
Legal effect
The provisional application of a treaty or a part of a treaty produces a legally
binding obligation to apply the treaty or a part thereof between the States or
international organizations concerned, except to the extent that the treaty otherwise
provides or it is otherwise agreed. Such treaty or part of a treaty that is being applied
provisionally must be performed in good faith.
Guideline 7
Reservations
The present guidelines are without prejudice to any question concerning
reservations relating to the provisional application of a treaty or a part of a treaty.
Guideline 8
Responsibility for breach
The breach of an obligation arising under a treaty or a part of a treaty that is
applied provisionally entails international responsibility in accordance with the
applicable rules of international law.
Guideline 9
Termination
1.
The provisional application of a treaty or a part of a treaty terminates with the
entry into force of that treaty in the relations between the States or international
organizations concerned.
2.
Unless the treaty otherwise provides or it is otherwise agreed, the provisional
application of a treaty or a part of a treaty with respect to a State or an international
organization shall be terminated if that State or international organization notifi es the
other States or international organizations concerned of its intention not to become a
party to the treaty.
3.
Unless the treaty otherwise provides or it is otherwise agreed, a State or an
international organization may invoke other grounds for terminating provisional
application, in which case it shall notify the other States or international organizations
concerned.
4.
Unless the treaty otherwise provides or it is otherwise agreed, the termination
of the provisional application of a treaty or a part of a treaty does not affect any right,
obligation or legal situation created through the execution of such provisional
application prior to its termination.

21-18669

3/4

A/RES/76/113

Provisional application of treaties

Guideline 10
Internal law of States, rules of international organizations and observance of
provisionally applied treaties
1.
A State that has agreed to the provisional application of a treaty or a part of a
treaty may not invoke the provisions of its internal law as justification for its failure
to perform an obligation arising under such provisional application.
2.
An international organization that has agreed to the provisional application of a
treaty or a part of a treaty may not invoke the rules of the organization as justification
for its failure to perform an obligation arising under such provisional application.
Guideline 11
Provisions of internal law of States and rules of international organizations
regarding competence to agree on the provisional application of treaties
1.
A State may not invoke the fact that its consent to the provisional application of
a treaty or a part of a treaty has been expressed in violation of a provision of its
internal law regarding competence to agree to the provisional application of treaties
as invalidating its consent unless that violation was manifest and concerned a rule of
its internal law of fundamental importance.
2.
An international organization may not invoke the fact that its consent to the
provisional application of a treaty or a part of a treaty has been expressed in violation
of the rules of the organization regarding competence to agree to the provisional
application of treaties as invalidating its consent unless that violation was manifest
and concerned a rule of fundamental importance.
Guideline 12
Agreement to provisional application with limitations deriving from internal
law of States or rules of international organizations
The present guidelines are without prejudice to the right of States or
international organizations to agree in the treaty itself or otherwise to the provisional
application of the treaty or a part of the treaty with limitations deriving from the
internal law of States or from the rules of international organizations.

4/4

21-18669
