S/PV.9017

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9017th meeting

Thursday, 14 April 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Dame Barbara Woodward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Bongo
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Asokan
Mr. Flynn
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Abushahab
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-31881 (E)
*2231881*

S/PV.9017

The situation in the Middle East

flights to depart from Sana’a airport for the first time
since 2016. My Office is working to bring the parties
together to open roads in Taiz and other governorates.
The impact of that on Yemeni lives, as well as the
symbolism, should not be underestimated.

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Hans
Grundberg, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen, and Mr. Martin Griffiths, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.
Mr. Grundberg is joining today’s meeting via
video-teleconference.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Mr. Grundberg: At the start of this year, I told
the Council that the military escalation was among the
worst we had seen in Yemen for years (see S/PV.8946).
Now, I am pleased to tell members that there is light
at the end of the tunnel. After some three months of
bilateral negotiations, the parties have agreed to a
United Nations initiative for a two-month, nationwide,
renewable truce — the first nationwide truce in
six years.
The truce commenced with the start of the holy
month of Ramadan and includes provisions to improve
the freedom of movement of goods and civilian men,
women and children. So far, the agreement is broadly
holding. It offers a moment of respite for Yemenis and a
moment of possibility for pursuing peace, but it requires
continued commitment on the part of the parties and
broad support from the region and the international
community to make sure it holds and becomes a turning
point towards peace.
Since the start of the truce, there have been
encouraging signs that halting the cyclical patterns
of escalation is possible. There has been a significant
reduction in violence and civilian casualties. There
have been no confirmed air strikes inside Yemen or
cross-border attacks emanating from Yemen. There is
more fuel flowing through Al-Hudaydah ports into the
country. Preparations are under way for commercial
2/19

14/04/2022

Although the truce is broadly holding, reports of
military operations, particularly around Ma’rib, are
concerning and must be addressed urgently through the
mechanisms established by the truce. Many Yemenis
have told me they fear that the truce will be exploited
and used to set the stage for a new escalation. This
fear is understandable, given the lack of trust and past
experience, and I want to remind the parties that the
foundational principle of the truce is that the respite
it offers should be used to make progress towards
ending the war, and not to escalate it. The parties have
publicly committed to de-escalation, and that is what
the Yemeni people and the international community
expect of them. My Office has established coordination
mechanisms for all aspects of the truce, and I encourage
the parties to engage seriously and meaningfully in
those mechanisms.
I want to emphasize that easing restrictions on
the movement of goods and civilian men, women and
children is a priority for the truce. We have already
seen a number of ships enter Al-Hudaydah ports,
something that is having a positive impact on the lives
of civilians. Flights to and from Sana’a airport need to
resume, and we are working with partners to make that
happen as quickly as possible. I also want to emphasize
that reaching an agreement to open roads in Taiz and
other areas is a priority. I know that the people of Taiz
have waited too long for the moment when they can
move freely into and out of the city. It is imperative that
serious work be done in Taiz to open roads, allowing
civilians on either side of the front lines, both in the city
and the surrounding areas, to go to work and school and
facilitate trade.
I want to thank the Government of Yemen and
Ansar Allah for showing the required leadership and
making the necessary compromises to reach that
agreement. I want to use this opportunity to encourage
them to continue implementing all elements of the
truce. I also want to recognize the crucial roles played
by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the Sultanate of
Oman in supporting the negotiations that got us here.
The members of the Security Council also played a
critical role in backing the talks. I also want to express
my gratitude to the Member States that are actively
22-31881

14/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East

working with us to set up some of the mechanisms
relating to the parameters of the truce. I would also like
to recognize the contributions of Yemeni peace actors.
This truce builds on the long-standing and tireless
efforts of Yemeni civic actors, youth groups and women
peace activists to stop the war and improve the situation
of civilians across the country. I will continue working
with them to generate additional momentum for peace.
The truce is the result of the commitments of the
parties, and it enjoys significant international support,
but it is still fragile and temporary. We need to work
collectively and intensively in these coming weeks
to ensure that it does not unravel. I will continue
engaging the parties to implement, strengthen and
extend the truce. That was the focus of my recent visits
to Muscat and Sana’a. I am grateful for the constructive
conversations I had in Sana’a, during which I received
reaffirmed commitment to all aspects of implementing
the truce. I also discussed next steps on strengthening
the truce and further steps beyond the two months.
There have been other positive signs of progress
on confidence-building in recent weeks. We have been
making headway on the exchange of detainees, and I
urge the parties to expeditiously agree on details of the
release so that Yemeni families may be reunited with
their loved ones as soon as possible. My Office and the
International Committee of the Red Cross, as co-chairs
of the Supervisory Committee, will support them in
that endeavour.
At the end of March and beginning of April, the
Gulf Cooperation Council hosted consultations with
hundreds of Yemenis in Riyadh in stated support of a
peaceful solution to the conflict. Several conclusions
emerged from those consultations, including the need
to eschew military solutions and commit to political
dialogue under United Nations auspices. It demonstrated
the importance of regional organizations in supporting
United Nations peace efforts.
On 7 April, President Hadi took the decision
to delegate his full authorities to a newly-formed
Presidential Leadership Council. In line with the
Security Council, I welcome the creation of and the
assumption of responsibilities by the Presidential
Leadership Council of the Government of Yemen
that reflects a broader array of political actors. The
Security Council has expressed its expectation that
the formation of the Presidential Leadership Council
will form an important step towards stability and an
inclusive Yemeni-led and -owned political settlement

S/PV.9017

under United Nations auspices. I look forward to
engaging with the Presidential Leadership Council to
continue to work towards that end.
I also welcome the economic package that has been
announced by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates.
The truce is a chance to steer Yemen in a new
direction, but if we are to consolidate that path and
prevent a slide back into fighting, there needs to
be progress on the political front as well. Through
dialogue, Yemenis need to determine and own a
negotiated settlement to the conflict.
Looking ahead, I will continue to engage the
parties to build upon the elements in the truce, both in
order to sustain it and as part of my multi-track process.
Those efforts will also be informed by my consultations.
At the end of March, I completed the first round of
consultations and discussions with diverse Yemeni men
and women, including political parties, economic and
security experts, civic actors and the wider Yemeni
public. The aim was to understand their priorities for
economic, security and political elements that will
inform my framework for a multi-track process to reach
a durable settlement. I will hold further consultations
after Ramadan.
The main message that has emerged from the
consultations so far is that Yemenis want the war to
end. They want to live in safety and security, to be
able to care for their families, to have access to public
services and to exercise their rights. Yemenis across
political and geographical divides have stressed the
dire economic situation in the country, pointing to the
need to resume salary payments and service delivery,
address the rising cost of living; ensure the freedom
of movement of people and goods, and bring together
economic institutions.
Many Yemenis have pointed to the need for
accountable and effective governance at all levels,
including at the local level. Several groups from southern
Yemen have stressed the need to address the southern
question in a lasting manner. Different Yemenis have
pointed to the need for security arrangements to include
local security actors and civil society and be informed
by the needs of the civilian population.
Women have participated actively in those
consultations, and I am very encouraged by that. They
have highlighted the disproportionate impact of the
conflict and economic strains on them. They have also

22-318813/19

S/PV.9017

The situation in the Middle East

14/04/2022

called for their inclusion in peace talks and for protection
for women and girls from all forms of violence.

Sana’a for medical care or other reasons would at long
last be able to do so.

Those priorities will shape next steps and my
overall approach to reaching a sustainable solution.
The truce offers a rare opportunity to pivot towards a
peaceful future. The coming weeks will be a test of the
parties’ commitments to upholding their obligations.
This is a time to build trust and confidence, which will
not be easy after more than seven years of conflict.
Yemen will need the international community’s support
as much as ever to maintain the momentum and move
towards finding an inclusive, peaceful and sustainable
end to the conflict. I will need the Council’s redoubled
efforts and support during this critical period.

That is all good news, so long as the truce holds.
Beyond the truce itself, there may be more good news
on the horizon.

The President: I thank Mr. Grundberg for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: As we have heard from
Mr. Grundberg, after so many years of conflict
and crisis, hope has become something of a scarce
commodity in Yemen. However, today, I think we may
well be hopeful that we are seeing the kinds of changes
that could very possibly help pave the way towards a
brighter future for the people of Yemen.
The truce that Mr. Grundberg has just described
is an incredibly important step forward. It is already
having a positive impact on the humanitarian situation.
Despite reports of limited clashes in a few areas, mainly
in Ma’rib and Taiz, hostilities have dropped sharply
across the country. Civilian casualties have fallen to
their lowest level in months — a major improvement
after weeks of escalating conflict earlier this year.
More fuel ships are now arriving in Al-Hudaydah,
helping to ease severe fuel shortages. For months, those
shortages have been driving up prices, depriving people
of health care and other services. That, in turn, has
exposed women and girls to more risks as they travelled
further and further away to seek water or cooking gas.
The truce is also aimed at facilitating the movement
of people, goods and humanitarian assistance by
resuming commercial flights from Sana’a airport
and working to reopen roads in Taiz and other areas,
as we have heard. Communities living near front
lines — including in Taiz, where residents have suffered
for years as their city has been encircled by conflict
and its roads have been blocked — would then become
easier to reach. People who need to travel abroad from
4/19

The $3-billion economic support package
announced at the recent Yemeni consultations convened
by the Gulf Cooperation Council is extraordinarily
welcome. That includes fuel support, development
assistance and, crucially, a new $2-billion deposit in
Yemen’s Central Bank — split between Saudi Arabia
and the United Arab Emirates, which should be
congratulated on that decision — to help stabilize the
currency. The Yemeni rial has already recovered 25 per
cent of its value since the announcement of the truce.
That means that food and other essential goods, nearly
all of which must be imported, should soon become
more affordable for the people of Yemen.
Efforts to resolve the threat posed by the FSO
SAFER tanker are also progressing. The new United
Nations proposal to replace the FSO SAFER vessel and,
in the meantime, move the oil into a temporary vessel
has received strong support. I believe Mr. David Gressly
was here in New York recently, briefing members of
the Council informally on the matter. Work can begin
in May, if we can raise the funds — approximately
$80 million is needed.
As we have heard from Mr. Grundberg, we are
also hopeful that the new Presidential Leadership
Council may help to resolve fragmentation which
has, at times, created challenges for aid agencies. We
join Mr. Grundberg in looking forward to the new
council’s engagement in efforts to find a peaceful,
sustainable solution to the conflict. Our thoughts are
with Mr. Rashad Al-Alimi in his new leadership role.
Further, I urge the parties to seize the many
opportunities offered by the current moment. Like
others, I call on the Security Council and other Member
States to use all avenues to support those efforts.
However, despite the hope we have for tomorrow,
the fact remains today that millions of people in
Yemen still urgently need humanitarian assistance
to stay alive. Our partners are doing everything they
can to help. This year, aid agencies are seeking just
shy of $4.3 billion to assist 17.3 million people — a
campaign we saw launched the other day. The pledging
event raised $1.3 billion in pledges, and we are glad
to note that additional pledges have been announced
22-31881

14/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East

since then, including $300 million from the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia. But we are still, obviously, short of
money. I want to thank all our donors for stepping up,
especially those who have significantly increased their
pledges since last year, like some gathered here, the
United States and the European Union.
Looking ahead, we will need more, and I will
continue to ask for donations. Funding remains the
biggest challenge to the response. There is a serious
risk that core programmes across sectors, including
food aid, water, health care and support for displaced
people, will keep scaling down. We have heard that
risk discussed here in previous briefings. If these
programmes do not get the funds they need, they
will eventually stop. Allowing the aid operation to
collapse would run directly counter to the very positive
momentum that we are right to honour and celebrate
today. We will therefore do all we can on our side
to work with donors in order to ensure that these
life-saving programmes survive.
There is an inter-agency humanitarian evaluation
for Yemen, which has been under way for the past eight
months. It is a large undertaking and will be a major
help in getting us all to understand the way in which
humanitarian assistance is delivered and, to some
extent, counter — or perhaps, confirm — some of the
comments made today about the diversion of that aid.
I am hoping that the report will be out in June, and
it will be presented here. It will advise us how to do
our business and strengthen the relationship we have
with stakeholders.
We still continue to face serious access challenges
and attempted interference. Last year, half of all people
in need lived in areas affected by access constraints,
primarily as a result of bureaucratic impediments, more
than other factors. Many of those constraints particularly
affect female humanitarian workers and certain types
of programming that are essential for the well-being
and safety of women and girls — always the most
vulnerable and at the edge of any such impediments.
But there have also been some improvements in
that regard. On the west coast, for example, a new
agreement with local security forces is helping to
facilitate humanitarian movements through the Dhubab
checkpoint, which has been a long-standing objective.
We will all become familiar with that. And this year’s
humanitarian-needs analysis is based on assessments
that collected new data from all 333 districts across
Yemen. We said that in the launch. The basis on which

S/PV.9017

humanitarian priorities are made is much more solid
than in years gone by. I continue to call on the parties
to do everything possible to facilitate access to people
in need, in line with obligations under international
humanitarian law.
At the same time, we must also address challenges
to the safety and security of humanitarian workers.
In that connection, five months after their arrest — if
that is the right word — in Sana’a, two United Nations
staff detained by the Houthi authorities remain in
custody. We have discussed that here before. This is
in contravention of United Nations privileges and
immunities. Despite past promises to release them, they
have not been released.
We are also continuing to make efforts to secure
the release of five United Nations staff kidnapped by
armed men in Abyan in February. I cannot imagine
what it is like for them and their families. They have
now held by their abductors for more than 60 days, in
very grave conditions. We are therefore very concerned
about news of recent kidnappings.
Nevertheless, I said at the beginning of my
statement that I am hopeful, and I have often been
accused of being too hopeful. But my optimism is well
founded in this case. Mr. Grundberg described vividly
the possibilities and hopes that we must now have and
the opportunities that we must now seize.
It is an extraordinary moment. Like the Special
Envoy, I pay tribute to those who decided to make this
moment happen. I would like to assure the Yemeni
people that we will stand in solidarity with them as they
seek to make this truce a permanent feature.
The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United Kingdom.
I would like to start by thanking Special Envoy
Hans Grundberg and Under-Secretary-General Martin
Griffiths for their briefings and to congratulate
Mr. Grundberg for his phenomenal efforts to broker
a truce.
For the first time since 2016, Yemenis will feel what
it is like to live in relative peace. The United Kingdom
commends all the parties for putting forward proposals
and engaging in confidence-building measures to
sustain that truce. We now need to make quick headway
on getting the free flow of fuel, goods and flights, and
we need to pivot quickly to political negotiations.

22-318815/19

S/PV.9017

The situation in the Middle East

The United Kingdom applauds, in particular,
the efforts of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the Gulf
Cooperation Council and the Government of Yemen to
deliver serious consultations and significant political
reform. The formation of the presidential leadership
council is a vital step. We also commend President
Hadi for facilitating the peaceful transfer of power.
We expect the presidential leadership council to work
seriously and quickly towards political negotiations with
the Houthis, and we call on the Houthis to continue to
engage with the Special Envoy. We therefore welcome
the Special Envoy’s visit to Sana’a this week — another
step forward.
As
Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths
so
powerfully articulated, as we start to see progress on
the political track, it is crucial that the international
community help alleviate the humanitarian crisis.
Sadly, the United Nations conference raised only around
a third of the funding needed, as Mr. Griffiths pointed
out. We therefore strongly welcome the Saudi-Emirati
$3 billion economic package designed to revive and
support the Yemeni economy and the $300 million in
Saudi humanitarian aid. It is important that all donors
disburse money quickly if we are to avoid agencies
making further cuts to programmes.
Ultimately, the truce provides a window of
opportunity to make the lives of many Yemenis better,
and it must be seized. In that context, defusing the
ticking time bomb of the FSO Safer oil tanker becomes
even more pressing. We therefore strongly support David
Gressly’s efforts in that regard. The United Kingdom
will contribute funding, and we urge the international
community, including regional partners, who will be
directly affected by any oil spill, to also contribute.
I resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now call on the other members of the Council who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): I would like to thank our
briefers, Special Envoy Grundberg and Under SecretaryGeneral Griffiths. We rarely have the opportunity
to hear positive news in the Security Council on the
situation in Yemen. We therefore very much welcome
what we heard in their briefings this morning.
I join others in welcoming the United Nationsbrokered two-month truce, which presents a precious
opportunity to alleviate the humanitarian suffering of
Yemenis and to improve regional stability. We sincerely
6/19

14/04/2022

hope that the parties will seize this opportunity to
build trust and to move forward towards resuming an
inclusive political process.
We also strongly welcome the commitment to allow
the entry of fuel ships into the port of Al-Hudaydah
and to resume commercial flights in and out of
Sana’a, as well as to open important roads in several
governorates. Now more than ever, as we grapple with
increased food insecurity across the globe, the free
movement of life-saving commodities and fuel into
Yemen is essential.
The significant reduction in violence, as reported
by the Special Envoy, is long overdue and will be
welcomed by the many innocent Yemenis who have
lost loved ones or whose lives have been uprooted by
conflict. However, we share the concern expressed
by the Special Envoy about reports of hostile military
activities, even if at a lower intensity.
We urge all parties to continue to respect in full
their commitments to the truce and to engage with the
Special Envoy and his United Nations-led consultations
process. The Special Envoy’s first meeting with
the Houthis in Sana’a earlier this week was another
significant development that — we hope — signals the
beginning of a period of increased engagement.
It is important that these de-escalation efforts
are coupled with the pursuit of accountability for
all violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.
Ireland also welcomes the Yemeni-Yemeni talks
hosted by the Gulf Cooperation Council, which began
in Riyadh at the end of March and ended last week,
in support of United Nations efforts. We welcome
the participation of women in the talks and hope that
future dialogues will have a minimum of 30 per cent
participation by women.
We hope that the Presidential Leadership Council
brings a new focus to collective efforts towards finding
a truly inclusive solution to the conflict and building
a peaceful, prosperous Yemen for future generations.
It is, however, deeply regrettable that no women were
included in that eight-member Council — another
missed opportunity to ensure that Yemeni women have
their rightful place at the negotiating table.
While we welcome the generosity of many donors
at the Yemen high-level pledging conference last
month, in which Ireland was pleased to participate,
22-31881

14/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East

and the additional pledges since, the total amount
pledged falls short of what is needed. Against the
backdrop of the most recent Integrated Food Security
Phase Classification hunger projection, that shortfall
is troubling.
The economic assistance announced by Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates is a welcome
measure to stabilize the Yemeni economy. We hope that
it will bolster efforts to implement the United Nations
economic framework plan. We encourage all parties
and the international financial institutions to engage
constructively with that plan.
The FSO SAFER oil tanker has been a disaster
waiting to happen for far too long. Ireland welcomes
the progress made in efforts to address the grave
humanitarian and ecological threat that it poses. A
sustainable, long-term solution appears to finally be
within reach. With the committed engagement of the
parties, the support of Member States and the private
sector, and the efforts of the United Nations on the
ground, we have an opportunity to avert a catastrophe.
To conclude, the developments of recent weeks have
marked a moment of hope and expectation for Yemenis,
who have suffered more than seven years of gruelling
conflict. While that deserves recognition, it is crucial,
as our briefers said this morning, that momentum be
sustained and the parties continue their engagement
towards the realization of inclusive and sustainable
peace in Yemen.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Hans Grundberg and Mr. Martin
Griffiths for their briefings.
As the Special Envoy noted, there have been
encouraging developments in Yemen over the past two
weeks. In the area of security, France commends the
announcement of a two-month-long truce. That is an
important initial step to reduce the level of violence,
alleviate the suffering of the people and lay the
foundation for trust between the parties.
We welcome the progress made since 2 April, in
particular regarding the easing of the restrictions to
access the Al-Hudaydah port and Sana’a airport.
At the political level, important steps have
been taken. France welcomes the efforts of the Gulf
Cooperation Council and in particular those of Saudi
Arabia, which have made it possible to establish a
Presidential Leadership Council bringing together

S/PV.9017

a large number of Yemeni stakeholders. That is an
important stage in the restoration of a State that is
at the service of all Yemenis and committed to the
political process. The Special Envoy’s visit to Sana’a
is also encouraging. France calls on the Houthis to also
contribute constructively to the peace process.
However, despite those positive developments,
the humanitarian situation remains critical, and
serious human rights violations continue. The threat
of famine is worsening, and the international context
is contributing thereto. France is deeply concerned
about the recent abduction of five United Nations staff
members in the south and calls for their immediate
and unconditional release. The protection of civilians
remains an obligation for all. Full access to all persons
in need must be guaranteed.
Regarding the FSO SAFER oil tanker, France
supports the United Nations coordinated response plan
and wishes to see its implementation. France will step
up to the plate during the donors conference planned for
May in that respect. We also reiterated our commitment
to supporting the Yemeni people on 16 March by
announcing a contribution to the humanitarian response
plan of $16 million.
Yemen is now in a crucial phase. Conditions are
in place to transform that truce into a long-lasting
ceasefire coupled with a peace plan. France encourages
all Yemeni and regional stakeholders to fully cooperate
with the Special Envoy in order to achieve a lasting
solution. We commend his efforts to foster dialogue
between the parties, and we reiterate our full support
to him. I wish also to recall that Yemeni women must
be able to be fully involved in that historic stage of the
political life of their country.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Today’s briefing gives a
more hopeful outlook on the situation in Yemen, and
we are grateful to Special Envoy Hans Grundberg and
the United Nations team for all the efforts that have
been made in securing the two-month truce between
the parties, as well as the facilitation being undertaken
with regional partners to move forward the political
processes required for stabilizing Yemen.
We nonetheless acknowledge the persisting
humanitarian concerns in Yemen and thank UnderSecretary-General Martin Griffiths for his briefing
on the humanitarian situation as well as on the actions
being undertaken concerning the threat posed by the
FSO SAFER tanker. I also acknowledge the presence

22-318817/19

S/PV.9017

The situation in the Middle East

here today of the Permanent Representative of Yemen
at this meeting.
Repeatedly, the Council has expressed concerns
over the deteriorating security situation in Yemen and
reaffirmed its conviction that there can be no military
solution to the armed conflict, which threatens the
existence of a unified Yemeni State. Over the past
seven years, Yemenis have had to endure incessant
violent clashes that have resulted in the killing of more
than 400,000 people. Lives and livelihoods have been
disrupted, and some 17 million people, mostly women
and children, are on the brink of starvation as the
country faces its worst-ever humanitarian crisis.
We therefore welcome the two-month nationwide
truce agreed between the parties as a positive
development that offers a much-needed respite from
the gruelling war, eases the humanitarian burden and
creates a conducive environment to bolster political
processes for a solution to the conflict.
We urge the parties to respect the conditions of the
truce and refrain from any escalatory actions that could
potentially unravel the marginal progress being made
towards peace, especially in the light of the recent
skirmishes in Ma’rib governorate.
We encourage the Special Envoy’s ongoing
mediation and his engagement with broad sections of
Yemeni society. We welcome the efforts to maintain
open-channel communications to help the parties
sustain their commitments to the truce, which we hope
will extend beyond the two-month period.
The transfer of power by President Hadi Mansour
to the newly created Presidential Leadership Council
on 7 April is a positive and important act in the quest
for a comprehensive and inclusive political solution
that keeps all parts of Yemeni society together. We
recognize the leadership responsibility that has been
demonstrated in taking that step and thank the regional
partners for their support in that regard.
We urge the political class of Yemen to leverage the
prevailing momentum for a Yemeni-led, Yemeni-owned
process, with the support of the United Nations. We
believe that the window of opportunity provided by the
truce is significant and must be purposefully utilized
for the benefit of the people of Yemen, who desire
nothing but peace and the chance to live a normal life.
My delegation remains concerned that Yemeni
women have still not been provided a rightful place in
8/19

14/04/2022

societal efforts to find a solution to the conflict. Yemeni
women, who have been disproportionately affected by
the conflict, have a role to play in deciding how it should
be resolved. We remind the parties that the durability of
any political settlement is dependent on the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women in all aspects
of political negotiations and decision-making and urge
them to commit to the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000).
We welcome the decision to reopen the Sana’a
airport and the Al-Hudaydah port for limited commercial
flights, commercial imports and humanitarian aid and
underscore its significance for the import-dependent
economy of Yemen, especially in these moments
of unprecedented global challenges involving the
questions of food, energy and finance. In view of
the growing humanitarian needs and the near-famine
conditions of millions of Yemenis, we encourage the
continued support of the international community and
donors to raise the funds urgently needed to mitigate
the humanitarian crisis. In this regard, welcome the
economic package announced by the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and the Gulf
Cooperation Council. In line with their humanitarian
obligations, the Yemeni parties must protect access
for the delivery of humanitarian aid and services to all
parts of Yemen.
The growing risk of a major oil spill from the
dilapidated FSO Safer tanker and its potential
environmental, economic and humanitarian impacts
have also been matters of great concern. We are
therefore pleased by the signing of the memorandum
of understanding with the authorities in Sana’a to
permanently address the threat, including arrangements
to offload the 1.1 million barrels of oil cargo to a
temporary vessel within the next four months, pending
the search for a replacement vessel. We thank all the
countries that have supported that effort and those that
are considering financial assistance in this regard. In
addition to funding, which is crucial to the success of
mitigating the environmental impact of the situation of
the FSO Safer, we also urge the Houthis to continue in
their cooperation with the United Nations to that end.
In conclusion, we recognize that finding a lasting
solution to the conflict in Yemen interlocks with
peace, stability and security in the broader Middle
East. We therefore call for the collective engagement
by the Council as we seize this opportune moment
22-31881

14/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East

in supporting the revitalization of the peace process
in Yemen.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to begin
by thanking Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
Hans Grundberg and Under-Secretary-General Martin
Griffiths for their briefings. The insight that they bring
to the Security Council is especially valuable in the
light of the significant developments witnessed over the
past few weeks.
First, congratulations are in order for Mr. Grundberg
and his Office on brokering the truce announced
two weeks ago. Halting the fighting, increasing fuel
imports and resuming commercial flights from Sana’a
are all measures that will have a positive impact on the
humanitarian and economic situation in Yemen. As we
have heard, there are already signs of a steep reduction
in civilian casualties.
Not only should the truce be upheld, but the parties
and the international community also owe it to the
Yemeni people to renew the agreement and expand its
terms, including by reopening roads in Taiz and further
facilitating the movement of people and goods. Perhaps
most importantly, the truce provides an opportunity to
foster trust and build momentum towards a permanent
ceasefire and a comprehensive and inclusive political
solution. Therefore, we are gravely alarmed by
reports of armed clashes around Marib and Taiz. This
opportunity must not be squandered; this is not a time
for brinkmanship or irresponsibility.
Brazil hopes that the creation of the Presidential
Leadership Council will prove to be a positive step
towards peace and welcomes the public assurances
made by the Council’s leadership in that regard.
Mr. Grundberg’s three-day visit to Sana’a is another
element that indicates increasing openness to dialogue.
We urge the Houthis to step up their engagement with
the Special Envoy, both by observing and extending the
truce and by committing to a political solution.
As we have just heard from Mr. Griffiths, the
humanitarian situation remains dire, and we are still
far from closing the funding gap for aid operations. It
is worrisome that food and nutrition assistance is one
of the most underfunded areas of the response. Brazil
has sought to do its part, including by announcing new
contributions at the pledging conference for Yemen
held last month in Geneva.
Unless the causes of the humanitarian disaster
are addressed, however, no amount of aid will suffice.

S/PV.9017

The positive developments that we have discussed
today have the potential to revert to the previous trend
towards economic disarray and fragmentation. Brazil
commends, in this context, the Saudi and Emirati
contributions towards economic stabilization, including
the sizeable foreign reserve injection into the Yemeni
Central Bank. Sustaining the exchange rate will have
rippling effects on the well-being of Yemeni society.
Brazil also welcomes the progress being made
by the United Nations Yemen country team, under
Mr. David Gressly, with regard to FSO Safer. Brazil
supports the implementation of the plan in its entirety,
including the transfer of the FSO Safer’s contents to
a temporary vessel as an emergency measure and the
procurement of a replacement floating storage and
offloading unit as a long-term solution.
Over the past few weeks, we have seen a number of
significant developments with regard to Yemen, most
of them positive and many of them unexpected. As we
have learned over more than seven years of war, our
hopes should be tempered with caution and vigilance
and must be accompanied by sustained efforts to
capitalize on the initial advances. We reiterate our
full support for Mr. Grundberg and his Office in that
regard. We also recall that ultimate responsibility for
progressing on the path of peace falls to the parties on
the ground. The Yemeni people do not deserve to have
their hopes dashed yet again.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank Mr. Hans Grundberg and Mr. Martin
Griffiths for their briefings.
We are pleased to see increased positive momentum
and unprecedented consensus towards ending the war
in Yemen and achieving peace, security and stability.
Countless efforts have been made to that end, the most
recent of which was the Yemeni-Yemeni consultations
held under the auspices of the Gulf Cooperation Council
(GCC) from 29 March to 7 April. The consultations,
which included the broad participation of a diverse array
of political actors and civil society, concluded with a
consensus on a road map that we hope will pave the
way for a lasting and comprehensive political solution.
In that context, we express our appreciation for the
efforts of the secretariat of the GCC to bridge the divide
among the Yemeni parties and different points of view.
We also reiterate the need to ensure the continued,
meaningful and active participation of women in
political consultations and processes.

22-318819/19

S/PV.9017

The situation in the Middle East

The United Arab Emirates welcomes the decision
of President Abdrabbuh Mansur Hadi to form the
Presidential Leadership Council to complete the
implementation of the transitional phase and delegate
full presidential powers to it. We hope that this step
will contribute to reaching a lasting political solution
among the Yemeni parties. We also emphasize the full
support of my country for the Presidential Leadership
Council and its supporting bodies to enable it to
carry out its tasks, end the crisis, achieve security
and stability in Yemen and realize the aspirations of
the brotherly Yemeni people for development and
prosperity. We stress the need for the Yemeni parties to
pool their efforts and work collaboratively so that State
institutions can resume their effectiveness and meet the
needs of citizens.
We also welcome the call of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia on the Presidential Leadership Council to begin
negotiations with the Houthis under the auspices of the
United Nations in order to reach a comprehensive and
lasting political solution. We also reiterate our strong
condemnation of the Houthi terrorist cross-border
attacks targeting civilian facilities in the Kingdom,
the latest of which targeted an oil facility in the city of
Jeddah, which the Security Council condemned in its
press statement issued on 4 April (SC/14852).
We call on the Houthis to seize this valuable
opportunity, stop manoeuvring and seriously engage in
the ongoing efforts to end the war in Yemen.
We also stress the importance of the Houthis
stopping all violations of the truce, in particular their
continued bombing of sites in Ma’rib governorate. We
urge all parties to work with the Special Envoy to achieve
further progress in implementing confidence-building
measures, including the exchange of prisoners, the
opening of roads leading to the city of Taiz and work
to transform the temporary truce into a permanent
cessation of military and hostile actions.
While this delicate period brings renewed hope
that an end to the war in Yemen is close, we urge all
regional and international stakeholders to advance this
opportunity by working positively with international
and Gulf efforts to find a peaceful solution to the crisis
in Yemen. We also urge them to refrain from exploiting
the crisis to serve their own agendas or narrow interests,
which could reverse the progress made thus far.
On the humanitarian front, the United Arab
Emirates, along with the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, has
10/19

14/04/2022

pledged $2 billion to support the Central Bank of Yemen.
As we have heard, as a result of that move, the value of
the local currency has begun to increase considerably,
which will help to alleviate the pressure on livelihoods
and to meet growing humanitarian needs in the wake of
rising global food prices and energy costs.
We reiterate our support for the efforts of the United
Nations to address the situation of the FSO SAFER oil
tanker. We call on the Houthis to meet their obligations
under the agreement with the United Nations in order
to avert a serious environmental disaster that could
occur if the recent United Nations emergency plan is
not implemented swiftly.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reiterates
its commitment to standing by the brotherly Yemeni
people. We support their ambitions and aspirations,
as part of our policy in support of the interests of the
peoples in the region.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Special Envoy Grundberg and
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for their briefings
and ongoing efforts.
We are witnessing a moment of hope for Yemen — an
opportunity to finally bring peace to a country and a
people that have suffered for far too long. Today, I will
outline the progress we are seeing on the ground and
the work still ahead.
First, the United States applauds the parties’ public
endorsement of Special Envoy Grundberg’s call for a
two-month truce. That is a hopeful first step. Movement
towards a comprehensive ceasefire will require
concerted efforts by the parties and the support of the
Council to hold the parties accountable. We are also
encouraged by the Special Envoy’s visit to Sana’a and
hope that this is another example of the peace process
moving forward. Crucially, there are indications that
access to food and other supplies will increase, thanks
to the movement of fuel ships into the Al-Hudaydah
ports in preparation for resuming commercial flights to
and from Sana’a airport. The parties should continue to
negotiate in good faith to discuss opening key roads to
Taiz and other locations. Easing the flow of goods and
people will reduce the suffering of millions of Yemenis.
The United States also welcomes the announcement
of the formation of the Government of Yemen’s
Presidential Leadership Council and of its support for
the United Nations negotiated truce and broader peace
efforts. We support the Yemeni people’s aspirations for
22-31881

14/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East

an effective, democratic and transparent Government
that includes diverse political and civil society voices,
including those of women and other marginalized
groups. We appreciate the recent talks hosted by the
Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), which provided an
opportunity for Yemeni-Yemeni dialogue. This has
brought diverse members of Yemeni society together to
discuss reforms and other initiatives that can strengthen
governance, stabilize the economy and improve the lives
of Yemenis, and in doing so, the GCC-hosted talks can
also help bolster the United Nations-led peace process.
This truce opens a window of opportunity for
long-term and sustainable peace — peace that the
people of Yemen desperately need. The party should
turn their efforts to securing a lasting end to fighting
and to participating in an inclusive, United Nationsled political process. We urge the parties to adhere to
their agreement to halt all offensive military operations
inside Yemen and across its borders and to freeze their
positions on the ground.
Already, we are aware of troubling reports of
continued ground fighting. We call for restraint and
for the parties to work through the United Nations
to address their concerns, rather than resorting to
accusations in the media. A durable end to the conflict
will require all parties to engage in order to reach a
compromise and choose dialogue over violence. That is
the task ahead.
While there is cause for optimism, millions of
Yemenis still suffer from the ravages of war. Putin’s war
of choice in Ukraine has made an already precarious
food insecurity situation in Yemen even worse. The
World Food Programme’s March report identified
Yemen as one of the country’s most affected by wheat
price increases and lack of imports from Ukraine.
That is just another grim example of the ripple effect
Russia’s unprovoked, unjust and unconscionable war is
having on the world’s most vulnerable.
Tragically, the World Food Programme has already
had to reduce rations for some of the 8 million Yemenis
who are food insecure. This is a moment for the world
to step up. We welcome the Saudi announcement of
a $300-million contribution to the United Nations
humanitarian response plan, and the United States was
pleased to announce a $585-million contribution just
last month. Still, more help is needed as food shortages
grow and prices rise. The United Nations appeal remains
less than 40 per cent funded. The United States urges
all countries to contribute more before it is too late.

S/PV.9017

We also applaud Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates for contributing $1 billion each to support the
Central Bank of Yemen and an additional $1 billion
in Saudi support for fuel imports and development
projects. It is imperative that those funds be disbursed
promptly to help stabilize the economy and facilitate the
implementation of projects that will benefit the people
of Yemen. But let us make no mistake — economic
support is not a substitute for humanitarian support,
and they are both essential to Yemen’s prosperity.
Finally, now is the time to defuse the ticking
time bomb that is the FSO SAFER. We are optimistic
about the United Nations-coordinated effort to address
the situation, but the need for funding and regional
cooperation is urgent. We welcome last month’s signing
of a memorandum of understanding between the United
Nations and the Houthis, which provides for the transfer
of FSO SAFER’s oil to a sound vessel, on an urgent
basis, while a replacement export capacity is identified.
In advance of a pledging conference in May, our
Special Envoy for Yemen, Tim Lenderking, is traveling
in the region with United Nations Resident Coordinator
in Yemen, David Gressly, to encourage financial and
in-kind support for emergency efforts to avert a spill
from the vessel.
We have not had this much momentum in Yemen
in a long time. It is critical that we continue to help the
parties seize this hopeful moment, preserve the gains
being made and lock in steps that can prevent a return
to fighting. There is no military solution to this terrible
conflict. There is only a political and diplomatic
settlement, and the Yemeni people are counting on our
support to achieve success.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Envoy Hans Grundberg and Under-SecretaryGeneral Martin Griffiths for the briefings. I welcome
the Permanent Representative of Yemen to today’s
meeting. I would like to say Ramadan Mubarak to all
our Muslim friends, and I wish them a peaceful and
tranquil month of Ramadan.
After seven years of war, at long last the light of
hope is dawning for Yemen. The past month has seen
important progress on the ground, with the parties to
the conflict entering into a two-month truce, starting
from 2 April. This is the first Ramadan free of fighting
for the Yemeni people in seven years. China welcomes
that development and commends the efforts of Special
Envoy Grundberg, the Yemeni parties and regional

22-3188111/19

S/PV.9017

The situation in the Middle East

countries, including Saudi Arabia and Oman. Peace and
stability are the common wish of the Yemeni people. It
is in no one’s interest to resume hostilities. The current
hard-won and fragile ceasefire must be cherished with
greater care by all parties. We call on all parties in
Yemen to make every effort to ensure that the ceasefire
holds and to do their utmost to prolong its momentum.
The Yemen conflict should ultimately be
resolved through a Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned
political process. Recently, under the aegis of the
Gulf Cooperation Council, Yemeni consultations
took place successfully in Riyadh. On 7 April, the
Yemeni Government announced the formation of the
Presidential Leadership Council. On 11 April, Special
Envoy Grundberg visited Sana’a for the first time. All
those factors gave the Yemeni political process new
impetus. We hope that all parties in Yemen will take
the current rare opportunity and continue to move in
the same direction under the good offices of the Special
Envoy so as to set reasonable expectations and kickstart
and continue the dialogue. Countries of the region with
influence should continue to contribute positively and
constructively to that end.
The humanitarian crisis in Yemen remains one of
the worst in the world, with more than 23 million people
in need of humanitarian assistance and some 12 million
facing severe starvation. As Yemen relies on imports
for 90 per cent of its food and nearly all its fuel, the
soaring global food and energy prices have exacerbated
the plight of the Yemeni people.
China welcomes the high-level pledging conference
on the humanitarian crisis in Yemen, co-hosted by the
United Nations, Switzerland and Sweden last month.
Adequate funding is crucial to sustaining United
Nations humanitarian programmes in Yemen. Some
goods recently started to enter the Al-Hudaydah port.
The truce agreement allows commercial flights to
depart from and land at Sana’a airport twice a week. We
encourage all parties to work jointly for the agreement’s
implementation. That will help to ease Yemen’s
humanitarian situation. We applaud Saudi Arabia and
the United Arab Emirates for offering economic support
to Yemen, and we welcome the continued financial and
material assistance from the international community.
The United Nations operational plan regarding the
FSO SAFER tanker issue is supported by the Houthis.
That is a positive development. From the economic,
humanitarian, security and environmental perspectives,
the potential risks of the FSO SAFER oil tanker must
12/19

14/04/2022

be eliminated without further delay. We hope that all
parties concerned will actively cooperate with the
United Nations in implementing the operational plan to
ward off a potential disaster.
Mr. Asokan (India): I thank Special Envoy Hans
Grundberg and Under-Secretary-General Martin
Griffiths for their briefings.
India welcomes the two-month truce agreed by all
parties in Yemen, beginning with the holy month of
Ramadan. We applaud the efforts of the Special Envoy
and commend the role played by the countries of the
region in facilitating the temporary ceasefire. India
support all efforts towards consolidating the truce into
a more comprehensive and durable ceasefire.
At the same time, we strongly condemn the crossborder terror attacks, using missiles and drones, against
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, including
the one that was carried out on Saudi Arabia three
weeks ago. Those attacks resulted in the death and
injury of innocent civilians, including Indian nationals.
We hope that the announced ceasefire will also put an
end to such cross-border attacks.
The ceasefire announcement could be a first
step towards the peaceful resolution of the conflict
in Yemen. The final goal must be the permanent
cessation of all violence and hostilities. To that end,
it is important to resume an inclusive Yemeni-led and
Yemeni-owned political process that addresses the
legitimate aspirations of all Yemenis at the earliest. The
full, equal and meaningful participation of women in
that process is vital.
We also welcome the announcement of additional
steps accompanying the truce declaration, including
permitting a specified number of fuel ships into
Al-Hudaydah port and a limited number of commercial
flights a week in and out of Sana’a. That was agreed
between the parties. The full implementation of those
steps will help in alleviating the humanitarian suffering
of all Yemenis. There is a need to strengthen such steps
and take further concrete confidence-building measures,
such as the exchange of prisoners and detainees.
I reiterate India’s demand for the immediate release
of the crew members of the vessel RWABEE, whose
onboard crew also includes seven Indian nationals.
Resolution 2624 (2022) also unequivocally demands
that. The crew has been unlawfully detained. Regular
access to them and updates on their safety and well22-31881

14/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9017

being must be ensured by Ansar Allah until they are
eventually released.

briefings. I welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representative of Yemen in this meeting.

The
recently
concluded
Yemeni-Yemeni
consultations in Riyadh represent a significant
development. We recognize the key role played by
the Gulf Cooperation Council in facilitating that
dialogue, which complements the Special Envoy’s
consultations with all Yemeni parties. We hope
that the recommendations contained in the final
declaration of the consultations will be implemented in
a timely manner.

Since our previous meeting (see S/PV.8995), there
have been significant developments in the security
situation and the political climate in Yemen that give
hope for the path to peace.

We welcome President Hadi Mansour’s irreversible
transfer of powers to the new Presidential Leadership
Council. The announcement of the economic package
by Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates to
support Yemen’s economy will also help to address
the immediate humanitarian and economic challenges
facing the country.
We appreciate the United Nations efforts in finding
an early resolution to the environmental, humanitarian
and maritime threat posed by the current condition of
the FSO SAFER tanker. The operational plan prepared
by the United Nations adopts a more pragmatic
approach to resolving the problem. We hope that that
is taken forward for its early implementation with
adequate funding.
In line with its centuries-old relations with Yemen
and in keeping with its strong people-to-people ties,
India extended humanitarian help to Yemen in the
past, and we remain committed to doing so. India
has welcomed the people of Yemen, even during the
trying times of the coronavirus disease pandemic. Our
hospitals receive thousands of Yemenis for medical
treatment every year and several thousand Yemeni
students continue to pursue their studies in India.
Let me conclude by reaffirming India’s strong
commitment
to
Yemen’s
unity,
sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity. The recent events
in Yemen have created a window of opportunity to end
the violence and suffering of the people of Yemen. I
urge all Yemeni parties to seize that opportunity and
engage constructively with each other and with the
Special Envoy to reach a comprehensive negotiated
settlement to end the conflict in Yemen.
Ms. Bongo (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
Special Envoy Hans Grundberg and Under-SecretaryGeneral Martin Griffiths for their enlightening

The current truce, which came into force on 2 April
for a renewable period of two months, negotiated
with each of the parties under the aegis of the United
Nations, represents a good step towards the ceasefire
desired by the international community and awaited by
the Yemeni civilian population.
The lifting of restrictions on the movement of
women and children, as well as on fuel, for the duration
of the truce represents key steps, the latter authorizing
access for oil tankers to the port of Al-Hudaydah,
thereby enabling a better supply of fuel throughout
the country. In the same vein, the improvement in
the exchange rate, the significant pledges made and
the reopening of Sana’a airport, with the imminent
resumption of commercial flights, are positive elements
that will help revive the country’s economy.
The agreement of the parties to meet under the
auspices of Special Envoy Grundberg, open the roads
to Taiz and other Yemeni governorates is also an
encouraging development, as is the visit of the Special
Envoy to Sana’a on 11 April. All this should further
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian aid and the
action by humanitarian personnel in a country where
the food and health needs of the civilian population are
exacerbated by the coronavirus disease pandemic.
We encourage all the actors to capitalize on this
momentum to establish an effective and lasting truce
that is followed, in the long term, by a permanent
ceasefire that can promote the peacebuilding process
and national reconciliation. We therefore call on
all parties to engage in good faith in an inclusive
dialogue, adopting a holistic approach, in order to
achieve a political settlement of the Yemeni issue and
a lasting peace.
We note with interest the transfer of executive power
to an eight-member Presidential Leadership Council,
equally divided between northerners and southerners,
bringing together the main political forces in Yemen.
This is an important milestone in the revitalization of
the political process that should lead to the restoration
of the State’s authority over the whole of Yemen as well
as the country’s stabilization and its security. We also

22-3188113/19

S/PV.9017

The situation in the Middle East

welcome the support given by the Gulf Cooperation
Council to the negotiations held in Riyadh, as well
as the financial support announced for Yemen and its
institutions. We encourage these regional dynamics,
which are in line with the move towards de-escalation.
However, it is important to remain vigilant,
particularly with regard to the persistent risk of famine
amplified by the diminishing supplies of wheat. It
is also important to remain engaged in protecting
humanitarian workers and for the United Nations staff
abducted several months ago to be released without
conditions. Finally, while we welcome the signing of the
agreement between the United Nations and the Houthis
aimed at resolving the environmental and humanitarian
threats posed by the FSO SAFER oil tanker, we remain
attentive as to the modalities of the implementation of
the agreement.
In conclusion, Gabon reiterates its full support to
Special Envoy Hans Grundberg and his team for all
their work to resolve the conflict in Yemen.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I also thank Special
Envoy Grundberg and Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths for their briefings and their efforts.
Let me begin by welcoming the nationwide
renewable truce in Yemen. It gives hope that the parties
are engaging in a truce for the first time in six years,
and it comes at a critical time after months of military
escalation with multiple cross-border attacks into Saudi
Arabia and air strikes inside Yemen. We sincerely
thank the Special Envoy and other stakeholders for
their extensive efforts aimed at making this happen.
The situation is fragile, but this truce is a crucial
step in the right direction. We hope the parties will
seize the opportunity to build trust, and we encourage
all efforts aimed at supporting and upholding the truce.
The humanitarian measures of the agreement are
vital. Relief for the crisis-affected Yemeni people
is much needed in this dire situation. Almost three
quarters of the civilian population rely on humanitarian
assistance, including four out of five children.
We join others in welcoming the recent entry
of fuel ships in the port of Al-Hudaydah. This will
hopefully help to alleviate the fuel crisis in the north
of Yemen, which is important for the Yemenis as well
as for the humanitarian organizations working on their
behalf. We hope to see more results for the Yemeni
people during the two months of truce, such as opening
14/19

14/04/2022

the roads to Taiz, the protection of civilians, including
children, and the resumption of commercial flights in
and out of Sana’a.
A political settlement is the only way to create a
sustainable solution. Norway commends the Special
Envoy’s continued consultations this past month on the
framework for an inclusive multitrack process, and we
encourage all parties to engage in the United Nationsled efforts to end the conflict. We are therefore pleased
that Special Envoy Grundberg visited Sana’a, and we
thank him for his updates on these conversations. We
also welcome the recent discussions and aspirations
expressed by the participants in Riyadh and the outcome
of the Gulf Cooperation Council conference.
The resignation of President Hadi marks a shift in
Yemeni politics, and we welcome the new Presidential
Leadership Council. We encourage the Council to
engage in bringing about an inclusive political process
and a lasting peace. There is overwhelming evidence
that an inclusive process in which women, youth and
victims of conflict are meaningfully represented
offers the best hope for a sustainable solution. We
regret that there are no women in the newly appointed
Presidential Council, and we continue to encourage
efforts aimed at bolstering women’s direct full, equal
and meaningful participation.
Finally, we welcome the progress made on the
FSO SAFER oil-tanker issue, the new plan to address
this threat, and the planned pledging conference in
this regard.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): It has been a long time since
we had good news from Yemen, to the point that the
name of the country itself had become synonymous with
despair. We welcome the first serious truce between the
parties in years and all the positive measures associated
with and resulting from it. We welcome the cessation
of hostilities and military operations and crossborder attacks.
Let me join colleagues in praising Special Envoy
Grundberg’s sincere efforts to successfully broker this
truce. We hope it will be fully respected by all sides and
that the sides will continue to remain constructively
engaged in its full implementation.
We reiterate our firm position: a comprehensive
nationwide ceasefire remains a priority. We have
long stated that there is no military solution to the
conflict. The goodwill expressed by all sides needs to
22-31881

14/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East

be translated into long-term commitment and avoiding
unnecessary rhetoric and truce breaches.
Now that guns have been silenced, we believe it
is the right time to start thinking that Yemen, peace
and development can go together and that it is possible
to work and achieve a lasting solution to the conflict.
Viable solutions to long and protracted conflicts require
an inclusive political process, and we reiterate our
call for the full engagement of all the parties with the
Special Envoy. In this regard, the political participation
of women remains of paramount importance. We take
note of the visit of a Special Envoy to Sana’a and the
exchanges with the leadership of the Houthis, with the
objective of moving the political process forward.
All the foregoing important developments would
not have been achieved without the bold commitment
of the Gulf Cooperation Council in hosting the YemeniYemeni consultations. The Presidential Leadership
Council must bring a new focus, and we encourage it to
address the urgent humanitarian and economic needs
of the Yemeni people. The positive momentum created
by the $3 billion economic-support package announced
by Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates should
be fully embraced, and it calls for concrete action
and reforms.
We also welcome the Saudi Arabia pledge of
$300 million to fund the United Nations humanitarian
response plan, especially in the circumstances where
the military aggression in Ukraine is greatly affecting
or exacerbating food security in other conflict areas.
We know, as it was said in this Chamber, Yemen is
one of the most exposed countries to threats to food
security, given its dependence on imports.
While we applaud — and rightfully so — this
moment of hope, let us not forget that serious challenges
persist, and we must remain prudent. The humanitarian
situation is still dramatic, and access must be improved.
The detained United Nations personnel must be
released. The human rights situation remains sobering.
The truce is fragile, and everything must be done to
maintain and possibly extend it.
Pessimism can be pervasive, but the Yemenis
must not indulge in it. Rather, they should fully grasp
this momentum and offer themselves the prospect of
a future different from the past. We look forward to
concrete steps towards a sustained political process,
and we strongly support Special Envoy Grundberg in
his efforts in this respect.

S/PV.9017

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank the United Nations
Special Envoy, Mr. Hans Grundberg, and the UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Martin
Griffiths, on their briefings on developments in the
political and humanitarian situation in the Republic
of Yemen.
We are hopeful with regard to the progress achieved
by the Yemeni parties in resolving the years-long
military and political crisis in Yemen, with the mediation
of the United Nations. We welcome the establishment
of the long-awaited two-month truce, which provides
for a cessation of all hostilities, including air strikes
within and outside Yemen, and the partial reopening
of the Sana’a International Airport and the seaports in
Al-Hudaydah province.
In that regard, we pay particular tribute to the role
of Special Envoy Grundberg, whose efforts greatly
facilitated the negotiation and implementation of the
ceasefire. We hope that the ceasefire can be extended
and expanded beyond its stipulated timeframe. We
believe that such positive steps will contribute to
restoring mutual trust.
We strongly urge all parties to the Yemeni conflict
to strictly comply with the agreements reached and
to reject unilateral, provocative acts. We continue to
believe that the long-awaited peace in Yemen can be
restored only through widespread national dialogue
by taking into account the interests and concerns of
all leading political forces and religious and regional
groups in the country.
In that context, we note the establishment in Yemen
of a new collegial authority, the Presidential Leadership
Council, consisting of representatives of several political
and social forces in the country. The Council is tasked
with governing the State in the political, economic and
military spheres during the transition period, as well
addressing the security situation. That important event
for the Yemeni people was also the result of the political
and diplomatic efforts of Saudi Arabia and the Gulf
Cooperation Council. We trust that the members of the
Presidential Leadership Council will do their utmost to
stabilize the situation in Yemen and restore peace in
the country. We are convinced that such a goal can be
achieved only through constructive dialogue with the
Ansar Allah movement, which controls the north of
the country.

22-3188115/19

S/PV.9017

The situation in the Middle East

14/04/2022

In that connection, we welcome the first visit of the
Special Envoy to Sana’a since he assumed his post and
the resumption of direct dialogue with the movement’s
leadership. We also welcome Mr. Grundberg’s
willingness to cooperate with the Ambassadors of the
five permanent members of the Security Council in
Yemen. For our part, we will further actively encourage
the new Yemeni authorities and the Houthis to engage
in dialogue.

technologies. All of this had caused spikes of prices on
food and energy before 2022 even started. The main
factor driving instability and the source of the problem
today is not the Russian special military operation in
Ukraine, but the sanctions imposed on our country,
seeking to undermine the logistical chains and financial
patterns used to make payments for any incoming
deliveries from Russia, except for energy products that
the West is interested in.

We call on all parties to the internal conflict in
Yemen to return to the negotiating table in order to
establish a lasting comprehensive political settlement,
under the auspices of the United Nations, which is
key to normalizing the humanitarian situation in
Yemen, which remains a source of major concern. We
note the renewed access to the Al-Hudaydah ports
and the unloading of food and fuel from tankers. We
would like to stress once again, however, the need to
completely lift restrictions on the supply of medicines
and basic necessities to all parts of the country without
discrimination. In that context, we underscore the
efforts of regional States that are prepared to continue
to provide financial, humanitarian and mediation
assistance to resolve the political and military crisis
in Yemen.

For that reason, if Council members really want
to save the world from a food crisis, they should lift
the sanctions of choice that they themselves have
imposed and poor countries will immediately feel the
difference. If Council members are not prepared to do
that, they should not engage in empty rhetoric or try to
mislead people.

We also note the conclusion of a memorandum
of understanding between the Ansar Allah movement
and United Nations agencies to resolve the situation
involving the FSO SAFER oil tanker.
We again recall resolution 598 (1987) and other
initiatives aimed at subregional stabilization, including
the renewed Russian collective security concept.
Lastly, I would like to say that we are not surprised
that today we heard renewed allegations on the part of a
number of countries that the looming global food crisis
is caused solely by the actions of Russia in Ukraine. We
understand that it is more convenient for our Western
partners to make such accusations than to actually
recognize their own responsibility for the volatility and
pessimism in the food, energy and financial markets.
The situation did not arise overnight and took years to
evolve. Indeed, it is the result of the excessive subsidizing
of Western economies, trade wars, protectionism and
unilateral illegal sanctions that affect two-thirds of the
planet’s population to varying degrees.
Another negative aspect is the expedited energy
transition that Western countries are implementing
with the main goal of protecting and promoting their
16/19

Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to begin by thanking Special Envoy
Grundberg and Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for
their briefings.
Today, I will focus my statement on three points:
the truce, the political process and the FSO SAFER
oil tanker. On these three issues, we are seeing some
progress for the first time in many months.
First of all, Mexico commends the efforts led by the
Special Envoy for the truce that began on 2 April, and
we congratulate him on them. That initial step, while
fragile and not without its challenges, is an important
basis for the reconciliation and pacification of the
country. We hope that the suspension of hostilities can
be extended beyond the two-month period and will
eventually become a lasting national ceasefire.
We note that there have been no air strikes or crossborder attacks in a little over a week. However, there
have been reports of clashes in some places, such as
Ma’rib and Taiz. We urge the parties to exercise utmost
restraint and refrain from provocations in order to
maintain the truce. Clearly, the conflict will not be
resolved through military means, but through dialogue
and negotiation. The truce offers an opportunity to
that end.
Secondly, with respect to the political process,
we welcome the facilitation of the Gulf Cooperation
Council in organizing the recent intra-Yemeni
consultations. Mexico notes the transfer of powers and
the formation of the Presidential Leadership Council,
which includes the participation of representatives of
various factions. We hope that it will contribute to
22-31881

14/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East

the success of the political process facilitated by the
Special Envoy. However, like other delegations, we
insist on the importance of the full, fair and substantive
participation of women in that process.
As we have heard this morning, the armed conflict
is one of the main reasons for the serious humanitarian
crisis in Yemen. The needs continue to grow and,
unfortunately, only a little more than one-third of the
resources are available to meet the most basic demands
of millions of Yemenis. We welcome the contributions
announced by various donors, including Gulf countries.
We also welcome the contributions made by Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates to help the
economy and the revaluation of the rial.
The recent delivery of fuel through the port of
Al-Hudaydah is a positive development. However, the
rising prices for fuel and food are of great concern.
That increase is particularly serious for a country
where the vast majority of its population is living
in conditions of food insecurity and some even in
famine-like conditions.
My delegation welcomes the efforts to resume
commercial flights from Sana’a and to open the roads
and access to Taiz. Those measures will provide
an impetus to revive the economy and facilitate the
delivery of humanitarian assistance.
Additionally, we welcome the meetings between
the head of Ansar Allah and the Special Envoy in
Muscat, particularly as this was the first time since
the beginning of his mandate in Sana’a. We call for
channels of contact and communication with the United
Nations Special Envoy to be kept open.
Thirdly, Mexico recognizes the progress made
in relation to the FSO SAFER oil tanker issue. We
commend the efforts of the Resident Coordinator and
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
as well as the Netherlands, to address the pressing
situation surrounding the vessel. We call on the Ansar
Allah leadership to collaborate constructively in the
implementation of the memorandum of understanding
signed in March. We also call for international
solidarity in order to raise the necessary funds to
finalize that operation.
In conclusion, my delegation stresses the need to
take advantage of the opening window of opportunity
to establish a permanent ceasefire and advance the
political process in order to achieve peace and thus

S/PV.9017

put an end to the grave humanitarian situation being
endured by the Yemeni people.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Special Envoy
Grundberg and Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for
their briefings and welcome the participation of the
representative of Yemen in this meeting.
After seven years of devastating armed conflict,
the positive developments over the past few weeks are
encouraging. I commend all the parties for agreeing
to a two-month truce and appreciate the pivotal role
of the Special Envoy and the United Nations team in
that regard.
The truce symbolizes the mutual desire of the
parties for a political solution to the conflict. More
importantly, it opens up an opportunity for them to
engage meaningfully and constructively in efforts
towards a comprehensive ceasefire and, ultimately, the
desired political settlement. We therefore encourage
the parties to stay true to the terms of the truce. I also
commend the Gulf Cooperation Council for their efforts
aimed at uniting the various political stakeholders with
a view to driving Yemen’s peace aspirations forward.
Kenya acknowledges the decision of President
Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour to peacefully hand
over authority and wishes the Presidential Leadership
Council every success as it embarks on unifying the
people of Yemen while ensuring equitable service
distribution. Even as we celebrate this moment of
reprieve, the parties must be conscious of the fact that
difficult decisions and compromises have to be made to
attain the much-needed sustained peace.
We regret that, in the past few years, humanitarian
funding for the millions of Yemeni people in need has
gradually decreased while the humanitarian situation
has been worsening. Indeed, the approximately
$2.7 billion shortfall in the humanitarian funding
appeal has left humanitarian programmes struggling to
operate under extremely difficult conditions.
In that regard, we welcome the timely intervention
by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates to provide $2 billion in economic support
to the Central Bank of Yemen, as well as $1 billion
towards development projects and fuel. The regional
initiative should serve as encouragement for the
international community to also renew their support to
the Yemen funding appeal. Addressing that challenge
will also require the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and other humanitarian agencies

22-3188117/19

S/PV.9017

The situation in the Middle East

to recalibrate their approaches aimed at attracting
sustainable support.
Our region, the Horn of Africa, is alive to the threat
posed by the deteriorating FSO SAFER tanker. An oil
spill would destroy not only the fragile ecosystem,
but also the livelihoods of those who depend on the
blue economy. In that regard, we welcome the agreed
operation plan as a positive step and call on all
stakeholders to urgently contribute to its funding so as
to commence without delay.
To conclude, I wish all our Muslim brothers
and sisters continued peace during the holy month
of Ramadan.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Madam President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
this month and to wish you and your friendly delegation
every success in your work. I thank also our sisterly
country, the United Arab Emirates, for a successful
presidency last month. I thank as well Mr. Griffiths and
Mr. Grundberg for their briefings.
There is no path towards peace as peace is the path
itself. The Yemeni Government has chosen peace as
the path to stop the conflict and achieve the security,
justice, equality and the rule of law to which the Yemeni
people aspire. While that path has been obstructed
with challenges by the Houthi militias, the Yemeni
Government has made many concessions to alleviate
human suffering and put an end to the war imposed by
the terrorist Houthi militias.
The Yemeni wisdom on the path of peace was
illustrated by the historic decision taken on 7 April by
His Excellency former President Abdrabuh Mansour
Hadi Mansour to form a Presidential Leadership
Council and to confer his full powers upon it. The new
Council has been made far more representative of all
the civic-oriented Yemeni political strata, with the
aim of restoring State authority. This reaffirms that
the Yemeni Government functions in a comprehensive
environment based on pluralism, dialogue and
consensus for Yemen’s present and future, as well as
for achieving just and lasting peace through the peace
process led by the United Nations and its Special Envoy,
Mr. Grundberg. That process is based on the agreed
political terms of reference: the Gulf Cooperation
Council (GCC) Initiative and its implementation
18/19

14/04/2022

mechanism, the outcome of the comprehensive National
Dialogue Conference and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, foremost among which is resolution 2216
(2015).
In that connection, I commend from this rostrum
the historic decision by His Excellency former
Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour to form the sovereign
Presidential Leadership Council and to confer his
full powers upon it, and who shouldered his past
responsibilities amid very complex and challenging
historic circumstances.
I also take this opportunity to express the
appreciation of the Yemeni Government for the
efforts made by the GCC in hosting the intra-Yemeni
consultations and creating all the conditions conducive
to ensuring that those consultations were successful.
That was a historic turning point in the Yemeni crisis,
and it proved the commitment of our brothers in the
GCC to unite the Yemeni people with one voice,
including the Houthi militias, which were also invited
to participate in the consultations at the last minute.
However, the Houthi militias rejected all invitations
for engaging all dialogue, stopping bloodshed and
achieving peace. The Houthi militias have chosen to
pursue war, not peace, to realize their goals and they
insist on remaining a tool in the hands of Iran.
His Excellency the leader of the Presidential
Leadership Council, Mr. Rashad Al-Alimi, has stressed
that the Council will end the war and establish peace
and that it is a council for peace but also a council of
defence and unity to defend the country’s sovereignty
and protect its citizens.
Early this month, the Security Council gave its
blessing to the truce declaration announced by the
Special Envoy. The Government supports it and is
committed to respecting its provisions, despite flagrant
violations by the Houthis. The governorates of Ma’rib,
Al-Jawf, Sa’dah, Hajjah, Al-Hudaydah, Taiz and Dhale
were subjected to persistent attacks by the Houthis,
who have used ballistic missiles that kill innocent
people and destroy civilian infrastructure, thereby
forcibly displacing more people, further complicating
the humanitarian situation and undermining the efforts
of the United Nations and relief agencies.
The Yemeni Government is committed from the
outset to all the truce provisions, be it allowing access
to ships transporting fuel through Al-Hudaydah ports or
taking all measures necessary to operate direct flights
22-31881

14/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East

via Sana’a International Airport. Our Government has
even communicated directly with the countries noted
in the truce agreement to receive those flights and
designated its representatives on the Taiz committee
with a view to lifting the siege on the city, whose
residents have been suffering from an unprecedented
siege amid silence from the international community.
We call on the Security Council to first assume
its moral responsibilities and then exert more pressure
on the militias to stop their aggression and respect the
truce. They must lift the siege on Taiz, release those
captives, in accordance with the principle of all for
all, and engage in the peace process led by the United
Nations to end the war.
The Yemeni Government is prepared to do
everything it can to meet the aspirations of our people
for peace, security and prosperity. However, that will
not be possible if the Houthi militias do not opt for
peace and make genuine concessions for a better future
for Yemen and its people
The Yemeni Government appreciates the generous
support provided by sisterly and friendly countries,
either directly or through the humanitarian response
plan, to alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni people.
Nonetheless, humanitarian operations do not have
access to all those who need assistance, due either to a
lack of funding for the rescue projects or to obstacles
imposed by the Houthi militias, which are diverting
humanitarian aid away from those who deserve it. We
once again urge the international community to maintain
Yemen as a top priority and provide more support to
end the humanitarian crisis, especially in the context of
current international circumstances and the spike in the
price of food and fuel. We call on the Security Council
once again to use all possible means to stop the Houthi
militias’ manipulation of the humanitarian dossier.
The Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs has repeatedly warned the Security Council
of the deteriorating economic situation in Yemen,

S/PV.9017

which is one of the most important factors leading to a
dangerously deteriorating humanitarian situation in the
country. Peace cannot be achieved in Yemen without
development. That is why the Yemeni Government
is sparing no effort to implement many reform and
development projects to stabilize the economy and
to control inflation and the exchange rate, thereby
improving the humanitarian situation for all Yemenis.
The Yemeni Government highly commends the
generous support of $3 billion pledged by the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates to
promote the economy and development. Nevertheless,
we reiterate our call on the international community to
enhance its support and help the Yemeni Government
to implement recovery programmes and promote
sources of income as a pivotal means to address the
humanitarian crisis, instead of relying on relief aid.
In conclusion, the Yemeni Government supports
all efforts to address the issue of the FSO SAFER oil
tanker and avoid an imminent disaster, with serious
potential humanitarian, economic and environment
consequences for Yemen, countries of the region and
the world. As the Government facilitates the United
Nations efforts in this regard, we warn against the
manipulation by the Houthi militias of this particular
dossier, because they may well shift their position for
the purpose of political blackmailing, as they have done
over the past three years. We therefore reiterate our
appeal for support and financing for the United Nations
plan to avert a disaster. We call on the Council once
again to continue exerting pressure on those militias to
eliminate the danger posed by the oil tanker.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I will now adjourn the meeting so that the
Council can continue its discussion on the subject in
closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

22-3188119/19
