General Aaeembly-Twenty-seeond Sea1ion

76

(subject to the Staff Assessment Plan provided in
staff regulation 3.3 and to post adjustments wherever
applied) and, if otherwise eligible, shall receive the
allowances which are available to staff members
generally.
"Annex I, paragraph 2
"The Secretary-General is authorized, on the basis
of appropriate justification and/or reporting, to make
additional payments to Under-Secretaries-General and
Assistant Secretaries-General to compensate for such
special costs as may be reasonably incurred, in the
interest of the Organization, in the performance of
duties assigned to them by the Secretary-General. The
maximum total amount of such payments is to be
determined in the annual budget by the General Assembly".
1642nd plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.

2370 (XXII). United Nations regular budget
The General Assembly,
Recalling that in paragraph 68 of its second report 42
the Ad Hoe Committee of Experts to Examine the
Finances of the United Nations and the Specialized
Agencies expressed the view that further development
and application by the United Nations family of organizations of an integrated system of long-term planning on a programmed basis is an essential ingredient
in improving their programming and budgetary processes and ensuring throughout the United Nations
system the most rational use of available resources,
Recalling further that in paragraph 73 of its second
report the Ad H oc Committee formulated precise recommendations to reach the objective indicated in paragraph 68, by taking into account the priority needs of
Member States, the over-all capability of the Organization and the probable financial costs to Member States
and that, in accordance with Articles 22 and 62 of the
Charter of the United Nations and General Assembly
resolutions pertinent thereto, the several programmeformulating bodies of the United Nations were especially charged to study, repor~ and make recommendations to the General Assembly in their respective
areas of competence,
Recalling further that in paragraph 26 of its second
report the Ad H oc Committee recommended that : ·
"The heads of the organizations should transmit
preliminary and approximate estimates to the bodies
responsible for examining the budget early enough
to enable them to consider the main items of the
budget well in advance of formal presentation and to
make comments and suggestions thereon in good
time. This could be done about one vear before the
date on which the legislative bodies
the organizations are required to give their final approval to the

Noting that the Secretary-General in his foreword
to the budget estimates for the financial year 196841
directed attention to the fact that renewed emphasis
had been placed on the need for basic measures to ensure
greater efficiency and real value for money and to the
necessity of reconciling work programmes with resources,
Recognizing that it is essential to the sound management aiid orderly development of the United Nations
and to the effective implementation of its programmes
that the Secretarv-General communicate in advance to
tlw General Assembly preliminary and approximate
estimates for succeeding budgets in order to enable
the Assembly to act thereon,
1. lnvitcs the programme-formulating bodies of the
Cnited Nations, including the Economic and Social
Council and the Committee for Programme and Coordination, bearing in mind the provisions of paragraph
2 below and in consultation with the Secretary-General,
to develop their own processes to carry out at the
earliest possible date a system of long-term planning
and programme formulation, within their respective
fields of competence, taking into account the recommendations in paragraph 73 of the second report of the
Ad H oc Committee of Experts to Examine the Finances
of the United Nations and the Specialized Agencies;
2. Decides that the Secretary-General, taking into
account all the actions of the programme-formulating
bodies, including the Economic and Social Council and
the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination, shall
suggest to the General Assembly at each regular session
a planning estimate for the United Nations regular
budget estimates for the second succeeding budgetary
period (henceforth referred to as the forecast period);
this planning estimate for the forecast period shall be
reviewed by the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions and transmitted, together with
its comments and recommendations, to the General
Assembly no later than 1 December; the Assembly shall
consider the planning estimate suggested by the
Secretary-General and the comments and recommendations thereon of the Advisory Committee and shall at
the same session approve a planning estimate for the
iurecast period ;

Considering General Assembly resolution 2150
(XXI) of 4 November 1966, adopted unanimously, in

3. Decides further that the Secretary-General shall
then construct the United Nations regular budget esti1mtes for the forecast period, guided by the planning
estimate approved by the General Assembly; all organs
of the L nited Nations and their subsidiary bodies
financed from the United Nations regular budget are
requested to co-operate with the Secretary-General and
tn be guided by the planning estimate;
4. Requests that the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions, review the Financial Regulations oi the United Xations and take any steps
required to bring them into conformity with the procedure set out above;

which the Assembly urged that the recommendations
and comments contained in the report of the Ad Hoe
Committee be given the most attentive consideration by
Member States and by the United Nations organs and
related bodies with a view to the earliest implementation
of the recommendations,

5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit for
consideration to the General Assembly at its twentythird session an integrated schedule of meetings for the
various bodies responsible for carrying out the several
parts of an integrated system of programming and
budgeting,

•2 Ibid., Twenty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 80. document A/6343.

anrl Corr .1).

of

budget",

43 lbid ..

Twenty .H·co~d Session, Supplement No. 5 (A/6705

a-lad- adopted oa the reporll of the Fifth Committee

Assembly at its twenty-second session," and in chapter
III of the second report of the Ad H oc Committee, especially those recommendations relating to transfers
and supplementary estimates found in paragraphs 35
to 46 thereof;
7. Decides further that the first planning estimate
shall be considered and approved for the forecast year
1971.
1642nd plenary ,neeting,
19 Decembw 1967.

6. Further requests, bearing in mind the above intent with respect to the planning estimates, that the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, in consultation with the Secretary-General,
recommend for consideration by the General Assembly
at its twenty-third session an appropriate definition of
"unforeseen and extraordinary expenses", together with
a resolution-and such other action as may be appropriate-to cope with the interrelated problems
identified in paragraph 73 of its first report to the

•

77

44 Jbid .. Supplement .'l'o. i

•

(A/6707 and Corr.1-J) .

•

Other deciaion,
Report of the Economic and Social Council (chapten XIV (eection VI)
and XV to XVIl)
(Item lZ)
At its 1633rd plenary meeting, on 15 December 1967, the General Assembly
took note of the report of the Fifth Committee. 0
Budget estimates for the financial year 1968
(Item 74)
At its 1642nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 1967, the General Assembly
approved the recommendation of the Fifth Committee contained in paragraph 90
of its report."

Personnel questions: eomposltic,n of the Secretariat
(Item BZ (a))
At its 1642nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 1967, the General Assembly
took note of paragraph 38 of the report of the Fifth Committee.' 1
Personnel questions: other personnel questions
(Item 82 (b))
At its 1642nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 1967, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Fifth Committee,' 8 took note of the note by the
Secretary-General.49
"Ibid., Tu,mt:,-second S1ssi0ff, Anne11s, agenda item 12, document A/6963.
' ' Ibid., agenda item 74, document A/7014.
41 Ibid., agenda item 82, document A/7001.
•• Ibid., para 45.
n Ibid., document A/6877.
