Re1olution1 adopted on the report• of the Fourth Committee

1. Decides to establish an Ad H oc Committee composed of five Member States appointed by the President
of the General Assembly to examine the question of
Oman;
2. Calls upon all the parties concerned to co-operate
with the Ad H oc Committee by all possible means,
including that of facilitating visits to the area;
3. Requests the Ad H oc Committee to report to the
General Assembly at its nineteenth session;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to render all necessary assistance to the Ad H oc Committee.
1277th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.

•

• *

The President of the General Assembly, in pursuance of
paragraph 1 of the above resolution, appointed the members
of the Ad Hoe Committee on Oman.IB
The Ad Hoe Committee will be composed of the following
}.{ember States: AFGHANISTAN, CoSTA RICA, NEPAL, NIGERIA
and

SENEGAL.

1969 (XVIII). Report of the TruBteeBhip Council
The General Assembly,
Having received the report of the Trusteeship Council
covering the period from 20 July 1962 to 26 June
1963, 14 and the report of the Secretary-General on the
dissemim1tion of information on offers by Member
States of study and training facilities for inhabitants
of Trust Territories,1~
1. Takes note of those reports;
2. Calls upon the Administering Authorities to take
account of the recommendations and observations contained in the report of the Trusteeship Council and to
bear in mind those expressed by delegations during the
debate on the report at the eii:;hteenth session of the
General Assembly.
1281st plenary meeting,
16 December 1963.

1970 {XVIII). Queation of the continuation of
the Committee on Information from NonSelf-Governing TerritorieB
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1847 (XVII) of 19 December
1962 in which it decided to review at its eighteenth
session the question of the further continuation of the
Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories,
Considering that the Declaration regarding Non-SelfGoverning Territories contained in Chapter XI of the
Charter of the United Nations cannot be dissociated
· from the Declaration on the granting of independence
to colonial countries and peoples contained in General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Considering that all United Nations activities concerning Non-Self-Governing Territories should now
be co-ordinated and consolidated, with a view to the
immediate ending of colonialism,
Recalling that, by r.esolutions 1654 (XVI) of 27
November 1961 and 1810 (XVII) of 17 December

1a See A/5688.
14 Official Records of the GeMral Assembly, Eighteenth Ses-

sion, S11ppltmtnt No. 4 (A/5504).
111 [bid., Eighttmth Session, AnMxes, agenda item 13, document A/5496.

49

1962, it established the_ Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples and that it has approved the
Special Committee's methods and procedures,
Considering that the Special Committee, in view of
the experience it has gained, is now in a position to
take over the functions of the Committee on Info!"mation from Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Having regard to the views of the Secretary-General
on this question, 16
Considering that it is imperative to avoid any duplication of work or overlapping of responsibilities,
Having received the report of the Committee on
Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories prepared at its fourteenth session, in 1963,17
1. Takes note of the report of the Committee on
Tnformation from Non-Self-Governing Territories on
the work of its fourteenth session;
2. Expresses its gratitude to the Committee for its
efforts and for its valuable contribution to the accomplishment of the purposes of the United Nations under
Chapter XI of the Charter;
3. Decides to dissolve the Committee on Information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories;
4. Inviter Member States which have or which assume responsibilities for the administration of Territories whose peoples have not yet attained a full measure of self-government to transmit or continue to
transmit to the Secretarv-General information as prescribed under Article 73 e of the Charter, as well as
the fullest possible information on political and constitutional development ;
5. Requests the Special Committee to study this
information and take it fully into account in examining
the situation with regard to the implementation of the
Declarntion on the granting of independence to colonial
countries and peoples in each of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories, and to undertake any special study and
prepare any special report it may consider necessary in
addition to its activities under General Assembly resolutions 1654 (XVI) and 1810 (XVII) ;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide the Special Committee with all the facilities and
personnel necessary for the implementation of the
present resolution.
1281st plenary meeting,
16 December 1963.

1971 (XVIII). Report on economic advancement
in Non-Self-Governing TerritorieB
The General Assembly,
Recalling that by resolutions 564 (VI) of 18 January
1952, 846 (IX) of 22 November 1954. 1152 (XII)
of 26 November 1957 and 1537 (XV) of 15 December
1960 it approved or took note of the reports on economic conditions prepared by the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories in 1951,
1954, 1957 and 1960, 18
18 A/C.4/630.
11 Official Records

of the General Assembly, Eighteenth
Session, SuPtlement No. 14 (A/5514).
18 Ibid., Sixth Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/1836), part
three; ibid., Ninth Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/27'29),
part two; ibid., Twelfth Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/3647),
part two; ibid., Fifteenth Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/4371),
part three.

General Assembly-Eighteenth Session

gramme for the indigenous people of Territories under
Portuguese administration,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral submitted in accordance with paragraph 9 of
the aforesaid resolution, 21
Noting with regret that, notwithstanding paragraph
10 of that resolution, the Government of Portugal has
not co-operated in the implementation of the resolution,
Noting with satisfaction that several Member States
have extended offers of scholarships to students from.
Territories under Portuguese administration,
Noting that only a few applicants from Territories
under Portuguese administration have the necessary
qualifications to enable them to enter institutions of
higher education,
Noting further that most of the scholarships offered
by Member States are for nigher education only and
consequently are not accessible to inhabitants of Territories under Portuguese administration whose qualifications cannot meet the requirements set for the use
of such scholarships,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts to use as fully as possible the existing United
~ ations programmes of technical co-operation and, particularly, to make available to those indigenous inhabitants of the Territories under Portuguese administratio~ who are or who may be temporarily residing in
1972 (XVIII). The situation in Aden
various countries or territories outside the Territories
administered by Portugal the benefits of such proThe General Assembly,
g-rammes, with the consent and co-operation of the host
Recalling its resolution 1949 (XVIII) of 11 DecemGovernments ;
ber 1963 on the question of Aden,
2. Draws the attention of Member States within
Having noted the petitioner's statement on the recent
20
whos_e
1:>oundaries great numbers of refugees from
developments in that Territory,
Terntones under Portuguese administration reside to
Deeply concerned at the critical and explosive situathe possibilities available to them of obtaining assistance
tion obtaining in Aden and the Aden Protectorate as
from the United Nations programmes of technical
a result of the state of emergency, and at the arrest
co_-operation, f?: ~he purpose of providing these refugees
and detention of nationalist leaders and trade-unionists
with more fac1httes for secondary, vocational and techas well as the deportation of others, a situation which
nical education;
constitutes a denial of fundamental rights and endangers
3. Invites the specialized agencies to co-operate in
peace and security in the region,
the_
~stablishment and i1;1plementation of the special
1. Urges the Government of the United Kingdom of
trau~mg pro_gramme mentioned above by offering every
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to take, as a matter
possible assistance and such facilities and resources as
of urgency, measures which would be most effective
they may be able to provide;
to secure:
4. Expresses its appreciation to Member States
(a) The immediate release of the nationalist lea~i:-rs
which hav~ e:i:::tended offers of scholarships to students
and trade-unionists;
from Terntones under Portuguese administration;
( b) An end to all acts of deportation of residents
of the Territory;
5. Invites Member States which have offered scholarships, and those which plan to do so, to consider in
2. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the
the fi~st place offers <;>f scholarships. for secondary
present resolution to the attention of the Government
education and for vocat10nal and techmcal training;
of the United Kingdom with a view to its implementation.
6. Requests Member States to inform the Secretary1281st plenary meeting,
General of any scholarships offered and of awards made
16 December 1963.
and utilized;
7. Further requests Member States to facilitate the
1973 (XVIII). Special training programme for
travel of students from Territories under Portuguese
Territories under Portuguese administration
administration seeking to avail themselves of the educational opportunities offered;
The General Assembly,
8. Reiterates its request to the Government of
Recalling its resolution 1808 (XVII) of 14 December
Portugal to co-operate in the implementation of the
1962 by which it established a special training prospecial training programme for inhabitants of Territories under Portuguese administration ;
19 Ibid., Eighteenth Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/5514),

H a·ving received and considered a report on economic
advancement in Non-Self-Governing Territories prepared by that Committee at its fourteenth session, in
1963. 19
1. Approves the report on economic advancement in
Non-Self-Governing Territories prepared by the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories at its fourteenth session and considers that this
report should be studied in connexion with the other
reports mentioned above ;
2. Jnz,ites the Secretary-General to communicate this
report to the Member States responsible for the administration of Non-Self-Governing Territories, to the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, to
the Economic and Social Council, to the regional economic commissions, to the Trusteeship Council and
to the specialized agencies concerned, for their consideration ;
3. Expresses its confidence that the Member States
responsible for the administration of Non-Self-Governing Territories will bring the report to the attention
of the authorities concerned with economic advancement
in those Territories.
1281st plenary meeting,
16 December 1963.

part two.
20 Ibid.,
meeting.

Eighteenth

Session,

Fourth

Committee,

1515th

21 Ibid., Eighteenth Session, Annexes, agenda items 49 SO
51, 52, 53 and 54, documents A/5531/Rev.1 and Add.1 arut' 2. '
