V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _l_39

Nations system in connection with new and renewable
sources of energy, including those related to consultative
meetings at the national. regional and global levels;
2. Welcomes the secretariat arrangements already
made and stresses the need for the full implementation of
the decisions made in this regard by the General Assembly
at its thirty-seventh session; 101
3. Welcomes also. in this regard. the establishment, in
the unit on new and renewable sources of energy. of a focal
point for information on multilateral. bilateral and other
programmes in the field of new and renewable sources of
energy and invites Member States and international organizations to facilitate its work hy providing appropriate
information.
102nd plenary meeting
19 Dccemher 1983

38/170. New international human order: moral
aspects of development
The General Assemhly,
Recalling its resolution 37 /225 of 20 December 1982
entitled "New international human order: moral aspects
of development",
Taking note of the report of the Economic and Social
Council on its consideration of this question 10 ~ and Council decision 1983/171 of25 July 1983.
Taking note also of the comments of Governments on
the question, 103 as well as statements made during the second regular session of 1983 of the Economic and Social
Council 104 and at the current session of the General
Assembly, 105
1. Invites Member States that have not yet done so to
submit their comments on this question and Member
States that have already done so to submit additional comments, particularly on the draft declaration transmitted to
the General Assembly by Economic and Social Council
decision 1983/171, preferably before 31 July 1985;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
on this question to the General Assembly at its fortieth
session;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the sub-item entitled "New international
human order: moral aspects of development".
102nd plenary meeting
19 December 1983

38/171.

Comprehensive policy review of operational
activities for development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 320 l (S-VI) and 3202 (S-Vl) of
May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975
on development and international economic co-operation.
Recalling also its resolution 35/56 of 5 December 1980,
the annex to which contains the International DevelopIOI See resolution 37/250.
102 See Official Records o( the General .-1ssc,nhl_i·.

Fhir1,•---,•1ghth Ses.,11111.

Supplement No. 3 (A/38/3). chap. II. paras. 61-64.
ID 3 See E/1983/68 and Add.1-3; E/1983.189.
10 4 See Official Records of the Fcono1111c and So,·ial < ·,,1111,·11. /'183. l'l,•11w..Meetings, 17th-30th meetinR,.

ment Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade.
Recalling _further its resolutions 2688 (XXV) of 11
December 1970 on the capacity of the United Nations
development system and 3405 (XXX) of 28 November
197 5 on new dimensions in technical co-operation,
Reiterating its resolutions 32/ I 97 of 20 December 1977.
33/20 I of 29 January 1979 and 35/8 I of 5 December I 980
on a comprehensive policy review of operational activities
for development. 36/199 of 17 December 1981 and 3 7/
226 of 20 December 1982 on operational activities for
development of the United Nations system,
Reajfirming the exclusive responsibility· of the Government of the recipient country in formulating its national
development plan, priorities and objectives. as set out in
the consensus contained in the annex to General Assembly
resolution 2688 (XXV). and emphasizing that the integration of the operational activities of the United Nations
system with national programmes would enhance the
impact and relevance of those activities,
Emphasizing the importance that developing countries.
through their actions, including increased financial contributions. have attached to the operational activities of the
United Nations system. in recognition of the role of those
activities in their overall economic development,
t·xpressing its deep concern about the increasing elements of bilateralism in multilateral economic cooperation and the increased channelling of tied resources
through multilateral programmes.
( 'oncerned at the increasingly high cost of experts and
consultants and the financial effect on the programmes and
projects being implemented, and convinced of the need, as
far as possible, to use the services of national experts and
consultants and to implement programmes and projects in
a cost-effective manner.
A ware that a substantial part of world resources, material as well as human, continues to be diverted to armaments. with detrimental effect on international security
and on efforts to achieve the new international economic
order, including the operational activities for development
of the United Nations system,
Reaffirming that one primary objective of operational
activities for development of the United Nations system is
to promote the economic self-reliance of developing countries.
!laving examined the report of the Director-General for
Development and International Economic Co-operation
for 1983 on the comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development of the United Nations
system. 106
l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Director-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation on the comprehensive policy review
of operational activities for development of the United
Nations system;
2. Reaffirms the important contribution that operational activities of the United Nations system make to the
development of developing countries and urges the relevant organs, organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system to continue to attach priority to operational activities in their plans and programmes;
3. Notes that, although the outcome of the 1983
United Nations Pledging Conference for Development
105 See Otfictal Records o( rhe Ueneral Assemb/_v, Thirl_v--eighth Session,
Si'Cond ( ·omm1//ce, I 5th-24th and 38th-45th meetings.
111 hA,.l8:~58-E>l98.l"87 and Add.I and Add.I/Corr.I, annex.

140

General Assembly-Thirty-eighth Session

Activities 107 reflected a positive trend, the overall level of
resources remains unsatisfactory, falling short, in many
cases, of the various types of targets set by the relevant
intergovernmental bodies, thus hampering the ability of
the system to respond to the growing needs of developing
countries;
4. Strongly reiterates the need for a substantial and real
increase in the flow of resources for operational activities
on an increasingly predictable, continuous and assured
basis, so as to enable the organizations of the system to
maintain and, where possible, increase the level of their
operational programmes and, in that context, strongly
urges all countries, particularly developed countries.
whose overall performance is not commensurate with their
capacities, to increase rapidly and substantially their voluntary contributions for operational activities for development, taking into account the targets that have been set by
relevant intergovernmental bodies;
5. Reaffirms that the operational activities of the
United Nations system should be in accordance with the
national plans, priorities and objectives of the recipient
countries in order to enhance their impact on and relevance to the national development process of those countries;
6. Invites the World Bank to continue to carry out its
country activities in accordance with the national plans
and priorities of recipient countries, in order to promote
the economic self-reliance of developing countries;
7. Emphasizes the need to maintain the multilateral
character of the operational activities of the United
Nations system and urges all Governments to enhance
their commitment in this regard;
8. Calls upon all Governments, in the interest of preserving the multilateral principles of the system, to refrain
from the practice of tying aid for operational activities of
the United Nations system to the procurement of goods
and services from the donor countries, restricting it to
those funds that have a mandate to accept it on an experimental basis;
9. Invites the organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system dealing with the flows of concessional resources to developing countries to pay greater
attention, in their reviews of these issues, to the funding
needs of the United Nations funds and programmes in
support of the development plans formulated by the recipient Governments;
10. Urges the international community to provide a
substantial increase in financial resources to United
Nations funds and programmes engaged in operational
activities in order to enhance their contributions to the
implementation of the Substantial New Programme of
Action for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries, 108 bearing in mind the need of those countries for
official development assistance from multilateral sources;
11. Urges all Governments concerned to conclude
negotiations regarding the seventh replenishment of the
International Development Association, with a view to
ensuring an appropriate increase in resources, and calls for
those negotiations to be completed as soon as possible so
that the seventh replenishment may become effective in
July 1984;
12. Urges all Governments concerned to strengthen
the International Fund for Agricultural Development. par107 See A/CONF.122/SR. J-3 and Corrigendum.
108 Report of the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Paris, 1-14 September 1981 (United Nations publication. Sales No.
E.82.1.8), part one, sect. A.
109 A/38/258-E/J 983/82, annex.
I IO See Official Records of the Economic and Social ( 'ounc,I, 1981. Supplement No. JJ (E/1981/61/Rev.l), annex I.

ticularly by releasing their contributions according to
agreed schedules and responding positively during the
negotiations regarding the second replenishment;
13. Welcomes the progress made towards the attainment of the 1983-1984 target for voluntary contributions
to the World Food Programme and urges Governments to
make every effort to ensure the full attainment of that target. as well as the proposed 1985-1986 target;
14. Takes note of the recommendations made in section III of the report of the Director-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation, 109
designed to enhance the responsiveness of operational
activities to the needs and requirements of all developing
countries in accordance with their objectives and priorities, as formulated in their national development plans
and programmes, and their efforts to promote greater economic and technical co-operation among themselves;
l 5. Invites all organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system engaged in operational activities
for development, with a view to achieving, inter alia.
higher cost effectiveness, to make greater use of the capacities of developing countries by:
(a) Engaging national experts and personnel;
(b) Utilizing local or regional sources for the procurement of material. equipment and services;
16. Decides that the guidelines on procurement to be
issued pursuant to paragraph 7 of decision 81 /28 of 30
June 1981 110 and section II, paragraph 2, of decision 82/
34 of I 8 June 1982 111 of the Governing Council of the
United Nations Development Programme should govern
the procurement activities of organs and bodies under the
authority of the General Assembly in their execution of
projects financed by the Programme;
I 7. J,Velcomes decision 82/8 of 18 June 1982 of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development
Programme, 111 designed to promote government execution of projects funded by the Programme, the support
cost savings that could result therefrom becoming available for programmes and plans, on the basis of the illustrative indicative planning figure;
18. Reiterates the set of principles which, in the programming of the resources at the disposal of the different
organizations of the United Nations system, should be
uniformly applied; those principles, embodied in the consensus of 1970 112 and decision 80/30 of26 June 1980 113
of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme include, inter alia, the following:
(a) Equity, particularly in the distribution of resources
among developing countries;
(b) Assistance to be provided only in response to the
express needs of the recipient countries;
(c) Assistance to be integrated with the overall development objectives and priorities of the country concerned;
(d) Programming to be seen as an integrated process,
of which the different phases, such as programming, project formulation. assessment, approval and evaluation.
constitute integral parts;
19. Emphasizes the important role of the United
Nations system in assisting developing countries, upon
request, in developing their evaluation capacity and
requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the
organs, organizations and bodies of the system, to elabo111 Ibid.,

/982, Supplement l•io. 6 (E/1982/16/Rev. l). annex I.

11 2 Resolution 2688 (XXV). annex.

113 OJjicial Records o(thc Economic and Social Council. 1980, Supplement

No I 2 (E/ I 980/42/Re, I). chap. XI.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

rate, in the light of the conclusions and recommendations
of the Joint Inspection Unit contained in its report. 114
proposals to promote the evaluation capacity of recipient
Governments;
20. Recognizes that. concerning operational activities
for development of the United Nations system. evaluation
is an important part of the programming process in order
to achieve a rational and optimal utilization of the overall
resources available;
21. Reaffirms the general guidelines embodied in the
new dimensions in technical co-operation adopted by the
Governing Council in 1975 115 and urges their full application;
22. Recommends improved coherence of action and
co-ordination of the operational systems at the country
level, under the overall responsibility of the resident coordinator and in consultation with the Governments concerned, in order to cut down expenses on administrative
and support costs, minimize waste through avoidance of
duplication of work and facilitate the task of the host
country in co-ordinating external assistance, and considers
that further efforts should be undertaken in this regard;
23. Invites the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme and the President of the World
Bank, as well as the heads of regional development banks,
to examine further possibilities of co-operation between
the Programme and those institutions regarding the complementarity of their respective technical co-operation
programmes, in order to enhance the implementation of
the present resolution and. in so doing, ensure greater utilization of the facilities available in the various organizations of the United Nations system regarding projects
financed by those funding agencies. and requests the
Administrator to report thereon to the Governing Council
of the United Nations Development Programme:
24. Urges the relevant organs. organizations and bodies of the United Nations system to increase their support
for the process of technical co-operation among developing countries by orienting their programmes and projects.
as appropriate, towards strengthening such co-operation:
25. Urges the Secretary-General and the executive
heads of organs, organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system, bearing in mind the need to maintain an
appropriate level of support functions. to seek to minimize
administrative and other support costs without affecting
the field programmes and the network of United Nations
Development Programme offices in developing countries,
with a view to increasing the proportion of resources available to improve programme delivery to developing countries;
26. Requests the organs, organizations and bodies of
the United Nations system receiving resources of an
extrabudgetary nature to include information on those
resources and their utilization in their budgets and reports
and to make that information available to the Governments concerned and to the resident co-ordinator in the
recipient country;
27. Recommends that. in accordance with its resolution 32/ 197, due consideration should be given to the
technical expertise of the Department of Technical Cooperation for Development for its designation as an executing agency for the implementation of projects within its
mandate, as well as its role in the execution of technical
co-operation activities of the United Nations system, in
order to reaffirm the role of the Department within the
existing technical and administrative structures and to
avoid duplication and accomplish economies of scale:
114 See A/38/333. sect. IX.

--- - - - - -------·--

141

28. Urges all organs.. organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system. in the light of the recommendations contained in section V of the report of the DirectorGeneral for Development and International Economic Cooperation, 109 to take the necessary steps to ensure the harmonization of administrative. financial. personnel, planning and procurement procedures. and requests the Director-General for Development and International Economic
Co-operation to report annually on specific action taken;
29. Reiterates the importance of the co-ordination of
multilateral development assistance at the field level, and
requests the Director-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation, while preparing his next
report on operational activities. to pay particular attention
to the need for improved coherence of action and effective
integration at the country level, in accordance with section
V of the annex to resolution 321197 and paragraph 11 of
resolution 35/81. and to the role of resident co-ordinators
in the co-ordination of operational activities of the United
Nations system:
30. Requests the Joint Inspection Unit to study in
depth the structure of the field representation of the organs
and organizations of the United Nations system. particularly with regard to the tasks allotted to the resident coordinators;
31. Requests the Director-General for Development
and International Economic Co-operation to include in his
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session:
(a) An examination of the extent and implications of
the continuation of the practice of contributions being provided to organizations with conditions attached to their
use. taking into account the information to be provided by
the heads of the relevant organs. organizations and bodies;
(h) An in-depth analysis of the subject mentioned in
paragraph 22 above concerning improved coherence of
action and co-ordination of the operational systems at the
country level:
(c) A comparative analysis of the relationship between
programme delivery and administrative costs pertaining to
operational activities for development executed by the
organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system. as well as an assessment of agency support costs;
32. Requests the Director-General for Development
and International Economic Co-operation to include in his
report for the 1986 comprehensive policy review:
(a) A study, with supporting data, on the progress
achieved with respect to the issues identified in paragraph
I 5 above:
(h) A system-wide review of the activities identified in
paragraph 24 above relating to technical co-operation
among developing countries as carried out by different
organizations, with particular reference to the approaches
and methods devised and followed, the kind of activities
undertaken by these organizations and the relevant institutional arrangements;
33. Requests the Secretary-General, for the purpose of
the 1986 comprehensive policy review. as part of the continuous review by the General Assembly, to entrust the
Director-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation with the preparation of a report on
policy issues pertaining to operational activities for development undertaken by the United Nations system, taking
into account the views and comments of delegations at the
second regular session of 1983 of the Economic and Social
Council and at the thirty-eighth session of the General
Assembly. for submission to the- Assembly at its forty-first
I I, Scl' 1esolut1on .1405 (XX \ ). annn.

142

General Assembly-Thirty-eighth Session

session through the Council at its second regular session of
1986;
34. Strongly reiterates its desire for a coherent and coordinated United Nations system in the field of operational activities for development and, in that context,
requests the Director-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation to continue to provide
effective leadership in the co-ordination of the various
components of the United Nations system in that field and
in exercising overall co-ordination within the system, as
set forth in resolution 32/ l 97, and requests all organs,
organizations and bodies of the United Nations system to
co-operate fully with the Director-General.

!02nd plenary meeting
19 December 1983

38/172. Situation of the financial resources of the
United Nations Development Programme
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 320 I (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975
on development and international economic co-operation,
Recalling also its resolution 35/56 of 5 December 1980,
the annex to which contains the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade,
Stressing the urgent need to strengthen multilateral cooperation for development as a desirable and effective
means for promoting mutually beneficial co-operation
between developed and developing countries,
Emphasizing the importance of multilateral technical
co-operation in the economic and social development of
developing countries and the urgent need for a substantial
and real increase in the level of financial resources on an
increasingly predictable, continuous and assured basis,
Reiterating the unique and central role of the United
Nations Development Programme in the field of technical
co-operation for development,
Reaffirming the exclusive responsibility of the Government of the recipient country in formulating its national
development plan, priorities and objectives, as set out in
the consensus contained in the annex to General Assembly
resolution 2688 (XXV) of 11 December 1970,
Stressing that the indicative planning figures established
for the third programming cycle, 1982-1986, of the United
Nations Development Programme should be maintained,
to the extent possible, and financed through efforts to
increase contributions by the international community,
Having considered the difficult financial situation of the
United Nations Development Programme, even in the
light of the encouraging outcome of the 1983 United
Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities, 116 and its serious impact on the level of technical
assistance provided to developing countries through the
Programme,
Aware that, together with efforts to obtain additional
voluntary contributions, steps are being taken to increase
116See A/CONF.122/SR.l-3 and corrigendum.
117 Official Records of the Economic and Social C,nmc,!. 1983. Sup1>/cme111

No. 9 (E/1983/20).
118 Ibid., annex I.
119 Ibid., 1982. Supplement No. 6 (E/1982/16/Rev 1). annex I.

further the quality. efficiency and effectiveness of the
United Nations Development Programme,
lfaving considered the report of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Development Programme for the
year 1983, 117
I. Takes note of the report of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Development Programme for the
year 1983 and the decisions contained therein; 118
~
Reaffirms Economic and Social Council resolution
1982/53 of 29 July 1982, in which the Council, inter alia,
took note of decision 82/5 of 18 June 1982 of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme, 119 by which the Governing Council reaffirmed
its decisions 80/30 of 26 June 1980 120 and 81/ 16 of 27
June 1981, 121 including those provisions relating to the
indicative planning figures, the assumed overall average
annual rate of growth of voluntary contributions and the
level of resources envisaged for the third programming
cycle, 1982-1986, for the purposes of forward planning;
3. Welcomes the adoption by consensus of decision
83/5 of 24 June I 983 of the Governing Council of the
United Nations Development Programme; 122
4. Notes that. although the outcome of the 1983
United Nations Pledging Conference for Development
Activities has shown that there is a trend towards ending
the erosion of the resources of the United Nations Development Programme, greater efforts remain necessary to
strengthen that trend in order to lead to a process of
growth of resources by increasing significantly the level of
contributions on a more equitable basis;
5. Expresses its appreciation to those Governments, of
both developed and developing countries, which, at the
1983 Pledging Conference, announced their voluntary
contributions or their intention to contribute to the United
Nations Development Programme for 1984 in amounts
approaching, equalling or exceeding an average annual
increase of 14 per cent in their contributions, and to those
Governments that have consistently maintained their contributions at a high level;
6. Urges all other Governments, especially those
whose overall performance is not commensurate with their
capacities, to renew their efforts, consistent with paragraph
I (c) of section I of decision 83/5 of the Governing Council, to provide the United Nations Development Programme with the resources necessary to establish a sound
financial basis for the implementation of its planned activities for the third programming cycle, 1982- I 986, which,
for the purpose of forward planning, would assume an
overall average annual rate of growth of resources of at
least 14 per cent;
7. Expresses its appreciation to the Administrator of
the United Nations Development Programme for his tireless efforts to obtain the necessary level of resources envisaged for the third programming cycle, 1982-1986, in order
to secure the financial viability of the Programme and to
improve further its quality, efficiency and effectiveness,
and encourages the Administrator to continue those
efforts, taking into account, inter alia, the need to restrain
administrative expenditures in order to maximize programme delivery, in accordance with paragraph 4 of Governing Council decision 81 /16;
•
8. Reaffirms the mandate of the Governing Council of
the United Nations Development Programme, reiterates
its confidence in the authority of the Governing Council to
120 !hid.. /980. Suppli'melll No. 12 (El I 980/42/Rev. I). chap. XI.
121 ff>id .. /981. S11pp/em,•1111\"o. II (E/1981/61/Rev.l), annex I.
122 fhid ..

/98.i. Su11,,11·111cm .\'o 11 (E/198J/20). annex I.
