United Nations

S/PV.5292

Security Council

Provisional

Sixtieth year

5292nd meeting
Tuesday, 25 October 2005, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Motoc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Romania)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Baali
Mr. Mayoral
Mr. Idohou
Mr. Sardenberg
Mr. Wang Guangya
Ms. Løj
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Vassilakis
Mr. Oshima
Mr. Baja
Mr. Denisov
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Mahiga
Mr. Bolton

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 20 October 2005 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2005/662)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

05-56783 (E)

*0556783*

S/PV.5292

The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 20 October 2005 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2005/662)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Lebanon and the Syrian Arab
Republic, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Boutros Assaker,
Acting Secretary-General of the Lebanese Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and Emigrants.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Assaker
(Lebanon) and Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab
Republic) took seats at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Detlev Mehlis,
Commissioner of the United Nations International
Independent Investigation Commission.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Mehlis to take a seat at the Council
table.
I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

2

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/662, which contains a letter dated
20 October 2005 from the Secretary-General,
transmitting the report of the United Nations
International Independent Investigation Commission.
I also draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2005/651, which contains a letter dated
14 October 2005 from the representative of Lebanon
addressed to the Secretary-General.
I now give the floor to Mr. Detlev Mehlis,
Commissioner of the United Nations International
Independent Investigation Commission.
Mr. Mehlis: The terrorist attack of 14 February
2005 that claimed the lives of Mr. Rafik Hariri and 22
others was a landmark event in the history of Lebanon.
It was a tragedy that came as the country was
beginning to heal the wounds of a long civil war. Allow
me first to pay tribute to the memory of all the victims
and acknowledge the suffering of the bereaved
families.
On 7 April 2005, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1595 (2005), whereby the United Nations
International Independent Investigation Commission
(UNIIIC) was set up. The Commission was designed to
be a supportive mechanism for the Lebanese judicial
and security authorities to carry forward the
investigation into the assassination.
Before going into the details of this unique and
unprecedented experience — by United Nations
standards — I would like to express my sincere thanks
to the Secretary-General and to the Security Council
members, who, by appointing me, have shown me and
my team trust and confidence, upon which I have
drawn throughout the five months I have spent in
Lebanon and which has been a great source of comfort
and encouragement. My heartfelt thanks also go to the
Lebanese people and Government for their unwavering
support and full confidence.
The Commission, which was established in full
agreement with the Government of Lebanon, became
fully operational on 16 June 2005. In keeping with the
letter and the spirit of resolution 1595 (2005), the
Commission and the Government of Lebanon signed a
memorandum of understanding outlining the modalities
of cooperation between the two parties.
Having set the framework of work and
cooperation early on, the Commission has been able to

05-56783

S/PV.5292

move ahead with its investigation. The earlier Factfinding Mission led by Mr. Peter FitzGerald and the
accompanying files were a valuable source of
information during the early phase of our work. In
addition, we relied to a large extent on the 8,000-page
Lebanese case docket handed over to the Commission
in order to understand the dimensions of the case, to
draw up a preliminary list of potential witnesses and
suspects and to focus on possible leads to pursue.
To the credit of the Lebanese judicial and security
authorities, they have come a long way in terms of
their ability to pursue the investigations. Some
problems of public trust remain. More recently, they
have shown growing levels of professionalism and
competence. They have been helped in this by the
presence and active support of the United Nations.
Undoubtedly, one of the main reasons for this positive
change is the setting aside of past constraints and the
stepping down of the old guard. On the other hand, the
close interest and valuable support shown by the
international community in Lebanese affairs has been
encouraging.
The Commission established close working links
with the Lebanese authorities, and channels of
communication were kept open with all sides. With the
political authorities, arrangements were made to
facilitate our work and to give the Commission the
moral and physical backing it most needed. With the
judicial authorities, regular meetings were held to
exchange updated information, files, statements and
new evidence. Plans were agreed for the upcoming
phases of the investigation, and lists of witnesses were
submitted to the Lebanese authorities for summoning
for questioning. With the security authorities, raid and
search operations were conducted in tandem. A striking
example was the joint UNIIIC-Internal Security Forces
(ISF) operation carried out on 30 August 2005 for the
house raid and search of former senior security
officials, who were later arrested by the Lebanese
authorities.
Thanks to the backing and active engagement of
the Lebanese authorities, we have been able to
integrate our work together, as envisaged by the
Security Council in April. Of utmost importance has
been the valuable assistance extended by other
organizations of the United Nations family, as well as
by other international organizations, such as Interpol.
Several United Nations Member States provided
expertise that contributed in no small measure to

05-56783

shedding light on major areas of the investigation. On
behalf of all the members of the Commission, I wish to
convey to all of them my sincere thanks and profound
gratitude.
On 19 October 2005, I submitted the
Commission’s report to the Secretary-General. Our
modus operandi, our findings and conclusions are set
out in that document, which is before you today at this
important session of the Council. I do not wish to
burden you by repeating the content of that report or
with further details. However, there are certain
elements and facts that I wish to stress at this time.
Over 130 days, 30 investigators from 17
countries interviewed more than 400 witnesses and
suspects, reviewed approximately 60,000 documents
and produced more than 16,500 pages of documents.
More than 450 pieces of evidence have been collected.
Some main lines of investigation have been identified
and leads established.
However, for such a multidimensional and
complex case as the one under review, the investigation
cannot be considered complete as of now. More time
should be allotted to further investigate our findings
and look into emerging leads. I would note that it is
entirely normal that a case of this type takes many
months, if not years, to cover all aspects of
investigation with certitude and to prepare a case for
prosecution.
The Lebanese Government recently asked for an
extension of the Commission’s mandate until
15 December. As the extension has been granted, the
Commission’s modus operandi will remain unchanged —
that is, the Commission will maintain the same level of
cooperation with the Lebanese authorities and, wherever
possible, will help to enhance it. The Commission will reinterview a number of witnesses and interview new ones
as the investigation unfolds. It will complete its
examination of material evidence obtained recently. And
it will endeavour to provide the Lebanese authorities with
any technical assistance they might require.
Moreover, the Commission is of the view that this
would provide yet another opportunity for the Syrian
authorities to show greater and meaningful cooperation
and to provide any relevant substantial evidence on the
assassination. For this reason, the Syrian authorities
may wish to carry out, on their part, their own
investigation into the assassination of Mr. Hariri in an
open and transparent manner. That would enable the

3

S/PV.5292

Commission to fill in the gaps and to have a clearer
picture about the organizers and perpetrators of the
14 February terrorist act.
As the Commissioner of UNIIIC, I am also
responsible for the safety and security of my staff.
Therefore, since the Commission will continue its work
until 15 December, the safety and security of its
members must be a priority. Ever since the
Commission started its work in Lebanon, in addition to
its own security team, the Lebanese security forces —
namely, the army and the police — have played a
major role in ensuring the protection of its members
and headquarters. They took exceptional security
measures, for which I wish to thank them on behalf of
all the Commission’s members.
However, it should be noted that despite all the
precautionary measures, the level of risk, which was
already high, will further increase, particularly after
the issuance of the report. I would also add that the
Commission has received a number of threats that were
deemed, in the assessment of our security personnel, to
be credible.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate that the total
number of investigators who have served in the
Commission was 30, coming from 17 different United
Nations Member States. The drafting team was
composed of members representing eight different
nationalities. It has been of particular importance to me
to maintain a geographical balance in the teams in
order to enhance the Commission’s credibility.
Finally, if and when the overall investigation is
completed, it will be up to the Lebanese authorities to
seek the way ahead and determine the nature and
location of any judicial mechanism to be set up. In the
meantime, the Lebanese judicial and security
authorities, who have shown good will and
demonstrated a growing ability to handle the case,
would benefit from all the legal and technical support
the international community could provide, either
bilaterally or through the United Nations system.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Boutros Assaker, Acting SecretaryGeneral of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs and
Emigrants of Lebanon.
Mr. Assaker (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, at the outset, I would like to thank you
for inviting me to address the Council on behalf of

4

Lebanon. I also wish to express our thanks to the
Security Council for its concern at and close follow-up
of the terrorist crime that took place on 14 February
2005, which resulted in the martyrdom of former Prime
Minister Rafik Hariri, parliament member Basil
Fleihan and several others.
This crime threatened Lebanon’s security and
stability and targeted a figure who had played a major
role in its reconstruction and renaissance after years of
war. The Lebanese people and their Government were
united in condemning this crime and showed
determination and persistence in uncovering all its
aspects and in punishing its perpetrators. In this
context, we are grateful that the Security Council
responded favourably to Lebanon’s unanimous request
by forming the United Nations International
Independent Investigation Commission, as called for in
its resolution 1595 (2005).
Lebanon expresses its appreciation to the
International Investigation Commission and to its
Head, Mr. Detliv Mehlis, for the important work
performed and for the great efforts deployed, which
have culminated in the report before us. This report
constitutes a solid basis that will help complete the
requested investigation by revealing all aspects of this
terrorist crime. It will establish justice by punishing the
criminal murderers, whoever and wherever they are.
In this regard, we welcome the extension of the
mandate of the Commission to 15 December 2005, and
we reaffirm the continued cooperation of the State of
Lebanon and all of its concerned institutions in order to
attain the noble objective to which we all aspire.
Lebanon is pleased with the contents of the
Commission’s report pertaining to the role played by
the Lebanese judicial and security institutions,
underscoring the positive cooperation of those
institutions with the Commission throughout the
various stages of the investigation. We are of the view
that strengthening the performance of these institutions
is a crucial step in the reform process currently being
undertaken by the Government of Lebanon. In this
context, the Government requests the support of
brotherly and friendly States to help this reform
process.
Lebanon calls on all parties concerned to
cooperate sincerely and effectively with the
International Independent Investigation Commission,
in compliance with Council resolution 1595 (2005).

05-56783

S/PV.5292

Uncovering the complete and absolute truth and
punishing all the criminal murderers, wherever they
are, corresponds to the aspirations of the Lebanese
people, as expressed by the Government of Lebanon,
with the support of the international community.
At the same time, the Lebanese Government,
reflecting the convictions of the Lebanese people in all
their policies, affirms that establishing justice by
uncovering the truth and punishing all the murderers
will help to enhance stability and security in Lebanon
and throughout the region. This is a matter of great
importance and concern for us.
Finally, Lebanon would like to thank those
brotherly and friendly States that have provided
support at this critical stage and continue to do so.
Lebanon also thanks the Security Council and
Secretary-General Mr. Kofi Annan for their continued
follow-up of the Commission’s work and their interest
in the situation in Lebanon. We also reiterate our
thanks to the International Independent Investigation
Commission and to its Head for their important and
promising work. We hope that it will continue and that
it will contribute to the establishment of justice, which
remains our primary demand.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): First of all, Mr. President, I would like to
congratulate you upon your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month. I wish
you all success in the discharge of your
responsibilities. I would also like to express our
appreciation for the efforts made by your predecessor,
Ambassador Baja, the Permanent Representative of the
Philippines, in conducting the business of the Council
last month. I would like to join you in welcoming the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, who is with us in
this meeting.
Allow me to express my gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to address
the Security Council before its important deliberations
on the report of the International Independent
Investigation Commission. At the outset, I would like
to assure those present here that what I will say
expresses the truth as seen by the leadership and the
people of Syria. I also reiterate our full faith in the role
of the United Nations and our total respect for its
resolutions.

05-56783

The heinous crime that took the life of Premier
Hariri targeted the unity and stability of Lebanon. It
also targeted the Syrian sacrifices for Lebanon and its
status in both Lebanon and the region. Based on this,
Syria, when informed of the crime, reaffirmed that
finding the culprits and those who backed them is a
Syrian imperative as much as it is a Lebanese
imperative.
I would also like to point out that this dastardly
act has led to an escalation of tension in the region,
particularly because in some quarters, either on the
basis of a suspect or premeditated scheme or out of bad
faith, this crime has been used in a despicable manner
in order to fan the flames of hostility against Syria and
to increase accusations against it.
It is indeed strange that every crime committed
has a number of suspects, except this particular crime
for which unfortunately only one possibility has been
advanced, involving an accusation against Syria,
levelled even before the body of Mr. Hariri was laid to
rest.
I will not lay out for the Security Council a
history of the relations between the peoples of Syria
and Lebanon and our countries. However, I will say
briefly that these two independent Arab States have
been linked throughout history by the ties of
neighbourliness, kinship, aspirations and mutual
concerns. In that regard, Syria was in a unique position
to come to Lebanon’s aid when, in 1975, a destructive
civil war erupted and tore that country apart and
destroyed the role of its institutions, its army and its
national fabric. The end of the civil war and return to
normalcy could not have been achieved without huge
sacrifices, namely at least 13,000 Syrian military
personnel who made the ultimate sacrifice while
extinguishing the fires of the civil war in Lebanon.
The security, stability, independence and
sovereignty of Lebanon have always been in the
forefront of Syria’s concerns. In order to achieve them,
Syria has cooperated with all loyal sons of Lebanon,
including the late Prime Minister Rafik Hariri, who
always supported the role of Syria in Lebanon and
always gave expression to that, both when he was in
power and when he was not. He always expressed his
faith in the role of Syria and his appreciation for its
assistance, even doing so just a few minutes before he
was assassinated.

5

S/PV.5292

This heinous crime runs counter to all the
principles that Syria upholds and clearly is against
Syrian interests.

However, that is a charge that could be levelled against
the security service of any country in the world on
whose territory a terrorist crime or act has taken place.

Allow me to make a few comments on the report
introduced by Mr. Mehlis a few moments ago
(S/2005/662). In view of the fact that every paragraph
of the report deserves a comment to refute its content, I
will put our remarks before you in brief in the hope
that Council members will take them into account
during its consideration of the report in subsequent
consultations.

In later paragraphs, among other things, the
report bases its conclusions on the wiretapping of
former Prime Minister Hariri by the Lebanese security
service. However, the report also mentions, and then
summarily dismisses, another hypothesis: the
possibility that an unknown, third party carried out a
wiretap.

First, I would like to point out that the report is
clearly influenced by the political climate prevailing in
Lebanon after the assassination of former Prime
Minister Hariri. That is clearly evident in the second
chapter of the report, entitled “Background”. In
paragraphs 25 and 26 and what follows in that chapter,
the report examined the structure of Syrian-Lebanese
relations and their ramifications on the Lebanese arena.
Secondly, it is indeed regrettable for us to read in
the report the Commission’s strange hypothesis that:
“Given the infiltration of Lebanese institutions
and society by the Syrian and Lebanese
intelligence services working in tandem, it would
be difficult to envisage a scenario whereby such a
complex assassination plot could have been
carried
out
without
their
knowledge.”
(S/2005/662, para. 216)
On that basis, the report can be seen to accuse Syria.
But, then, what about the major terrorist crimes that
were, regrettably, carried out on 11 September 2001 in
New York, on 11 March 2005 in Madrid, and on 7 July
2005 in London — as well as the many other terrorist
acts that have been carried out — despite the fact that
all those countries have very strong and highly
effective intelligence and security authorities? Again,
there is a hypothesis in paragraph 124, that
“There is probable cause to believe that the
decision to assassinate former Prime Minister
Rafik Hariri could not have been taken without
the approval of top-ranked Syrian security
officials and could not have been further
organized without the collusion of their
counterparts in the Lebanese security services.”
(Ibid., para. 124)

6

Thirdly, the report’s conclusions, which point the
finger at Syria, depend completely on the credibility of
the testimony of people with strongly declared political
antipathy to Syria. At the same time, the report casts
doubt on the credibility of the testimony of Syrian
officials.
Fourthly, the report contains the testimony of
three persons, only one of whom is identified. He is a
forger and a swindler, and he has been previously
convicted by both the Lebanese and Syrian judicial
authorities. In addition, the three sets of testimony
contradict each other, and thus they lack the necessary
credibility to be relied upon.
Fifthly, the report, in both form and content,
accuses my country before the investigation has been
completed. That can be seen by the results and
conclusions drawn under the chapter entitled
“Conclusions”. The Commission admits, however, that
it must continue its investigations in a number of areas
in order to identify the perpetrators of this criminal act.
I am pleased that, in the preface to the report,
Mr. Mehlis refers to the need to continue
investigations. The Commission further states that the
investigation still needs a considerable amount of time.
In paragraph 20, the report states:
“the investigation of such a terrorist act with
multifaceted international dimensions and their
ramifications normally needs months (if not
years) to be completed so as to be able to
establish firm ground for a potential trial of any
accused individuals”. (Ibid., para. 20)
Here, I would like to step back and address those
who are in such a hurry to pass judgement, to adopt
resolutions, to impose measures and to mobilize
members of the Security Council in support of their
extremist position. I wonder what their real objectives
are? I am certain that they have nothing to do with

05-56783

S/PV.5292

uncovering the truth, which is the common objective of
both Syria and the international community.
The report accuses Syria of not having
sufficiently cooperated with the Commission. That
accusation does a great injustice to Syria. Syria has
sent letters to the Commissioner of the Investigation
Commission, informing him of its readiness to
cooperate. Syria sent a representative to Geneva to
meet with the Commissioner at a time of his choosing,
with various dates suggested before the issuance of the
procedural report. On the basis of that meeting, the
Commissioner and one of his assistants visited Syria
on 12 September 2005. During that visit, procedures
were agreed on for those whom the Commission
wished to interview. However, paragraph 34 of the
report states that the Syrian Authorities refused to have
the Commission interview those individuals in a third
country. It goes on to report that each interview was
conducted in the presence of a representative of the
Syrian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, one interpreter, two
note takers and additional persons whose affiliations
were not identified. In paragraph 35, the report
concludes that the lack of cooperation of the Syrian
Government with the Commission has impeded the
investigation and made it difficult to follow leads
established by the evidence collected from a variety of
sources. That is an extremely strange statement, as it
runs counter to the agreement made with the
Commissioner of the Investigative Commission.
Syria offered for the meetings to be held in any
place on Syrian territory to be chosen freely by the
Commission. The Commission expressed its wish to
have the interviews take place near the SyrianLebanese border and that was precisely what happened.
The Commission could have rejected that arrangement.
Concerning the presence of a representative of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs at the interviews, the
representative in question was a lawyer and was
present in that capacity. Mr. Mehlis did not object to
the representative’s presence. He could have objected
to that and his request would have been honoured. As
for the presence of a note taker, the note taker was
present at Mr. Mehlis’s request, so that the witness
could read the record of their testimony and sign it in
Arabic. As for the presence of other persons referred to
in the report, the Commission must identify them,
because the place where the interviews took place was
under United Nations security control.

05-56783

Following those meetings and interviews, one of
the investigators informed us on 22 September that the
group would like to come back and hear from other
witnesses whose names were mentioned during the
interviews. Syria agreed to that request, but the
Commission has not returned to Damascus. It should
be recalled that the Commission contacted the Legal
Adviser to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for more
information in order to complete its investigation after
leaving Damascus. Syria provided the Commission
with the answers requested at the time. All of which
proves that Syria has fully cooperated with the
Commission and therefore refutes the accusation that it
failed to do so.
In paragraph 16 of its report, the Commission
complained that the media had a tendency to
continuously publish rumours and speculation. Syria
has had reason to complain about the media campaign
against it because of the leaks from the Commission
and from certain quarters of the United Nations.
Moreover, we had thought that the Commission was
committed to the principle of confidentiality in
carrying out its investigation. However, that principle
was repeatedly violated before the writing of the
report, in addition to the fact that the report itself was
leaked to the media before it was given to us.
We must also recall that an agreement was
reached with Mr. Mehlis and that the Commission had
sufficient time to review the agreement and to request
that it be amended between the two parties in a manner
consistent with the Commission’s approach. However,
nothing of the sort was put before us.
During the past period, Syria has cooperated
faithfully and sincerely with the International
Independent Investigation Commission. As we have
stated previously, that stems not only from Syria’s
commitment to international legality, but also from its
serious desire to arrive at the truth. Here, I should like
to reaffirm before the Council that during the coming
period, Syria will continue to cooperate with the
Commission and will provide it with any information
that can assist it in concluding its investigation and in
arriving at the truth.
His Excellency Mr. Bashar Al-Assad, President of
the Syrian Arab Republic, has stated that Syria is
innocent of this crime and is ready and willing to
pursue and prosecute any Syrian conclusively
implicated in it. Syria is the main victim of this crime,

7

S/PV.5292

in particular because the relations between Syria and
the late Prime Minister Hariri had been characterized
by cooperation and respect since the mid-1980s. That
fact was personally reaffirmed by the Prime Minister in
an interview with the Lebanese newspaper As-Safir on
14 February 2005, minutes before he was assassinated.
Finally, in its report the International Independent
Investigation Commission acknowledged that it has an
extensive programme of work and that it considers all
persons — including those against whom it has
levelled accusations — to be innocent until proven
guilty. Therefore, the Commission should not have
accused or cast doubt on anyone; it should have limited
itself to submitting a procedural report pending the
completion of its investigation into the various areas
referred to in its report, and it should have provided
evidence for its accusations.
We look forward to the Security Council’s
consideration of the report in the light of the points we

8

have just raised. Those points have also been raised by
hundreds of specialists, jurists and politicians in many
countries. Lebanon and the region from which we
come need tranquillity and stability, not further
destabilization and suffering.
In conclusion, I reiterate that Syria will spare no
effort to achieve the stability of Lebanon, because that
is at the heart of our strategy and of the aspirations of
the two brotherly Syrian and Lebanese peoples.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic for the kind words he addressed
to the Chair.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I should now like to
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.15 a.m.

05-56783
