S/2016/520

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 June 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force for the period from 1 March
to 20 May 2016
I. Introduction
1.
The present report gives an account of the activities of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) during the past three months, pursuant to
the mandate contained in Security Council resolution 350 (1974) and extended in
subsequent resolutions, most recently resolution 2257 (2015).

II. Situation in the area and activities of the Force
2.
During the reporting period, the ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic was maintained, albeit in a continuously volatile environment at tributable
to the ongoing conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic and notwithstanding a
significant number of violations of the Agreement on Disengagement between
Israeli and Syrian Forces (Disengagement of Forces Agreement) of 1974, which are
set out below. The Syrian Arab Armed Forces and non-State armed opposition
groups engaged in exchanges of heavy weapon fire in the area of separation and the
area of limitation. Different armed groups, including the listed terrorist group
Nusrah Front and the Yarmouk Martyrs Brigade, which pledged allegiance to
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, continued to exchange fire in the UNDOF area
of operation. Inside the area of separation, the presence of the Syrian armed forces
and military equipment, as well as any other armed personnel and military
equipment other than that of UNDOF, is in violation of the Disengagement of
Forces Agreement. As underscored by the Security Council in its resolution 2257
(2015), there should be no military activity of any kind in the area of separation.
3.
In employing its best efforts to maintain the ceasefire and see that it is
scrupulously observed, as prescribed in the Disengagement of Forces Agreement,
UNDOF reports all breaches of the ceasefire line. All incidents of firing into the
area of separation and across the ceasefire line, as well as the crossing by
individuals of the ceasefire line, are violations of the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement. In his regular interaction with both sides, the Force Commander
continued to call upon both parties to exercise restraint and prevent any
miscalculations that might lead to an escalation of the situation across the ceasefire
line.
16-09112 (E)

100616

*1609112*

S/2016/520

4.
A number of incidents of note occurred across the ceasefire line in violation of
the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. On two occasions, Israel Defense Forces
soldiers fired small arms shots at persons carrying out activities close to the
ceasefire line on the Bravo side. On 28 February, United Nations personnel at
position 80 observed three persons on the Bravo side, close to the ceasefire line,
with two of them removing metal poles from the ground. Subsequently, an Israel
Defense Forces soldier on foot, approximately 700 metres from United Nations
position 80, fired a single shot that impacted close to the third person, who
immediately boarded a vehicle and drove off from the location with the other two
individuals. On 23 March, United Nations personnel at position 80 also observed an
Israel Defense Forces patrol fire two rounds of gunfire in the general direction of
three persons working in a field in the area of separation close to the ceasefire line.
The three persons immediately left the area in the direction of Rafid village.
5.
Crossing of the ceasefire line by civilians, primarily shepherds, from the
Bravo side to the Alpha side was observed on an almost daily basis. On a number of
occasions on 9, 10 and 28 March and 11 April, United Nations personnel at
observation post 54 observed interaction at the Israeli technical fence between the
Israel Defense Forces personnel and individuals from the Bravo side, some of whom
were armed. The interactions involved vehicles from the Bravo side driving to an
Israeli technical fence gate. United Nations personnel at observation post 51
observed, on 20 April, five Israel Defense Forces soldiers escort an unarmed
individual to a gate in the Israeli technical fence, which they subsequently opened
for the unarmed person to cross from the Alpha side into the area of separation. The
individual was then picked up on the Bravo side by a person in a vehicle that drove
off towards the village of Ruwayhinah.
6.
In the context of the Syrian conflict, intermittent exchange of gunfire between
the Syrian armed forces and armed groups continued with varying degrees of
intensity in the area of separation and limitation on the Bravo side. The Syrian
armed forces maintained their positions in the area of separation, particularly
around Baʻth and Khan Arnabah, as well as around Hadar and in the vicinity of the
tri-village area of Jubbata, Turunjah and Ufana. The northern part of the area of
separation saw low-level sporadic exchange of heavy machine gun and small arms
fire between the Syrian armed forces and armed groups. In recent months, firing
occurred particularly from the area around United Nations position 17 towards Bayt
Jinn and from the general area of Hadar towards Jubbata al-Khashab. From 20 to
22 May, UNDOF observed a notable increase in direct and indirect exchange of
gunfire between the Syrian armed forces and non-State armed opposition groups, in
addition to several heavy explosions and detonations, in the northern and central
parts of the areas of separation and limitation on the Bravo side, particularly in the
vicinity of Harfa. During that period, United Nations personnel at temp orary
observation post 4 observed an explosion in the vicinity of Camp Faouar.
7.
Further north, in the border area between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab
Republic, on 16 occasions, UNDOF observed and reported transborder movements
of unidentified individuals, some of whom were armed with automatic weapons and
a light machine gun.
8.
The Syrian armed forces maintained their positions along the main road
connecting Qunaytirah to Damascus and generally deployed tanks at locations
adjacent to the area of separation. UNDOF observed non-State armed opposition

2/10

16-09112

S/2016/520

groups using tanks in the area of separation. In addition, the Syrian armed forces
maintained a presence at the vacated United Nations positions 25 and 32 and
observation post 72. Armed elements remained present at vacated United Nations
position 10 and observation post 71.
9.
In the central part of the area of separation and limitation, intermittent gunfire
occurred, with a high-level exchange of fire occurring in mid-February when
non-State armed opposition groups carried out offensives against the Syrian armed
forces in Jaba and Masharah.
10. Throughout the reporting period, open sources reported an increase in the
intensity of the clashes between the Nusrah Front and the Yarmouk Martyrs Brigade.
On 21 March, the Yarmouk Martyrs Brigade and its affiliate the Muthanna
Movement reportedly launched an offensive against the Nusrah Front and non -State
armed opposition groups in the south-west part of the area of limitation seizing
several towns and villages. These gains were reportedly reversed on 3 April when
the Nusrah Front and the Free Syrian Army launched a counteroffensive. Until
April, the Yarmouk Martyrs Brigade continued to conduct military training close to
vacated United Nations outpost 80A. Of particular note, on 2 March, United Nations
personnel at position 80 and observation post 53 went into shelter as a result of a
heavy explosion in close proximity to the United Nations locations. A vehicle -borne
improvised explosive devise detonated at a checkpoint manned by armed elements
on the outskirts of Aishah village in the area of separation, resulting in the reported
deaths of 18 people. This was the second asymmetric type of attack observed by
UNDOF in the area of separation since 30 November 2015, when ano ther such
attack occurred in Qahtaniyah close to United Nations observation post 51.
11. UNDOF protested against all violations to the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement by both parties, including the presence of unauthorized equipment in the
area of separation and firing into the area of separation. The Force Commander
reminded the parties of their obligation to abide by the terms of the Agreement and
to ensure the safety and security of United Nations personnel on the ground.
12. On two occasions, UNDOF observed armed and unarmed persons digging out
and removing landmines in close proximity to United Nations positions. On
24 February, United Nations personnel at observation post 53 observed two groups
of persons harvesting anti-tank and anti-personnel mines approximately 800 metres
from the observation post. On 26 March, United Nations personnel at position 80
also observed two persons digging out mines approximately 800 metres from that
position.
13. UNDOF observed five locations where tents and other structures had been set
up for internally displaced persons in the area of separation and in proximity to the
area. Approximately 70 tents were observed north-west of Aishah village, straddling
the ceasefire line close to United Nations position 80. UNDOF ob served water tanks
and limited infrastructure in the vicinity of the tents and also regularly observed
small groups of civilians in this camp. In another tented camp located in an area
along the ceasefire line close to the village of Burayqah, approximatel y 155 tents,
wooden structures and containers were observed. There were small numbers of
civilians observed intermittently in the camp. UNDOF observed some 130 tents and
wooden structures along the access road leading to United Nations observation post
53. A further 15 tents were observed at a location straddling the Bravo line north west of the village of Ayn al-Qadi. A single tent was observed in the centre of

16-09112

3/10

S/2016/520

Kudnah close to the Bravo line. Owing to the closure of the established crossing
point at Qunaytirah between the Alpha and Bravo sides since late August 2014,
UNDOF is not in a position to facilitate, in cooperation with the International
Committee of the Red Cross, humanitarian crossings, including for students,
between the two sides.
14. Since its temporary relocation from a number of positions in September 2014
and pending the time when UNDOF returns fully to the area of separation,
conditions permitting, UNDOF has continued to maintain visibility, albeit in a
modified manner, of the area of separation and the ceasefire line from its positions
on Mount Hermon and position 80 in the southern part of the area of separation, and
position 22 on the Alpha side. UNDOF operations continued to be supported by
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) military observers in
Observer Group Golan, who maintained five fixed and four temporary observation
posts on the Alpha side. The focus of the activities of Observer Group Golan was on
around-the-clock static observation and situational analysis. Through Observer
Group Golan, UNDOF continued to carry out fortnightly inspections of equipment
and force levels in the area of limitation on the Alpha side. Liaison officers from the
Alpha side accompanied the inspection teams. Inspections and mobile operati ons in
the area of limitation on the Bravo side remained suspended because of the security
situation. As in the past, the Force faced restrictions on its freedom of movement,
and its inspection teams were denied access to some positions on the Alpha side.
The arrangements put in place by the Israel Defense Forces to reduce the delays in
facilitating United Nations personnel crossing through the technical fence to
observation posts 54 and 73 and position 80 eased the challenges experienced by
United Nations personnel.
15. During the reporting period, United Nations personnel observed 155 mm
artillery weapons on a number of occasions on the Alpha side within 10 kilometres
of the ceasefire line, in positions and on flatbed trucks. Throughout February to
April, there was a significant increase in missile carriers in the area of limitation.
On 3 March, UNDOF personnel observed 9 M270 multiple-launch rocket systems at
an Israel Defense Forces training area in the area of limitation on the Alpha side,
with the number increasing to 12 on 11 March. In addition, on 14 April UNDOF
personnel observed six M109 (155 mm artillery) self-propelled guns at an Israel
Defense Forces position within the 10 km zone on the Alpha side.
16. UNDOF, in consultation with the parties, continued to review the situation in
the area of separation to assess whether the conditions on the ground permit an
incremental return to vacated positions in the area of separation. The ultimate
objective of UNDOF is to return fully to the area of separati on, conditions
permitting. In recent months, UNDOF assessed that, although the situation in the
area of separation remained volatile, the security situation in the northern part and
most of the central part had improved. In keeping with the intent to retur n to
vacated United Nations positions and Camp Faouar, UNDOF personnel carried out,
on 2 and 3 March, 12 April and 2 May, further fact-finding missions to vacated
United Nations positions 10, 16, 25, 31, 32 and observation posts 71 and 72 in the
northern part of the area of separation and to Camp Faouar in the area of limitation
on the Bravo side. There were no security incidents along the routes taken by
UNDOF personnel to these United Nations facilities or at the United Nations
facilities visited. UNDOF personnel found the security situation calm. However, in
late May open sources reported clashes between the Syrian armed forces and

4/10

16-09112

S/2016/520

non-State armed opposition groups in the vicinity of Camp Faouar and supply route
between Damascus and Camp Faouar. UNDOF personnel also found that, while the
United Nations positions had sustained significant damage and showed signs of
looting, some structures at the positions remained intact. A return to the positions
would necessitate a significant amount of repairs and reconstruction.
17. In the light of the findings from the assessments by UNDOF, the Force is
continuing its planning, with a view to returning incrementally to vacated United
Nations facilities on the Bravo side, based on conditions on the ground. As an initia l
step, UNDOF is looking to return in a limited way to Camp Faouar, from which the
Force would be able to carry out some observation and patrolling activities in the
area of separation. Necessary construction and rehabilitation work at Camp Faouar
is planned to start in June 2016. The limited return to Camp Foauar would involve
the deployment of some 100 troops, associated force capabilities, including
observation and force protection, and a limited civilian staff capacity. The
Secretariat and UNDOF are working on the details, including the required
capabilities, of that return. While the security situation in the northern part of the
areas of separation and limitation on the Bravo side has been assessed by UNDOF
as conducive to a return to Camp Faouar, the support of the parties is required to
facilitate enhanced mandated activities and functions of UNDOF. The establishment
by the parties of temporary crossing procedures when and if needed for UNDOF
personnel between the Alpha and Bravo sides remains critica l. The agreement of the
parties to the Force’s use of technology, including technological enablers to enhance
observation and monitoring of the area of separation and the ceasefire line and
capabilities to enhance force protection, is essential. It is also important that
UNDOF possess the appropriate Force capabilities to increase its operations on the
Bravo side.
18. UNDOF continued to resupply its positions on Mount Hermon from
Damascus. UNDOF convoys between Damascus and the Mount Hermon positions
are conducted almost daily and with an UNDOF security escort, accompanied by a
liaison officer from the office of the Senior Syrian Arab Delegate. UNDOF
continued to carry out contingency planning for the reinforcement and evacuation of
United Nations positions and observation posts and to update its contingency
planning for the relocation and evacuation of United Nations personnel on both the
Alpha and Bravo sides, as well as in Damascus. UNDOF, through its Force Reserve
Company, conducted regular rehearsals, exercises and training for all identified
contingencies. UNDOF and Observer Group Golan continued regular evacuation
and reinforcement exercises and contingency planning.
19. UNDOF continued its efforts to strengthen its positions and presence in the
Mount Hermon area. The infrastructure works and groundworks at positions 12 and
12A continued, with improvements to force protection measures, power supply,
communications and real-life support. Enhancements at United Nations position 80,
including additional force protection measures, continued.
20. The implementation of risk mitigation measures, including force protection
measures recommended in the military capability study of UNDOF, continued at
observation posts, positions and the operational base at Camp Zi ouani. The
Secretariat has made progress in the generation of the appropriate capabilities,
including additional medical facilities and explosive ordnance disposal teams
recommended in the study to support the UNDOF positions on Mount Hermon and

16-09112

5/10

S/2016/520

position 80, as well as additional protected mobility for Mount Hermon positions.
Additional force protection measures, including defensive positions and newly
constructed force protection barriers, have been completed at United Nations
positions 12A and 22. The UNDOF main headquarters at Yafour Hotel has been
further upgraded in accordance with the risk mitigation measures recommended in
the United Nations security risk assessment.
21. As at 8 May 2016, UNDOF comprised 786 troops, including 23 women.
Troops are currently deployed from Bhutan (2), the Czech Republic (3), Fiji (293),
India (191), Ireland (138), Nepal (157) and the Netherlands (2). In addition, 70
military observers from UNTSO, including 2 female observers, assisted the Force in
carrying out its tasks.

III. Financial aspects
22. By its resolution 69/301, the General Assembly appropriated the amount of
$51.7 million for the maintenance of UNDOF for the period from 1 July 2015 to
30 June 2016.
23. As at 18 May 2016, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account for
UNDOF amounted to $17.7 million. The total outstanding assessed contributions for
all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to $2,233.8 million.
24. Reimbursement of troop costs has been made for the period up to 31 Jan uary
2016, while reimbursement of the costs of contingent -owned equipment has been
made for the period up to 31 December 2015, in accordance with the quarterly
payment schedule.

IV. Implementation of Security Council resolution 338 (1973)
25. The Security Council, when deciding in its resolution 2257 (2015) to renew
the mandate of UNDOF for a further period of six months, until 30 June 2016,
called upon the parties concerned to immediately implement its resolution 338
(1973) and requested the Secretary-General to submit, at the end of the period, a
report on developments in the situation and the measures taken to implement that
resolution. The search for a peaceful settlement in the Middle East, in particular the
efforts made at various levels to implement resolution 338 (1973), was dealt with in
my report on the situation in the Middle East (A/70/353), submitted pursuant to
General Assembly resolutions 69/24 on Jerusalem and 69/25 on the Syrian Golan.
26. Since the discontinuation of indirect peace talks in December 2008, there have
been no negotiations between the parties. The Syrian conflict is further reducing the
prospects for their resumption and for progress towards peace between Israel and
the Syrian Arab Republic. I look forward to a peaceful resolution of the conflict in
the Syrian Arab Republic and the resumption of efforts towards a comprehensive,
just and durable peace settlement, as called for by the Security Council in its
resolution 338 (1973) and other relevant resolutions.

6/10

16-09112

S/2016/520

V. Observations
27. I am gravely concerned about the violations of the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement. The continued exchange of gunfire between the Syrian armed forces
and non-State armed opposition groups, and the continued fighting between
different armed groups, including the listed terrorist group Nusrah Front, in the
southern part of the areas of separation and limitation on the Bravo side jeopardize
the long-held ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic. The mandate
of UNDOF remains an important element in ensuring the stability of the region. For
its part, the United Nations will spare no efforts in ensuring that the long -held
ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic continues to hold .
28. A statement of the Prime Minister of Israel, Benjamin Netanyahu, on 17 April,
when he convened a cabinet meeting in the Golan, that Israel would never leave the
Golan adds further to the potential for escalated tensions. On 18 April, I reminded
Israel of its obligation to implement pertinent resolutions on the Golan. On 26 April,
the Security Council members unanimously deplored the convening of the Israeli
cabinet in the Golan and public statements calling upon the international community
to recognize the annexation of the Golan by Israel, noting the continuing legal
validity of resolution 497 (1981).
29. I am deeply concerned by the continuing deterioration of the security situation
in the Syrian Arab Republic, its impact on the Syrian population a nd its potential
implications for the stability of the region. These developments have continued to
affect significantly the UNDOF area of operation. The presence of the Syrian armed
forces and unauthorized military equipment in the area of separation are violations
of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. The increased use of heavy weapons by
the Syrian armed forces and armed groups, including listed terrorist groups, in the
continuing Syrian conflict is disturbing. I note that, while the reduction in the levels
of firing continues in the northern part of the UNDOF area of operation, listed
terrorist groups and other armed groups continue to maintain control over
significant sections of the areas of separation and limitation of the UNDOF area of
operation. The established crossing between the Alpha and Bravo sides remains
closed.
30. There should be no military forces in the area of separation other than those of
UNDOF. I call upon all parties to the Syrian conflict to cease military actions
throughout the country, including in the UNDOF area of operation, and to remove
all military equipment and all armed personnel from the area of separation.
31. The Israel Defense Forces should cease to deploy unauthorized weapons and
equipment in the area of limitation on the Alpha side. In addition, the firing of
gunshots across the ceasefire line by Israel Defense Forces soldiers has the potential
to escalate tensions between the two sides.
32. I remain concerned about the several incidents that have jeopardized Unite d
National personnel and facilities. Any hostile act against United Nations personnel,
including threatening their physical safety, restricting their movement and direct and
indirect firing at United Nations personnel and facilities by anyone, is unaccepta ble.
I reiterate that all military activities in the area of separation conducted by any actor
pose a risk to the ceasefire and to the local civilian population, in addition to the
United Nations personnel on the ground. I call upon all parties to take all measures
necessary to protect civilians.

16-09112

7/10

S/2016/520

33. As UNDOF moves forward with its planning to commence a limited return to
Camp Faouar and to intensify its operations in the area of separation, it becomes
critical that the safety and security of United Nations personnel be assured. I call
upon the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to fulfil its primary responsibility
for the safety and security of United Nations personnel in the areas of separation
and limitation on the Bravo side. I also call upon countries with influence to
strongly and urgently convey to the non-State armed opposition groups in the
UNDOF area of operation the need to cease any actions in violation of the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement that jeopardize the safety and security of
United Nations personnel and to accord United Nations personnel the freedom to
carry out their mandate safely and securely. The safety and security of United
Nations personnel must be ensured.
34. The continued presence of UNDOF in the area remains essential. Bot h Israel
and the Syrian Arab Republic have stated their continued commitment to the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement and support for the presence of UNDOF in
calling for a return to vacated positions. The full return of UNDOF to the area of
separation remains a priority for the mission. In the planning for the return, the
safety and security of United Nations personnel is the primary consideration in
determining the exact modalities. I note the positive developments in relation to the
strategic intent of UNDOF to return incrementally to Camp Faouar and gradually
increase its operations in the area of separation, conditions permitting. The
Secretariat supports UNDOF in this endeavour. I call upon both parties to assist
UNDOF in order for the mission to move the planning forward. As a matter of
priority, established efficient temporary procedures for the crossing of UNDOF
personnel between the Alpha and Bravo sides in the absence of the crossing at
Qunaytirah and technology and equipment to enhance the mission ’s observation of
the area of separation and the ceasefire line and to improve force protection are
necessary. It remains critical that, at the same time, the parties continue to support
the enhancement of the liaison function of UNDOF.
35. It is equally critical that the Security Council continue to bring its influence to
bear on the parties concerned to ensure that UNDOF is accorded the ability to
operate in a safe and secure manner and freely. It is essential that UNDOF continue
to have at its disposal all means and resources necessary to allow it to return fully to
the area of separation, as the situation permits.
36. The confidence and commitment of troop-contributing countries in UNDOF
remain a key factor for the mission’s ability to continue to carr y out its mandate. I
continue to count on the support of troop-contributing countries as UNDOF
continues with its planning, including in relation to the augmentation of required
capabilities, in preparation for the planned limited return to vacated positio ns in the
area of separation. I am grateful to the Governments of Bhutan, the Czech Republic,
Fiji, India, Ireland, Nepal and the Netherlands for their contributions, their
commitment and their resolve. I am also thankful to the Member States contributing
military observers to UNTSO.
37. Under the prevailing circumstances, I consider the continued presence of
UNDOF in the area to be essential. I therefore recommend that the Security Council
extend the mandate of the Force for a further period of six months , until
31 December 2016. The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic has given its

8/10

16-09112

S/2016/520

assent to the proposed extension. The Government of Israel has also expressed its
agreement.
38. In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation to the Head of Mission and
Force Commander, Major General Jai Shanker Menon, and the military and civilian
personnel serving under his leadership, who continue to perform the important tasks
assigned to them by the Security Council with efficiency and commitment under
challenging circumstances. I have full confidence that UNDOF will continue to use
its best efforts to carry out its mission.

16-09112

9/10

S/2016/520

Annex

10/10

16-09112
