UNlTED

NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL

2491st

MEETING:

NEW

27 OCTOBER 1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2491)
Adoption of the agenda

1

. . . . . . . . . . . ..*..............*.......

1

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..“.................

The situation in Grenada:
Letter dated 25 October 1983 from the Deputy Minister for External Relations
of Nicaragua addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16067) -

I

1

VPV.249 1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2491st MEETING
Held
President: Mr. Abdullah

in New York on Thursday,
SALAH

27 October

(Nigeria), Mr. St. Aimee (Saint Lucia), Ms. Gonthier (Seychelles), Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Martini
Urdaneta (Venezuela) and Mr. Hoang Bich Son (Viet Nam)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

(Jordan).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
representative of the United States of America has asked
to speak on a point of order, and I now call upon him.

Provisional agenda (WAgendaI2491)
1. Adoption

1983, at 3.30 p.m.

3. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America): I
rise to a point of order. It is my understanding that you,
Mr. President, are in possession of a communication
addressed to you yesterday by the Governor-General of
Grenada, the Honourable Sir Paul Scoon, which raises in
my mind a question as to whether the gentleman now
seated at this table with the designation “Grenada*’ is
properly seated as a representative of the Government of
Grenada.

of the agenda

2. The situation in Grenada:
Letter dated 25 October 1983 from the Deputy Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/16067)
The meeting was called to order at 5.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

4. I would further suggest, or request, that it might be
useful in these circumstances, if my understanding is correct as to the communication from the Governor-General,
to seek a report from the Secretary-General on this
question.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Grenada:
Letter dated 25 October 1983 from the Deputy Minister
for External Relations of Nicaragua addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/16067)

5. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
representative of the United States of America has raised
an objection to the credentials of the representative of
Grenada and questioned whether he is entitled to take the
place reserved for Grenada.

I. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): In
accordance with decisions taken by the Council at its
2487th and 2489th meetings, I invite the representative of
Grenada to take a place at the Council table, and I invite
the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Barbados, Bolivia, Cuba,
Democratic Yemen, Dominica, Ethiopia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Jamaica, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mexico, Mozambique, Nigeria, Saint Lucia, Seychelles, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Venezuela and Viet Nam to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jacobs (Grenada)
took a p/ace at the Council table: Mr. Zarr~(Afghanistan),
Mr. Sahnoun (Algeria), Mr. de Figueiredo (Angola), Mr. Jacobs (Antigua and Barbuda), Mr. Mutiiz (Argentina), Mr.
Moseley (Barbados), Mr. Gumucio Granier (Bolivia). Mr.
Roa Kouri (Cuba), Mr. Al-Ashtal (Democratic Yemen), Mr.
Baron (Dominica), Mr. lbrahim (Ethiopia), Mr. RajaieKhorassani (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Richardson
(Jamaica), Mr. Vongsay (Lao People’s Democratic Republic), Mr. Treiki (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Muiloz Ledo
(Mexico), Mr. dos Santos (Mozambique), Mr. Fafowora

6. I believe the communication, which arrived at noon
today and which will be distributed to members of the
Council, should properly be directed to the SecretaryGeneral, since he is the person concerned with the question
of credentials. It was, however, addressed to the President
of the Security Council. Nevertheless, there are certain
questions concerning its authenticity, and the matter is still
under consultation between the Secretary-General and
myself. I shall distribute it to members of the Council
when I have received the Secretary-General’s comments on
it. I propose, therefore, to suspend this meeting for a short
while.
.

The meeting was suspended at 5.20 p.m. and resumed at
6.45 p.m.
7. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
Secretary-General will in due course prepare a report on
the point of order that was raised by the representative of
the United States at the beginning of this meeting.

8. I would inform the members of the Council that I
have received letters from the representatives of Benin,
Bulgaria, Cape Verde, Colombia, Czechoslovakia, the
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, the German Democratic Republic, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Hungary,
India, Mongolia, Peru, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Sao Tome and Principe, Sri Lanka, Trinidad an 1 Tobago,
the United Republic of Tanzania, Yugoslavia and Zambia
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent
of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule
37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

11. The first speaker is the representative of Saint Lucia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
12. Mr. St. AIMEE’(Saint
Lucia): I wish to thank the
Council, through you, Mr. President, for this opportunity
to make a statement on behalf of the Government and
people of Saint Lucia regarding the item under
consideration-the
situation in Grenada. Allow me also to
congratulate you as you take the helm of this very important body of the Organization.
13. The Prime Minister of Dominica has presented the
position of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States
(OECS), of which Saint Lucia is a member, but I hope to
be able to clear up some aspects for the members here.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ogouma (Benin),
Mr. Tsvetkov (Bulgaria), Mr. da Luz (Cape Verde), Mr.
Aibdn-Hoi&in
(Colombia), Mr. Murfn (Czechoslovakia).
Mr. Knipping Victorid (Dominican Republic), Mr. Albomoz
(Ecuador), Mr. KhaliI (Egypt), Mr. Ott (German Democratic
Republic), Mr. Quiiiones-AmPzquita
(Guatemala), Mr.
Semedo (Guinea-Bissau), Mr. Hollai (Hungary), Mr. K&hnan (India), Mr. Erdenechuluun (Mongolia)), Mr. Arias SteIIa
(Peru), Mr. Toney (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines), Mr.
Cassandra (Sao Tome and Principe), Mr. Fonseka (Sri
Lanka), Mr. Aleyne (Trinidad and Tobago), Mr. Rupia
(United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia) and
Mr. Lusaka (Zambia) took the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber.

14. The Government of Saint Lucia agreed to participate
in a multinational force to remove what it deemed a threat
to its security. The Charter of the United Nations recognizes the right of any and every country to take these
measures, under Article 51, providing mechanisms also for
the removal of these threats. We do not know of any State
which has called for removal of this Article. Why7 Because
now, as when the Charter was drafted, this Article has its
purpose.
15. My delegation listened to the many statements made
yesterday before the Council [2489th meeting] and is glad
that there is agreement on a number of issues: first, that
there existed a situation of uncertainty, a breakdown of
law and order, and a lack of information on the issues in
Grenada; secondly, that the objectives and hopes of all
here are for a return to normalcy in Grenada; and thirdly,
that all countries have the right to self-determination and
territorial security.

9. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): I
should like to inform the members of the Council that as
President I have received a letter dated 27 October 1983
from the representative of Jordan which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that the Security Council extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to Mr. Clovis Maksoud, Permanent
Observer of the League of Arab States to the United
Nations, during its consideration of the item ‘The situation in Grenada’ “.

16. The areas of contention and disagreement are simply,
then, first: when is a country to defend itself and how does
it choose to defend itself; secondly, who determines what is
a threat to the security of a State; and, thirdly, who acts in
the name of the people-in this case, the people of Grenada, in whose name we have already heard many representatives speak here?

That letter has been published as a document of the Security Council under the symbol S/16091. If I hear no objection I shall take it that the Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 to Mr. Maksoud.

17. My delegation is therefore convinced that once the
facts are known and understood, much light will have been
shed on the situation.
18. The peoples of the eastern Caribbean are one. We
share a common culture, a common heritage, a common
language, and we have developed common institutions of
Government, always with the sole purpose of attaining the
improvement of the welfare and well-being of our citizens.
We have, to a great extent, been very successful, since not
one of us, in spite of our small size and lack of natural
resources, is included in the list of least developed countries. This has been possible because of our close interrelationship and cooperation with one another.

10. The Security Council will now resume its consideration of the item-on its agenda. Members of the Council
have before them document S/l6077/Rev.l,
which contains. the text of a revised draft resolution submitted by
Guyana, Nicaragua and Zimbabwe. I should like to draw
the attention of members of the Council to the following
documents: S/16078, letter dated .26 October 1983, from
the representative of India to the President of the Security
Council; S/16084, letter dated 26 October, from the representative of Brazil to the President of the Council;
S/16086, letter dated 26 October, from the representative
of Yugoslavia to the Council President; and S/16090, letter
dated 25 October, from the representative of Belize to the
Council President.

19. We were therefore very saddened to hear some representatives attempt to belittle our subregional organization,
the OECS, giving the impression that we could not devise
an organization to enhance the well-being of our peopie.
2

To those who do not have a history of co-operation, this
may be very difficult to understand. But to us who are one,
it is very easy. The fact remains that we are one people,
and we will always be one people, and that what affects
one of us affects all of us. To prove the extent of that
co-operation, may I inform the members here that most of
us in the OECS share a joint representative in London and
in Ottawa who, pursuant to the Treaty Establishing the
Organization of Eastern Caribbean States, can speak for
any one of us. That was a very important political decision. It was under the terms of that same treaty that my
Government agreed to participate in a multinational force.

Grenada Constitution, although, of course, he may delegate that authority to a subordinate office-and I might
add, where that subordinate off~ce exists, if it exists. It was
the Governor-General who made a formal request to the .
OECS, of which Grenada is a member, for assistance to
remove what he saw as a threat to his people and what at
that stage had also become a threat to our subregion.
24. While addressing the Council yesterday the representative of Guyana, our partner in the Caribbean Community (CARICOM),
wise in the ways of our political
institutions, told members that the Governor-General is
the legal authority in Grenada. In his statement to the
non-aligned meeting he noted that his Government had
accepted that the Governor-General could be a point of
contact with Caribbean countries. My delegation therefore
fails to understand why some representatives here refuse to
consider the legitimacy and authority of the GovernorGeneral to request assistance from any quarter to defend
and remove what he sees as a threat to his people. Such a
request is also in keeping with the provisions of both the
charter of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States
and the Charter of the United Nations. And, I must add,
we have many examples of that kind of request all around
the world.

20. In 1979 a series of events began in Grenada, our
sister island, which needs some restating here. Members of
the New Jewel Movement under Maurice Bishop removed
the administration
of Eric Gairy. While a number of
Caribbean States expressed their displeasure at the
method, it must be recognized that not one intervened
because the administration of Mr. Gairy did not solicit our
assistance. It must be pointed out also that attempts to
isolate the Government of Prime Minister Bishop were
met with resistance by the member States of our subregion,
in clear recognition that the people of Grenada wanted
and supported that Government. Yet we were, and have
been, apprehensive about the buildup of military troops on
Grenada and we did, on many occasions, express this concern to the Government of Grenada. The massive buildup
of military troops is foreign to our part of the region, and
we rightly had to be concerned about it. But we were also,
and on many occasions, assured-indeed we felt assured
then and we had reason to believethat
those troops
would not be used against States in our region by Mr.
Bishop’s Government. That assurance was given to us by
Mr. Bishop.

25. We must also understand the concern and intention
of the Governor-General for the safety of his citizens and
also acknowledge the right of States within the region to be
concerned about their own safety and security. Once we do
that we cannot but determine that the situation that developed in Grenada over the past two weeks constituted a
threat to peace in the region.
26. Why did the OECS think that their security was
threatened? Let us look at another set of facts. During his
first address to the Council [2487rh meeting‘], the representative of Cuba informed the Council that the Cuban
“workers” on Grenada had been given an opportunity
very early in the proceedings not to become involved in
what was happening. What was their decision? They opted
to fight. What were they lighting and who were they fighting for? Later on, we heard such words used as “defending
the Fatherland”. Whose Fatherland? Which Fatherland?
Had Grenada then become part of Cuba? Did they feel
obliged to defend Grenada as Grenada or Grenada as part
of Cuba? I am sure the question is clear. The answer to it is
also clear.

21. A dramatic turn of events occurred in the past two
weeks. Mr. Bishop and a number of his Cabinet members
were killed. The whereabouts of many others are not
known. That element of assurance which we had from Mr.
Bishop was no more. It was removed.
22. But let us go back to the immediate events leading to
Mr. Bishop’s death. We confirmed, and everyone here
agrees, that Prime Minister Bishop was placed under house
arrest. We know, and so do the members of the Council,
that the people of Grenada freed their Prime Minister. He
was subsequently brutally murdered. Who did it? Surely it
cannot be the same people who freed him. We must look
for somebody else. Our information confirmed that there
is growing military personnel on the island of Grenada and
that military personnel, in collusion with some elementsand I would not wish to use a word here that I heard used
some time ago by a representative of a member State in
referring to Governments and people-imprisoned
the
entire population, the very people, by imposing a 24-hour
curfew with orders to shoot on sight. Surely, a people
would not act in its own name and then put out an order
to shoot itself on sight. We have therefore, to look for
elements of that order from somewhere else.

27. We, too, in Saint Lucia have had occasion to get
foreign assistance in the construction of our international
airport, but never at any time were there more than 30 to
40 Canadian and British technicians on the project. I am
not trained in engineering or military tactics, so how 500
ordinary workers opt to fight in Grenada and defend
themselves so valiantly, as we were told by the representative of Cuba, is beyond my comprehension. What was
the cause? What justifies the blood of a people with no ties
whatsoever, barely understanding each other because of
language and other barriers, being shed on Grenadian soil
in defence of interests alien to the people of Grenada?

23. It was the Governor-General of Grenada-and
1
repeat, the Governor-General of Grenada-in whom executive authority in Grenada rests under Section 57 of the

28. The representative of Mexico mentioned in his statement [ibid] that some States were attempting to impose
3

their political models on others. We in the OECS-and the
representative and spokesman of Grenada confirmed
this-have accepted the principle of ideological pluralism
within our subregion. But let us be clear. When one State,
by virtue of the presence of its armed forces within another
State, prevents the people from exerting their franchise
and legitimate right to choose whatever institution of
Government they want, it must be considered as interference. Such was the situation existing in Grenada on or
about 18 October-not
25 October. That interference in
and invasion of Grenada had taken place long before and
not by us. Given our military weakness, and correctly
assessing the intentions and objectives of a State which has
been involved in Grenada and which has been accused of
interference in the affairs of States much stronger than we
are, the Defence and Security Committee of the OECS
decided to seek assistance to combat a threat to the security of its members and to respond to a request by a legal
authority in Grenada, a member of the organization, to
remove a threat from within. It is in this light that the
events of 26 October must be seen, and only in this light.

32. We are meeting today because Grenada, one of the
smallest nations in the world, has been invaded by the
most powerful and richest country in the world. Grenada’s
territorial integrity has been rudely violated, and its political independence and national sovereignty are gravely at
stake. This is the price the people of that peace-loving State
are paying for espousing a political philosophy which does
not meet with the approval of some of their neighbours.

29. The Prime Minister of Dominica, Chairperson of the
Organization
of Eastern Caribbean States, has outlined the plans of the Governor-General for an interim
Government and subsequent holding of free and fair elections in the State 112489th meeting]. We at least owe it to
him to give him a chance to carry out his duty within an
international environment of understanding and assistance, not one of hostility. The decision of the Council can
go a long way to creating this environment conducive to
peace and harmony and can assist the people of Grenada
to live again with hope after their long ordeal of over two
weeks. They.have lost their cherished leader, let them now
not lose hope in this great Organization of ours.

..

33. Let there be no mistake, the people of Grenada
earned the wrath and hostility of their most powerful
neighbours because they opted for and pursued truly independent and progressive domestic and foreign policies,
compatible with their chosen political philosophy. In particular, Grenada’s neighbours have been offended by its
choice of friends and allies, and they made no secret of
this. It had become increasingly clear that sooner or later
the slightest excuse or pretext would be used to intervene
directly in the internal affairs of Grenada-and
indeed of
any of the other progressive democratic nations in that
region. The deteriorating situation in Grenada in recent
weeks which led to the tragic and untimely death of Prime
Minister Maurice Bishop and some of his colleagues provided that pretext and opportunity. In fact the international community is now left to wonder whether those now
fshing in the muddy and murky waters in and around
Grenada are mere beneficiaries of that situation or are its
creators.
34. The invasion of Grenada on the morning of 25 October by so-called multinational forces was executed for the
sole purpose of overthrowing the Government of that
country, in order to replace it with a puppet rigime. The
invasion is very much in line with the policy of perceiving
the world in terms of spheres of influence. A genuinely
independent Grenada in the middle of what is generally
regarded as a certain Power’s sphere of influence, or back
yard, was unfortunately perceived as a threat to the interests of that Power.

30. Mr. MASHINGAIDZE
(Zimbabwe): Mr. President,
I wish to express my personal appreciation for the prompt
response you gave to Nicaragua’s request for the conven- !
ing of the Council to consider the situation in Grenada. As
members know, my delegation was among those which
supported this request for an immediate meeting. We did
so out of our concern about the current developments in
that country.

35. We have said time anh again, in this Council and in
other forums, that we in Zimbabwe are strongly opposed
to any Power’s arrogating to itself the right to decide for
other countries what type of Government they must have
or, for that matter, who should lead them. The choosing of
a Government and of leadership is the sovereign prerogative of the people of each country and must be exercised
without external interference and influence.

31. The Prime Minister of the Republic of Zimbabwe,
Mr. Robert Mugabe, on several occasions has expressed
deep concern and anxiety about the dangerous situation in
the Caribbean and Central American regions. Recently, at
the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government
of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi in March, he
made the following pertinent observation:

36. We also wish to point out that the invasion of Grenada, which was masterminded, planned, financed and executed by a super-Power and a permanent member of this
Council, is a shameless breach of the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and the General Assembly’s
Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.’ For
instance, Article 2, paragraph 4 of the Charter, which all
Member States are required to observe scrupulously, states
very clearly:

“The continued tension in the Central American, the
Caribbean and the South Atlantic regions, is largely a
direct result of foreign intervention, most of which is
aimed at destabilizing and undermining the progressive
governments in those areas.”
Similar observations were made by Zimbabwe’s Minister
for Foreign Affairs in his address at the 29th meeting of
the thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly, on 12
October 1983.

“All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territor4

ial integrity or political independence of any state, or in.
any other manner inconsistent with the Purposes of the
United Nations.**

41. Lastly, the people of Grenada can count on Zimbabwe’s full support and solidarity with them in their
struggle to be genuinely free, independent and nonaligned.

Unless all Member States-large and small, super-Powers
or non-super-Powers-respect
those principles, humanity
might as well abandon altogether any notion of organized
and civil&d
international relations and return to the
jungle.

42. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Ecuador. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
43.

ALBORNOZ
(Ecuador) (interpretation from -’
I should like to thank you, Sir, and the other
members of the Council for providing me this opportunity
to speak in the Security Council on a subiect of broad
significance to the United Nations and of particular importance to the Latin American region.

37. The reckless breaching of the bedrock principles of
international law and the corner-stones on which civilized
international order is founded, such as occurred on 25
October against Grenada, gives rise to very deep concerns
among peoples living in regions and areas which are being
regarded as other people’s so-called spheres of influence or
back yards-that is, Central America, southern Africa and
the Middle East. Any of those regions may for similar
reasons qualify for military intervention by some strong
Powers.

Mr.

Sp4nidz):

44. First of all, I should like to express the condolences
of my Government on the tragic death of the Prime Minister of Grenada, Mr. Maurice Bishop, and of members of
his Government, as well as our sorrow at the other victims
of the recent succession of lamentable events that have
occurred in that fraternal country.

38. There are no circumstances according to the Charter
and international law governing inter-State relations in
which military intervention in or invasion of another State
is permitted. The reasons adduced in a vain attempt to
justify the invasion of Grenada must therefore be categorically rejected. At no time did Grenada pose a threat to the
security of its neighbours, within the Caribbean region or
outside it. Who, for example, can take seriously the claim
that Grenada; with a population small enough to be seated
in one sports stadium in this country, could threaten the
security of a nuclear Power? Nor can we accept the assertion that citizens of some other country residing in Grenada were in danger. We have also been told that after the
death of Prime Minister Bishop and some of his colleagues
there existed an unacceptable power vacuum in Grenada.
Again, this is not borne out by facts. Even supposing that
were the case, we do not accept that it is the duty of
outsiders to choose a Government for Grenada.

45. In that respect, the Government of Ecuador issued
the following statement on 25 October:
“The Government of Ecuador is a faithful defender
of the principles of international coexistence enshrined
in the charters of the United Nations and of the Organization of American States, particularly the prohibition
of the use of force in international relations, respect for
the sovereign equality of States and their territorial
integrity, non-intervention
of whatever sort in their
internal and external affairs and the self-determination
of peoples. It condemns the armed action carried out
today against Grenada, an action that has aggravated
the already troubled situation in the Caribbean, about
which the Government of Ecuador has frequently
expressed its concern.

39. What, then. should the Council do? It has a responsibility to condemn the invasion in the strongest possible
terms and to tell the perpetrators that their presence in
Grenada is illegal and that the only legal thing which. they
can do now is to withdraw from that country, forthwith
and unconditionally. When the invasion has been stopped,
the Council should do everything possible to assist Grenada to restore and secure its territorial integrity, political
independence and national sovereignty, free from all forms
of undue external interference, pressure and influence. In
no circumstances should Grenada’s sovereignty and nonaligned status be compromised. The perpetrators of the
shameless act of naked aggression against Grenada should
be required to pay reparations to that country.

“We therefore appeal urgently for an end to the foreign intervention and for the establishment of the conditions necessary to enable the people of Grenada to
exercise their sovereign right freely to elect their democratic Government.*’
46. Defence of the principle of the non-use of force or
threat of force in international relations has been a part of
the history of Ecuador since it attained political independence at the beginning of the last century. In this spirit, my
country contributed to the drafting of the Charter of the
United Nations. in which all Member States undertook to
settle international disputes by peaceful means that would
not endanger either international
peace and security or
justice. Article 2, paragraph 4 of the Charter states. as
Members are aware:

40. ‘We believe the draft resolution before the Council
[S/Z6077/Rev.Z] offers the necessary first steps towards
the accomplishment of the goal which we have outlined.
Accordingly we urge ail Council members to support it.
Such action will eloquently demonstrate the Council’s
unanimous sense of revulsion at this crime against international peace and security. This is the least the Council can
be expected to do for the struggling people of Grenada.

“All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state, or in
any other manner inconsistent with the Purposes of the
United Nations.”
5

against the use of force in the Charter as an absolute, and
the injunction against intervention in the internal affairs of
other States as the only obligation of States under the
Charter.

47. This is the universal law which must prevail over any
dialectics or particular policy if we wish to live in an international community
founded on the rule of law.
Moreover, Article 2, paragraph 7 of the Charter states that
not even the United Nations is authorized to intervene in
matters which are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any State. Therefore, Ecuador feels that even the
remotest recourse to force in an attempt to impose conditions on any country whatsoever is contrary to law and to
the civilized course of history.

5?. The events of the past days pose no such morally or
legally simple questions as has been suggested by that interesting array of speakers. The prohibitions against the useof
force in the Charter are contextual, not absolute. They
provide justification for the use of force against force in
pursuit of other values also inscribed in the Charter, such
values as freedom, democracy, peace. The Charter does not
require that peoples submit supinely to terror, nor that their
neighbours be indifferent to their terrorization. the events in
the Caribbean do not comprise a classical example of a large
Power invading a small, helpless nation.

48. Moreover, aware of the importance of the principle
of faith in the equal rights of nations large and small, and
espousing a coherent and uniform attitude that must
remain consistent in all situations, Ecuador will continue
in United Nations debates to uphold the absolute need for
the withdrawal of foreign occupation troops anywhere in
the world, whether in Africa, Asia, the Middle East or the
Mediterranean, or in Central America, the Caribbean or
any other part of our hemisphere. Such is the indispensable prerequisite for peoples, through free elections, to be
able to choose their own destiny free from the armed pressure of foreign forces.

54. The impression that there is involved here a violation
of the Charter which should be straightforwardly condemned by an outraged world opinion is not only a delusion, it is as well a snare, a snare which will leave those
caught within it a bit weaker, a bit more confused, a bit less
able to defend themselves, a bit more of what Jean-Francois
Revel called in his most recent book, Comment les dPmocratiesfinissent,
an obliging victim. This is another way of
saying that although the islands that we are meeting to
discuss are small, the issues are as large as any ever discussed
in this chamber.

49. With an equal moral authority, we reiterate that position in this instance, because unswerving adherence to
principles proves to be the sole source of strength on which
countries, particularly those that lack military, economic
or technological power, can rely.

55. The use of force is indeed central to our deliberations, as is respect of the rights of people to selfdetermination, as is non-intervention in the internal affairs
of others. The most fundamental questions of legitimacy,
human rights and self-defence are also present in this
debate in this chamber.

50. The delegation of Ecuador trusts that the action of
the Security Council will lead to the immediate withdrawal
of foreign forces from the sovereign territory of Grenada
and that it will prove possible to create the conditions
necessary to arrive at a solution to the serious situation
that has prompted the present debate.

56. The intrusion of force into the public life of Grenada
did not begin with the landing of a task force. Before 1979
Grenada was ruled by a corrupt Government. From 1979
Grenada had been ruled by a Government which came to
power by coup, overthrowing that corrupt predecessor.
That new Government declined to submit itself to free
elections. That Government itself succumbed to superior
force more than two weeks ago when, with the complicity
of certain Powers, which have in the past three days nearly
drowned us in crocodile tears over the death of Maurice
Bishop and foreign intervention in Grenada’s affairs, first
arrested, then murdered, Bishop and his ministers. Thus
began what can only be called an authentic reign of terror
in Grenada.

51. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America):
Some of the speakers before the Council in the past few
days have attempted to present the events of the past days
as a classical invasion of a small country by an imperial
Power, a simple case of intervention in the internal affairs
of others, a case whose moral and legal character is readily
discernible. After all, the Charter of the United Nations
forbids the use of force to settle a dispute, and force has
been used by the task force. The Charter forbids intervention in the internal affairs of States, and the task force is
intervening in the affairs of Grenada. The Charter requires
respect for the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States, and when foreign forces land on an
island it might not-at first glance-appear unreasonable
to contend that the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the State is not being fully respected. That,
as I understand it, is the purport of the draft resolution
now circulating in the Council. That is the reasoning urged
on the Council by an interesting array of speakers. It is,
presummably
the reasoning that will lead Council
members-at
least some of those members-to
support
the draft resolution.

57. Tragically then, for them, the people of Grenada had
already had large experience with political violence before
the arrival of the task force. The people of Grenada were
also sadly accustomed to foreign intervention in their internal affairs. Let us speak frankly about this situation. Maurice Bishop was a man with strong ideological
commitments.
Those commitments identified him and
allied him with Cuba, the Soviet Union and the member
States of that empire which invokes Marxist principles to
justify tyranny. Maurice Bishop freely offered his island as
a base for the projection of Soviet military power in this
hemisphere.

52. It is a particular perspective. The perspective I have
described begins with the landing of the task force in Grenada, the day before yesterday. It treats the prohibition
6

58. The familiar pattern of militarization and Cubanization was already far advanced in Grenada. More than
three dozen Soviet officials have been detained in just the
past three days. An enormous, truly enormous, arsenal of
Soviet weapons has been come across in the last three
days. The total number of Cubans present on Grenada is
still unknown, but it appears likely that there were over
I,OOO, more than one Cuban for every 100 Grenadians.
59. Even this did not satisfy Prime Minister Bishop’s
friends. Maurice Bishop was not the victim of an ordinary
power struggle. As Jamaica’s Prime Minister Seaga put it:
“It became clear, as events unfolded, that this was a
-well-planned and orchestrated coup which was carried
out with a savagery and brutality without precedent in
the English-speaking Caribbean. On Wednesday, 19
October, after having been released by a large crowd of
his supporters, Mr. Bishop, his Minister of Education
Miss Jaqueline Creft, his Foreign Minister Mr. Unison
Whiteman, Mr. Norris Bain, Minister of Housing, Mr.
Vincent Noel, leader of the Bank and General Workers
Union, Mr. Fitzroy Bain, another trade union leader,
were brutally executed by Cuban-trained military ofticers who had seized power. We also learned subsequently that the.People’s Revolutionary Army had fired
on a crowd of demonstrators which included many
women and children and that several of these have not
been accounted for and are .presumed to have been
killed. An eyewitness reports having seen a child
attempting to jump to safety having his legs blown off.”
60. Let us be clear in this Chamber tonight. Grenada’s
internal affairs had fallen under the permanent intervention of one neighbouring and one remote tyranny. Its
people were helpless in the grip of terror. Imagine, if you
will, that here in New York, tonight, just after we return
home, some gunmen, who had already proved that they
would kill on a whim, announced that anyone leaving his
home, anyone appearing on the streets, would be shot on
sight. Imagine, if you will, that that condition lasted for
four days and four nights, punctuated by the sound of
gunshot. Ask yourself whether friendly forces arriving to
free us from some nearby democratic country would be
engaged in a violation of the Charter in an unjustifiable
intervention in United States internal affairs, in an unjustified use of force.
61. Listen to the comments of the Prime Minister
Barbados:

of

“The pros and cons of the action of the Caribbean
Governments will be long debated. So will those of
President Reagan in coming to our aid. But I think that
history will agree with the verdict of public opinion in
the eastern Caribbean. There has seldom been in these
islands such virtual unanimous support in the media,
and at political and popular levels, for an action so
potentially divisive. West Indians have shown that we
have a view of our future that is democratic. peaceloving and devoted to constitutional and not arbitrary
government. We have shown that we can cut through
the sometimes artificial controversies, generated by

today’s media, and go right to the heart of things, what
is best for our people. The United States and President
Reagan have, to their eternal credit, concurred in our
views and have come to the same conclusion as we
have.”
62. I know, as well as the Council knows, that such
words may easily be dismissed as cynical. After all, are we
not all accustomed to similar justifications as when the
Soviet Union invades Afghanistan or imposes a new
Government on the people of Poland, or when Viet Nam
invades and occupies Cambodia? Why should anyone here
suppose that this is not just one more cynical claim when
we assert that the task force, of which we are members, is
there to restore self-determination to the people of Grenada rather than to deny them self-determination.
63. There is an easy test: the test is what comes after. We
intend-we in the task force-as all of us have now made
clear, to leave Grenada just as soon as law is restored and
the instruments
of self-government-democratic
government-have
been put in place. But all Governments
in our time claim to be democratic. They all say they are
going to leave as soon as law is restored. What will there be
to support the claim that the new Government of Grenada
will be any more an authentic expression of the will of the
people of Grenada than was the gang of thugs from whom
Grenada has just been delivered? Again, the answer is
easy. There is a simple test. It will be clear that selfgovernment has been restored to Grenada because freedom and the institutions through which free peoples
express themselves will be clearly in evidence: a free press,
free trade unions, free elections and representative, responsible government.
64. It should not be difficult for any people, especially
any democratic people which has ever suffered a reign of
terror from foreign or domestic tyrants, to discern the difference between the force that liberates captive peoples
from terror and the force that imposes terror on captive
peoples. Neither the intellectual nor the moral nor the legal
problems involved here are really very difficult.
65. Because of the repeated discussions and questions
here in this chamber concerning the legal bases of this
intervention, I should like to address my attention now,
briefly, once again to this matter of the legal foundation for United States action in Grenada. It was indeed a
unique combination of circumstances prevailing in Grenada that led the United States to respond positively to the
OECS request that we assist it in its decision to undertake
collective action to secure peace and stability in the Car&
bean region. Those circumstances included danger to innocent United States nationals, the absence of a minimally
responsible Government in Grenada and the danger posed
to the OECS by the relatively awesome military might that
those responsible for the murder of the Bishop Government now had at their disposal. The United States’
response, we believe, was fully compatible with relevant
international law and practice. I will turn briefly to each of
these points.

66. I deal first with the defence of innocent nationals.
The United States’ concern for the safety of its nationals
was real and compelling and had absolutely nothing to do
with any inclination to gunboat diplomacy. As Prime Minister Seaga pointed out in his address to Jamaica’s parliament on 25 October, “madmen” wiped out the whole
Government of Grenada, murdered its leading citizens and
imposed a 24-hour shoot-on-sight curfew against its own
citizenry. The madmen responsible for the coup in Grenada did not put their captured adversaries on trial. They
simply murdered them in cold blood. In these circumstances it was fully reasonable for the United States to conclude that these madmen might decide at any moment to
hold hostage the 1,000 American citizens on that island.

70. In assessing this danger; the States of the OECS,
most of which, as we have heard here, have no army at all
or have armies of fewer than 200 men, concluded that the
military potential of Grenada in the hands of the madmen
who engineered the coup had reached threatening proportions. For’ example, although Jamaica’s population
exceeds by twentyfold that of Grenada, Grenada’s armyits known army, its indigenous army-exceeded by one
and a half times the size of Jamaica’s armed forces.
Moreover, a new airstrip was in the final stages of completion by over 600 armed Cubans. In the words of Jamaica’s
Prime Minister Seaga:
“In the hands of sane men, [the airstrip] would have
offered no threat, but against the background of the
insanity of the past two weeks it would be a logical
staging area for countries whose interests are similar
and who have ambitions for using Grenada as a centre
for subversion, sabotage and intiltration within the area
and against member States of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States.*’

67. American nationals scattered throughout the island
were denied the right of free exit, as students returning last
night testified repeatedly. The airport was closed and entry
by humanitarian organizations and others concerned with
their welfare was prevented. The United States, having
recently been victim of, as well as witness to, revolutionary
violence in Iran, where, in contravention of all international conventions and the express ruling of the Intemational Court of Justice, United States diplomatic personnel
were held hostage, could not be expected to sit idly by
while the lives of a thousand of our citizens were again
threatened.

71. It was in this context that the OECS; viewing with the
greatest alarm this combination -of brutal men and awesome might, decided to undertake collective action pursuant to its charter. Such action fully accorded with relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, which
accorded regional organizations the authority to undertake collection action.

68. Of course, it goes without saying that the United
States does not advocate that in normal circumstances
concern for the safety of a State’s nationals in a foreign
country may justify military measures against that country. But normal circumstances presuppose the existence of
a Government which, regardless of its democratic, nondemocratic or antidemocratic nature, or the system which
it pursues, is nevertheless recognized as minimally responsible for not wantonly endangering the lives of its citizens
and foreign nationals and the security of neighbouring
States in the region. Where, however, terrorists murder the
leading citizenry and leadership of their own country, a
situation may well arise in which no new Government
replaces the former order, but anarchy prevails. In those
circumstances, the general rule of international law permits military action to project endangered nationals.

72. When asked to assist this effort, the United States,
whose own nationals and vital interests were independently affected, joined the effort to restore minimal conditions of law and order in Grenada and to eliminate the
threat posed to the security of the entire region,

73. The third legal point which I should like to address
briefly concerns collective regional action. Dominica, Barbados, Jamaica and other Caribbean States have already
made clear the factors that impelled them to invoke their
regional treaty arrangements for collective action. As
pointed out by their representatives here, the issue was not
revolution. This hemisphere has seen many revolutions
and many members of the OECS, like the United States
itself, were born of revolution. Each of us in this hemis69, T‘he second point that I should like to address briefly
’ phere celebrates an independence day. Nor was it an issue
is that this was indeed a unique situation, in which there.2 of the type of Government Grenada possessed.
existed a vacuum of responsible governmental authority.
The revulsion shared by the international community over
74, While the Government of Maurice Bishop, which
the cold-blooded murder of Mr. Bishop’s Government was
had never secured a mandate from its electorate, was an
nearly universal. The consequences of the coup were not,
anomaly, and an unwelcome anomaly, in the democratic
however, restricted to Grenada. Although a small island,
Caribbean Sea, no thought was ever given by the OECS to
Grenada, because of its massive buildup of arms and
influencing a change of that Government. No effort, may I
materiel, had become capable of gravely affecting the secuadd, was ever undertaken by the United States to affect in
rity of the entire Caribbean region. Those most immeany way the composition or character of that Govemdiately affected by the situation prevailing in Grenada
ment. Bather, the OECS was spurred to action because, as
were, of course, Grenada’s neighbouring countries, all of
a result of the murder of Mr. Bishop and almost his entire
which were members of the OECS, the Caribbean regional
Cabinet, the military power which Grenada had amassed
organization. As they were aware that terrorists were in
with Cuban and Soviet backing had fallen into the hands
control of Grenada, it became incumbent upon the States
of individuals who could be reasonably expected to wield
of the OECS to assessthe military capability at their dispothat awesome power against its neighbours. That the coup
sal and the dangers presented to the security of all the
leaders had no arguable claim to being the responsible
States in the Caribbean region.
Government was indeed made clear by their own declara8

tions, the failure of other States to recognize them as a
legitimate Government and the fact -that .the Governor
General of Grenada, the sole remaining symbol of governmental authority on the island, invited OECS action.
,
75. In the context of these very particuIar, very unusual
and conceivably unique circumstances, the United States
decided to accede to the request of the OECS to aid its
collective efforts aimed at securing peace and stability in
the Caribbean region.

rights and self-determination, the protection of national
independence and the ,promotion of development. The
Council is not incapable of making distinctions between
policies which serve those purposes and policies which
undermine them.. No Government in this chamber is
incapable of making such distinctions. We very much hope
that those Governments in this chamber which do indeed
endorse and support the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations will reflect carefully on the most profound
and important issues involved here.

76. I should like to close by once again quoting Prime
Minister Seaga. who, I believe, has given perhaps the best
justification of the decision by Jamaica and the United
States to accede to the request of the OECS for assistance
in its effort to establish collective security for the region.
Prime Minister Seaga said:

78. Mr. GAUCI (Malta): Once again, regrettably, the
Security Council is called upon to consider a most serious
situation, in which the use of armed forces has been
adopted as a means to achieve defined ends. Malta views
with extreme dismay and concern all instances of foreign
intervention, especially armed intervention, in the internal
affairs of any States.

“It is the inescapable fact that revolution breeds revolution because it makes no allowan‘ce to institutionalize
opposition and to change administrations peacefully.
During the past week we witnessed in Grenada not only
a revolution spawning its own destruction, but a brutal
military takeover of a civilian Government.

79. Our consternation becomes all the more acute in the
light of a situation in which, as in the case of the Soviet
intervention in Afghanistan in 1979, a super-Power-this
time the United States of America-becomes
directly
involved. The implications for regional and global peace
and security which arise in the wake of any such involvement impose unacceptable dangers on all members of the
international community.

“It may be felt that these matters do not concern us,
but most certainly they do. If a whole Government can
be wiped out overnight, by either political or military
extremists and the Governments of the Caribbean
remain silent and passive, then no Government elected
by the people can be safe from madmen of one type or
another who would seek to replace a Government of
the people, elected by the people, with one selected by
whichever chosen few of whatever nature.

80. Armed intervention has taken place in Grenada.
That is an action which Malta strongly deplores. All the
arguments which have been adduced in justification of that
action, despite their sophistication, fail to dispel our sincere misgivings that a very serious and deliberate violation
of the basic norms which govern relations between sovereign and independent. States has occurred.

“If we ignored the occurrence of brutal military
takeovers or political overthrows of Government, we
would immediately give heart to every subversive group
within the region to engineer disorder and instability as
a means of overthrow. No democratic system of government would have a chance of carrying out the programmes of development which it was elected to
implement if in its midst was a group of subversives,
anarchists and terrorists bent on destruction of the
foundations of stability which underpin the whole system of democracy. The far-reaching consequences of
such neglect on our part would be awesome and would
have the effect of creating an unsure and an insecure
future for all of us.

81. Only a few weeks ago my country’s Foreign Minister,
in his statement at the, 23rd meeting of the thirty-eighth
session of the General Assembly, underlined the threat to
State sovereignty which resides. in the unrestrained scramble for global power and influence over men and resources
which increasingly and most unfortunately we are witnessing. We simply cannot accept that the precarious international political environment in which we are living can
serve as a justification for any action which somehow
evades or diminishes the responsibility to seek peaceful
resolution of all problems which is imposed on us by our
commitment to the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.

“For the sake of the democratic system of govemment which we ail agree to be the one which allows the
maximum freedom of choice to peoples and protects
their right to elect’ a government of their choice, we
cannot ignore the events which defeat these purposes
whenever they occur in the English-speaking Caribbean.”

82. Malta, for its part, remains steadfast in its adherence
to the fundamental principles of international relations
enshrined in the Charter, upon which our own survival as
a sovereign and independent State depends. This commitment leaves us no option but to deplore the events which
have taken place in Grenada over the past few days, to
express our profound sadness at the loss of life which ,has
occurred and to call for an immediate withdrawal of all
foreign presence from the island and for the immediate
restoration to the people of Grenada of the full exercise of
their national sovereignty.

77. It behoves this Council, as well as the Englishspeaking Caribbean, not to ignore events which defeat the
purposes for which this Organization was founded. Those
purposes are the promotion of human freedom. human
9

83. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Arabic): As
agreed in the course of the Council’s consultations, I
intend to suspend the meeting now until 9 p.m. Following
the resumption of the meeting, the remainder of the representatives whose names are on the list of speakers will be
heard. The Council will then proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it.

91. This armed aggression is a serious threat to the maintenance of peace and security in the region. It is a flagrant
violation of the sacred principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations, particularly Article 2, paragraph 4,
and it is a rather curious coincidence that it is taking place
38 years to the day since the Charter entered into force.

The meeting was suspended at 8 p.m. and resumed at 9.50
p.m.

92: Scrupulous respect for the principles that I have mentioned is an essential condition of the survival of small,
defenceless States such as Grenada and Benin. Each
people is free to choose the socio-political system it wishes
to have, without outside interference.

84. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): I
should like to ask all those who have been invited to participate in this meeting without the right to vote to bear in
mind- how many speakers we have ‘for this evening. I
would request them also to bear in mind the lateness of the
hour in the statements that they make.

93. My delegation strongly condemns the foreign armed
aggression against Grenada, a sovereign State, a member
of the Non-Aligned Movement and a Member of the
United Nations. We call for the immediate withdrawal
from that country of all the forces of intervention so as to
allow the Grenadian people themselves to decide their
future.

85. The next speaker is the representative of Benin. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

94. On behalf of the Central Committee of the People’s
Revolutionary Party of Benin and of the National Execu;
tive Council, my delegation expresses the solidarity of the
people of Benin with the people of Grenada in their heroic
struggle.

86. Mr. OGOUMA (Benin) (interpretation from French):
1 congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month of October
and, through you, I thank all the members of the Council
for agreeing to our request to be allowed to speak on the
urgent matter now under discussion. I wish to express to
Mr. Noel Sinclair, the representative of Guyana, the satisfaction of the Benin delegation on the able and effective
manner in which he presided over the work of the Council
during September.

95. Is not what is happening now in Grenada a’test of the
vigilance of the peoples and of the international community? Is it not an experiment in a Machiavellian strategy
the first scene of which has just taken place in Grenada
and which is aimed, in the final analysis, at the colonial
reconquest of certain countries? That is why the Security
Council, and thereby the United Nations, must take firm,
concrete measures to guarantee the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and security of Grenada. My
delegation invites the Security Council to shoulder this
international responsibility by adopting the draft resolution submitted by Guyana, Nicaragua and Zimbabwe.

87. The events that have been taking ulace over the last
72 hours in Grenada constitute a se‘;i:ous act of armed
aggression and invasion against the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of a small State, which is,
nevertheless, responsible and sovereign, a member of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and a Member of
the United Nations.

96.

Ready for the revolution;

the struggle continues.

97. The PRESIDENT ,(interpretation from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Egypt. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

88. Speaking on behalf of the People’s Republic of
Benin, which is also a small, sovereign, free country and
was the victim of imperialist armed aggression on 16 January 1977, we are entitled to say today that aggressors, in
order to justify and cover up their crimes, always present
all sorts of fallacious reasons, such as the protection of
their nationals, the defence of a certain kind of democracy
and of “civilization”, a struggle against the penetration of
communism, and so on and so forth.

98. Mr. KHALIL
(Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
First of all, Sir, I wish to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. I
assure you that we have full confidence in your experience
and your diplomatic ability enabling you to preside effectively over the work of the Council at this difficult time. I
should like also to congratulate the representative of Guyana, Mr. Sinclair, on his work’as President of the Security
Council last month, when his ability was evident to all.

89. Have we not already heard all these reasons
advanced, directly or indirectly, since the independent, sovereign State of Grenada was put to the fire and the sword?
90. The armed aggression that has just been committed
against Grenada is in our opinion unjustitied and is part of
gunboat diplomacy, the policy of a great Power intoxicated by its selfish interests. It is a typical example of
recolonization, colonial reconquest, which we strongly
condemn.

99. We shall heed your appeal, Mr. President, and contine ourselves to making a very brief statement expressing
the position of Egypt.
100. Events over the last few days and weeks in Grenada
have given rise to feelings of deep concern and sorrow, for
10

those events have brought about a deterioration in the
situation in the region and an increase in tensions there.
The events in Grenada are a major source of concern for
the international community as a whole.

effort in contributing to that end. We reiterate our commitment to this concept, especially to the institutionalization
of freedom and democracy along with non-intervention,
the self-determination
of peoples and full respect for
human rights.

10 1. Experience in other regions-in our region, the Middle East, for example-teaches us that the use of force and
violence cannot resolve problems, but only leads to perpetuating and exacerbating them, and even to the creation of
new problems which, in turn, spark new hotbeds of tension. This causes increase instability in international
relations.

109. The Government of Venezuela made clear its position with regard to the events in Grenada through a communique disseminated through all the communications
media of my country on 25 October. The text of that
communique is as follows:
“First, it is public knowledge that in recent days a
serious political crisis took place in Grenada, whose
violent developments led to the overthrow and execution of the head of Government, Mr. Maurice Bishop,
and to the emergence of a military regime which,
according to the scanty information that has filtered
through the isolation imposed by that regime, attempted to consolidate itself by force in the face of apparent
rejection by the population. These events prompted
unanimous condemnation by countries in the area and
generated great concern about the repercussions they
might have on peace in the region.

102. On that premise, and as a non-aligned country,
Egypt has always affirmed and continues to affirm the
importance of adhering to the main principles on which
the Charter of the United Nations is based and which
depend on respect in Ietter and spirit for continuity and
stability in the international order and international mlations. Foremost among them is the principle of nonintervention in any manner whatsoever in the internal
affairs of other States.
103. In the present international circumstances it is the
duty of all of us-the Security Council in particular-to
try to prevent any spreading of the conflict between East
and West to third-world States, for that conflict can only
lead to a diversion of the limited resources of those States
from development efforts, preventing them from attaining
independence and from exercising their right of selfdetermination.

“Secondly, within the critical Caribbean context, the
democratic Governments of CARICOM
[the Caribbean Community] have been insisting, especially at the
Ocho Rios and Chaguaramos meetings, on requiring all
members of the Community fully to respect human
rights and to establish representative democracies.

104. Accordingly we reiterate once more the importance
of adherence to the principles of the Charter and of international law in respect of friendly relations and cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations and other international agreements
and instruments, primarily the charter of the Organization
of American States (OAS), all of whose members have
undertaken to abide by these principles in their international relations.

“Thirdly, in these circumstances, the Governments of
various democratic countries of the area agreed to support a joint military action, invoking security instruments entered into by them, to confront what, in their
view, was a situation which posed an imminent threat
to peace in the’ region.
“Fourthly, today [25 October] combined forces of
Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Jamaica, Barbados,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadians, and the
United States of America landed in the neighbouring
country of Grenada, an action which further exacerbated the critical situation which had been developing
over the preceding days.

105. In the light of what I have said, and given the political factors bearing on this matter, we call for the prompt
withdrawal of all foreign troops from Grenada so as to
ensure that the people of that island can, without interference in their internal affairs, proceed on their own path
and freely determine their own political, economic and
social future, so that good-neighbourly relations among
the States of the region can be restored.

the members of the Council for giving me the opportunity
to participate in this discussion.

“Fifthly, Venezuela, as a Caribbean country and as
the Latin American nation which is closest to Grenada
geographically, has a special interest in maintaining
peace and security in the region and in respect being
shown for the norms which govern international relations. For Venezuela it is essential that basic principles
of the inter-American system be preserved, principles
which are fully reflected in its cdnstitution, such as nonintervention, the self-determination
of peoples, full
respect for human rights, and the institutionalization
of
democracy and freedom. Therefore we cannot approve
of any form of intervention by foreign armed forces in
the internal affairs of a State.

108. Venezuela has always maintained that the Caribbean region should be a zone of peace and has spared no

“Sixthly, Venezuela defends and supports the lasting
value of these principles in their full meaning as means

106. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Venezuela. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
107. Mr. MARTINI
URDANETA
(Venezuela) (inferprefarion from Spanish): On behalf of my delegation I thank

11

to attain.the highest forms of coexistence and to allow
the full and free development of persons and nations.
We must in this regard endorse what we have already
stated at the present session of the United Nations General Assembly: ‘Non-intervention attains its true expression when it is based on the full exercise of
se1f-determination.‘2
“Seventhly, in conformity with the principles that
guide its international
action, the Government of
Venezuela-a
consistent friend of the democratic
nations of the Caribbean-has
a position based on the
following objectives: (a) the cessation of the armed
struggle; (6) the cessation of all foreign intervention in
Grenada so that the people of that country can exercise
the right to self-determination freely and fully; (e) complete respect for the guarantees of human rights and for
the guiding principles of the inter-American community; and (d) the preservation of the Caribbean as a zone
of peace, removed from the confrontation between the
big Powers.”

have; they could take us back to stages in international
relations that we had thought had been overcome.
115. Whenever the sovereignty of a country in Africa,
Asia, the .Americas, or any other region has been threatened or undermined in the past, my country has always
held the same position, calling for respect for the rules of
international law, in particular those enshrining the principles to which I have just referred.
116. Faced with the events in the Caribbean that have
brought us together today, we repeat our position and urge
the Security Council to deploy its best efforts towards
ensuring that States abide by the rules that sustain peaceful
coexistence in international relations. We also, with all due
respect, urge the Council to encourage the adoption of a
viable and constructive alternative to solve the crisis besetting us today, a solution that will guarantee the withdrawal
of all the foreign forces now in Grenada so that the people
of that country can freely exercise its right to selfdetermination.

I believe that that communique makes perfectly clear
Venezuela’s position on the events that have occurred in
Grenada.

117. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Barbados. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

1IO. The PRESIDENT
(intkrprerarion from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Peru. I invite him to
take a place at ‘the Council table and to make his
statement.

118. Mr. MOSELEY (Barbados): It is my pleasant duty
to congratulate you, Sir, on your accession to the presidency of this body for the month of October. I must also
thank the members of the Council for their generosity in
granting me permission to address them. I congratulate
you too, Mr. President, on the manner in which you have
performed the duties of your high office, and I welcome
the opportunity to record my delegation’s congratulations
to your immediate predecessor in office, Mr. Noel Sinclair,
representative of Guyana, on his outstanding success in
conducting the affairs of the Council during September.

Ill.
Mr. ARIAS STELLA (Peru) (interprerafion from
Spanish): It is a pleasure for me, Sir, to extend to you again
the congratulations of the delegation of Peru on the considered and skilful way in which you have been guiding the
debates as President of the Security Council.
112. A cornerstone of the foreign policy of Peru is strict
respect for and observance of the principles and rules
governing relations among nations in the international
community. Among these rules, contained in the Charter
of the United Nations, are the observance of the principle
of non-intervention and non-interference in the internal
and external affairs of States, respect for the selfdetermination and independence of peoples, respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, abstention from the threat or use of force in international relations. These are fundamental pillars on which the hopes
for peace and international coexistence rest.

119. The item of the agenda which is the subject of this
debate involves my country, Barbados, to a very serious
degree. I propose therefore in my statement to set out with
all the clarity at my command what may properly be called
the Barbados position.
120. Let me begin by referring to a most significant incident which took place in the Caribbean in the year 1967.
The population of the tiny island of Anguilla had become
dissatisfied with the administration
of the Government
which had its headquarters on the island of St. Kitts about
70 miles away. In that year, about a dozen or so men drove
off the small police force and established the administrative separation of Anguilla from the rest of the three-island
colony then known as St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla.
Anguilla is
very much smaller than Grenada. Yet it took the presence
of warships of the Royal Navy of the United Kingdom to
regain control and to establish on the island of Anguilla
some sort of coherent constitutional
government in
accordance with the wishes of the people of Anguilla. The
United Kingdom became the butt of severe criticism and
even ridicule: the then-familiar term UDI (unilateral declaration of independence) was applied to Anguilla as it had

113. Peru has followed the events in Grenada very
closely and attentively. It felt deep consternation and surprise upon learning of the culmination of this matter in the
events of the past few days, which make it patently and
painfully clear that the principles to which -I have just
referred have been violated.
114. Peru, which has respect for the international legal
order, must express its vehement rejection of these flagrant
violations of international rules which has bereaved the
American family. Moreover;my
country cannot conceal
its concern at the consequences that these events might
12

been applied to the country now properly referred to as
Zimbabwe.
121. I regard this incident as significant for two reasons.
In the first place, it was the first occasion within memory
in the eastern Caribbean that a duly authorized Govemment was overthrown by force. Secondly, this incident
showed how easy it was for a small country, unaccustomed
to revolutionary violence, to succumb to even a small
group of determined men. At that time, the Commonwealth Caribbean States hastily met to decide what should
be done. Eventually, on strictly legal grounds, it was
decided that the responsibility was solely that of Britain. It
is an interesting footnote that one country in particular, a
country now a full Member of the United Nations, was
willing, ready and eager to send in its troops to put down
the rebellion. Happily, that country was restrained by
other countries, including my own.
122. At this point, I consider it of the utmost importance
for the better understanding of the Grenada question that
there should be a clear understanding of the sociology and
the geography of the geography of the Caribbean islands,
and of the eastern Caribbean islands in particular. In these
small units it is hardly an exaggeration to say that everyone knows everyone else and from island to island a very
considerable percentage of families on one island are
related by blood to others on another island. This is not to
take into account the very real relationships, other than
those of blood, which exist. On the geographical side there
is the relationship between Saint Vincent and Grenada as
an apt example. Between those two islands separated by
about 90 miles of sea there is a chain of islands like
stepping-stones across a brook.
123. The members of this Council might well question
the relevance of these descriptions. I will answer by saying
that this is the context in which one must measure the fears
and anxieties and concerns of the people of one island in
respect of the events which might occur in another. It is in
this context that one must see the reason for, and read the
legislation which lies at the root of, my country’s participation in the events leading up to going to the assistance of
the people of Grenada.

scurrilous attacks by making the observation by which we
live, namely, that we may disagree with what you say but
we shall defend to the death your right to say it.
127. Now I would wish to put the pieces together to form
the mosaic and the true scenario which led to the events of
the past few fateful weeks.
128. Prior to 13 March 1979, Grenada was governed-or
rather misgoverned-by
a rdgime which my country
openly detested. Barbados would not and did not interfere,
either overtly or covertly, since the Government was a duly
constituted one and there was a recognizable constitutional fabric.
129. On 13 March 1979, the late Mr. Maurice Bishop led
a coup-the first coup of such magnitude in the Commonwealth Caribbean. Again Barbados did not interfere. The
will of the Grenadian peopie appeared to have prevailed.
On this basis, Barbados was among the very first to extend
a helping hand to Mr. Bishop. Hands off Grenada.
130. The same Barbados was among the first in the
region to recognize the young Fidel Castro and the Cuban
revolution. Barbados has never had a revolution. Barbados, with its well-earned reputation for stability of government and of economy, was never afraid to put into
practice its declared adherence to the principle of selfdetermination of peoples. It was the same Barbados which
encouraged countries inside and outside the Caribbean to
give Maurice Bishop a chance to establish a better regime
for his people. The one condition was that he shoufd, in
good time, institute a system of popular elections. When,
to the expressed disappointment of Barbados, Mr. Bishop
failed to meet that condition in good time, Barbados
nevertheless refused to desert Grenada, refused to allow
discrimination against Grenada in matters of regional economic aid. No presence of Cuban or other advisers
deterred Barbados from adherence to the cherished principles which have been enunciated in this statement.
131. This Chamber-the
Security Council-and
the
drama that is so often played out in it are creatures of law.
We are foregathered here, at least ostensibly, to discuss
issues of international law that touch and concern the
peace and security of the eastern Caribbean region. But
law and the order it seeks to create are an emanation from
the human mind and soul. Law, whether municipal or
international, does not exist in a vacuum. It does not subserve collectivities of inanimate automata; it is a social
tissue woven by human beings of flesh and blood around
themselves to preserve and enhance their humanity.

124. The tiny, poor and unarmed islands which form
what is sometimes known as the Windward and Leeward
Islands, recognizing their vulnerability, established the
OECS and made provision in their laws for mutual
defence and support. Along with some members of the
OECS, Barbados entered into a regional defence treaty.

132. The Barbados delegation has listened with fascination, at times with incredulity, to the debate in this
chamber. Have members not noticed how little is actually
said about Grenada? About the thousands of human
beings and the tragic events that have seared themselves
indelibly on their minds in letters of red?

125. If I may leave this aspect of my statement for a
while, I would-wish to deal with what one might appropriately call the historical aspect of the Barbados position.
Barbados has never wavered in its strict adherence to the
principles of self-determination,
territorial integrity and
respect for sovereignty. The record of my country in these
matters, as in the matter of human rights, stands proud for
all to read.

133. When the late Mr. Maurice Bishop, yet unknown to
international fame, fled the wrath of the Gairy regime,
where did he go? Not to Cuba, not to Nicaragua, not to
Guyana-he fled to Barbados, his limbs broken, his body

126. In this context, it must be said that my country, with
its free press and parliamentary government, responds to
13

’

bleeding. Barbados did not turn him away. Barbados gave.
him succour.

this spasm of terror. To leave nothing undone in the reign
of terror, a 96hour curfew was imposed. Men, women and
children were repeatedly warned that they would be shot
on sight if they appeared out of doors.

134. As I have said before, when his Government came
into power by a bloodless coup, Barbados was among the
first States to recognize his regime. And I repeat, we were
among the first in the Commonwealth Caribbean to establish relations with the Government of Cuba. Two nights
ago, we lived to hear ourselves referred to as lackeys and
hyenas. That nasty reference does not bother us unduly. In
the case of Cuba some years ago, we believed we were
acting on principle. Our actions following the tragic events
in Grenada were based no less on principle as we, in our
lights, perceive it.

140. Against this sombre background the following considerations became starkly relevant and urgent.
141. First. , the member States of the OECS were deeply
- concerned that this situation would continued to worsen,
that there would be further loss of life, personal injury and
a deterioration of public order as the military group in
control attempted to secure its position. Secondly, member
Governments considered that the subsequent imposition
of a draconian 96-hour curfew by the military group in
control was intended to allow them further to suppress the
population of Grenada, which had by numerous demonstrations shown its hostility to that group. Thirdly,
member Governments have also been greatly .concerned
that the extensive military buildup in Grenada over the last
few years had created a situation of disproportionate military strength between Grenada and other OECS countries. This military might in the hands of the present group
has posed a serious threat to the security of the OECS
countries and other neighbouring
States. Fourthly,
Member Governments considered it of the utmost urgency
that immediate steps should be taken to remove that
threat. Fifthly, under the provisions of article 8 of the
Treaty Establishing the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States, concerning defence and security in the subregion, member Governments of the organization decided to
take appropriate action.

135. In March 1979 we not only recognized the Bishop
Administration,
we also gave it technical assistance. We
were not entirely happy with the manner of seizing and
maintaining power, but we took no steps to destabilize his
Government. We respected the sovereignty of Grenada. We
were vocal in our concern about the delay in returning to a
parliamentary system. Yet, when lenders to the regional
Caribbean Development Bank sought to apply financial
and political pressure on Grenada, we resisted it. Again we
acted on principle as we perceived it. We went on record as
saying that we did not agree to countries using the regional
development bank as a pressure point against Grenada, or
any other Bank member, for that matter.
136. I began outlining the ancient and enduring links of
family and friendship that bind our peoples throughout
that beautiful archipelago of islands. You are therefore
now, I hope, more effectively sensitized as to the horrific
impact which the brutal murders have had upon our fraternal countries.

142. I now turn to the legal aspects.
143. The action taken by Jamaica, the eastern Caribbean
States and Barbados was perfectly legal. It was within the
letter and the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations.

137. Quite understandably this debate has tended to
focus on the late Mr. Bishop. But other died as well, and it
was not just their deaths but the inhuman manner in which
they died that shocked the fraternal peoples of the neighbouring islands. Let us never forget that Bishop was shot
at point-blank range, with his hands in the air, in an
unmistakable posture of surrender. He was executed without even the show of a trial-this after he had been set free
by a spontaneous surge of support from the masses, his
grass-roots supporters.

144. The eastern Caribbean States have placed their cooperation for economic, political and military purposes on
a sound legal basis. First, there is a treaty binding those
States. Some delegations have scoffingly referred to it as “a
so-called treaty”. Does this make it less of a treaty in
international law? Is a treaty a treaty only when it is concluded between certain Powers? Are we to ignore pacts
and agreements made for mutual defence and support
among small States because they are neither NATO nor
Warsaw Pact countries?

138. Also murdered when totally unable to defend themselves were the Foreign Minister, Mr. Unison Whiteman,
who but a few days ago addressed the General Assembly
at the 32nd meeting of its thirty-eighth session; the Minister of Housing, Mr. Norris Bain, the former President of
the Bank of Grenada and the Grenada Workers Union,
the late Mr. Vincent Noel; and Fitzroy Bain, the President
of the Agricultural and General Workers Union. Last, but
in the scale of tragedy and brutality not least, was the late
Jacquline Creft. She was bludgeoned to death.

145. Under the treaty a defence and security committee
has been established. It consists of the ministers responsible for defence and security or other ministers or plenipotentiaries designated by heads of Government of member
States. The leaders of these States further provided and
mutually agreed that the defence and security committee
shall have responsibility for coordinating
the efforts of
member States for collective defence and the preservation
of peace and security against external aggression and for
the development of closer ties among the member States of
the organization in matters of external defence and security, including measures to combat the activities of mercenaries operating with or without the support of internal or
national elements in the exercise of the inherent right of

139. It was Danton, who commented bitterly that, like
Saturn, the French revolution he did so much to create
was devouring its children. Danton spoke metaphorically.
In Grenada it was actually happening. According to
reports reaching us, children were the targets of bullets in
14

individual or collective self-defence recognized by Article
51 of the Charter of the United Nations.
146. As I stated earlier, there existed the horror of the
brutal slaughter, the draconian 96-hour curfew by the military group in control. There was in the OECS an awareness that the extensive military buildup in Grenada over
the last four years had created a situation of disproportionate military strength between Grenada and the other
OECS member countries. This military might in the hands
of a group that had so brutally murdered so many ministers of government and some private citizens as well was
perceived to be a serious threat to the security of the OECS
member countries and other neighbouring States. Therefore member Governments of the OECS considered the
matter to be of the utmost urgency and took the initiative
to set in train immediate steps which would remove this
threat with minimum delay and loss of life. Reports coming out of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, separated
from Grenada by the stepping-stones of islets, told of over
50 people bearing arms entering Saint Vincent from Grenada. These people had to be disarmed.
147. The second aspect of legality is the regional defence
pact to which I referred earlier and by which Barbados
considers itself bound.
!148. I turn now to the third aspect of legality. Let it not
be forgotten that it was the Governor-General of Grenada,
!the sole link of authority with the massacred Bishop
#Government, who formally called on the members of the
OECS to come to the aid of his country. Under Section 57
of the Grenada Constitution Order 1973, the GovernorGeneral of that country assumes full executive authority
for the administration of the State in the absence of a
prime minister and parliament. Prime Minister Bishop and
four of his ministers had been killed. Those ministers who
Chad not been killed had resigned.
149. Finally there is another and bitter aspect of the
tragedy that is Grenada. This debate is not about Grenada
and the human beings who have still to live out their lives
there. What concrete suggestions have been made to ameliorate the desperate situation there? Only hollow words.
Some’ have come here to put their respective political cases
as heatedly and emotionally as they can. Barbados, Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Saint Christopher and Nevis,
Saint Lucia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and the
rest of us are still neighbours and friends of Grenada.
After we rise tonight the problem of these people will still
be out there in the eastern Caribbean in all its grave
dimensions.
,150. The, island inhabitants of the Caribbean must and
will continue to live as brothers and sisters, bearing one
another’s burdens as best we can. We, as sister islands,
have to help Grenada, to carry it on our backs if necessary.
Little that has been said and done here makes our task any
easier.

152. Mr. de FIGUEIREDO
(Angola): Mr. President,
allow me to pay tribute to all those around the world, and
in Grenada in particular, who are defending the right of
nations to independence and independent choices and who
are laying down their lives to defend freedom.
153. The armed might of a super-Power-a member of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and one of the
strongest countries in the world in terms of military;political, economic and technological strength-has invaded in
full force a small Caribbean island, small and defenceless,
but also independent and sovereign and due the respect to
its sovereignty and territorial integrity which its status
demands in international law and under the Charter of the
United Nations.
154. The world has seldom seen, at least in recent .history, such an uncalled for massive military action, on such
a vast scale, against such a small target in such unjustified
circumstances. This military invasion violates not one but
many of the provisions of the Charter. This invasion
proves the point which many of the small third world
countries have made time and time again-that none of us
are ever secure against acts of imperialism, and certainly
not in an area where the United States has a history of
political interference and military intervention, so ably
chronicled by the representative of Nicaragua in his statement two days ago.
155. Radio broadcasts monitored in the United States
since last week showed no threat emanating from the
purely internal and domestic event that took place in
Grenada. Dr. Modica, rector of the college ,where the
United States students and students from 23 other countries were registered, stated that the students were never in
danger. The excuse for the invasion is as. pathetic as the
action itself is illegal.
156. The invasion is an attack on law and order in the
Caribbean. Its repercussions will not be limited to the eastern Caribbean, to Central America, or to Latin America
The implications are being recorded far and wide, not least
of all in southern Africa, a region where the United States
has always supported, overtly and covertly, the racist
minority regime in Pretoria and its illegal occupation of
Namibia and parts of southern Angola. Where the United
States cannot use surrogate forces, it dispatches its own
armed forces. Indeed, it is tragic that in this latest venture a
group of non-aligned countries have lent themselves to the
nefarious designs of the United States, attempting to
provide-but
failing to do so-a hint of legality for the
invasion of a non-aligned neighbour. Even this attempt at
legality fails in view of the fact that the United States fleet
moved towards Grena.da on Thursday, before tbe socalled request for assistance from the OECS.
157. We, the non-aligned nations, must take a firm,
united stand against the United States invasion of Grenada. We must condemn the invasion; we must show full
solidarity and support for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Grenada, and we must call for the immediate
withdrawal of United States forces from that island.

15 1; The PRESIDENT
(interpefation from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Angola. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
~ statement.

(

15

158. When we talk of imperialism, we are not referring to
an event in the distant past. When we talk of colonialism,
we are not referring to an institution long dead and gone.
What happened two days ago to the people of Grenada
shows that imperialism is alive and well and is being
launched from the shores of the United States.

tions to all problems and for desisting from all actions which
are in contravention of the Charter and international law.
167. It is in this very spirit that my delegation is constrained to state that the great Power in question gave no
chance to diplomacy but instead resorted to force when all
avenues of negotiation were still open. We cannot’ but
deeply deplore this approach to the solution of intemational problems.

159. I wonder how many had an opportunity to monitor
the radio orders being given to the people of Grenada by
the invading forces. The entire action is one of invasion,
occupation and control. The message is that unless sovereign nations comply with the dictates of imperialism, they
will be subjected to military and other reprisals. Well, we
have received that message .loud and clear. We reject the
message and we condemn the’ sender.

168. There can be no political or moral justification for
such a premeditated and unprovoked act of aggression.
Grenada, a small and peaceful country and a member of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, became the victim of an act of aggression led by one of the most powerful
members of the Organization, the United States of America. Beyond the violation of international law, this aspect
of the invasion is also alarming for all of us.

160. And our message to each other, as non-aligned
nations, should be the caveat: Hodie mihi, eras tibi-today
me; tomorrow you.

169. The leaders of Grenada were making efforts to
build a society based on social justice, really equal opportunities and a just distribution of material wealth. The
internal contradictions arising in the course of these efforts
falls solely to the domestic jurisdiction of Grenada. Only
the people of Grenada have the right to decide. What are
the perspectives of those countries making efforts in the
interests of their people, using concepts of development
other than those used by economically more developed
countries?

161. The struggle continues; victory is assured!
162. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representatke of Hungary. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
163. Mr. HOLLAI (Hungary): Mr. President, allow me
first of all to express my delegation’s appreciation to you
and to the other members of the Security Council for the
opportunity extended to us to speak on this important
issue before the Council.

170. A draft resolution was presented by the delegations
of Guyana and Nicaragua [S/16077) strongly condemning
the armed invasion of Grenada and calling for the immediate withdrawal of the invading troops. My delegation
fully shares the ideas contained in the draft resolution
because they correctly reflect the reactions and sentiments
of the overwhelming majority of the international community and are in conformity with an authorized statement of
the Hungarian Telegraphic Agency issued from my capital, Budapest, on 26 October, on the invasion of Grenada,
which stated the following:

164. -The Security Council is meeting at a time when the
deterioration of the international situation is a matter of
grave concern for most of us. The latest events in the
Caribbean region have further heightened the tension, and
that is the main reason why my delegation found it necessary to state its views in a very brief statement on the
subjed before the Council.
165. On 25 October the military forces of the United
States, with the symbolic participation of some eastern
Caribbean States, invaded the small island nation of Grenada. The pretext for the invasion was the “intention to
settle” the internal disorder in Grenada which allegedly
threatened the security of the United States citizens in
Grenada as well as the security of the neighbouring States.

“The Hungarian People’s Republic resolutely condemns the aggression against Grenada and demands,
together with other peace-loving countries and peoples
of the world, the immediate withdraual of the invading
troops. The Hungarian people is in solidarity with the
people of Grenada and sincerely hopes that it will be
able to regain control of its own destiny as soon as
possible.”

166. My delegation finds the reference to the security
treaty as a legal basis and all the attempts at justification
presented here by some of the participants in the invasion
totally unacceptable. Facts remain facts. The invasion of
Grenada is an act of aggression and a violation of, the
norms of international law and of the Charter of the
United Nations. There can be no legal basis for such an
action. In fact, there will be no international law if such
acts continue to happen in the future. For international
relations should be based on principles respected by all
States. Respect for the Charter is an obligation of all
Member States. A permanent member of the Security Council has a special responsibility ‘for maintaining international peace and security, for trying to find peaceful solu-

171. The PRESIDENT
(inrerprerazion from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Sao Tome and Principe. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
172. Mr. CASSANDRA (Sao Tome and Principe): Mr.
President, I take this opportunity to congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October. In the turbulent days ahead you
will have a diff~cuit ,task to perform, but I am quite sure
that with your .diplomatic skills you will be able to meet
this challenge. I would also like to take the opportunity to
16

178. This state of affairs is totally unacceptable to my
Government. The use or threat of use of force or the use
of violence can never be a substitute for diplomacy. Violence and armed intervention will give to its perpetrators
a temporary victory only. Any form of government has
to be based on the consent of the people. The people of
Grenada are entitled to decide their own form of
government and freely to determine their own political,
economic and social system without outside intervention, coercion or threat.

congratulate your predecessor, Mr. Sinclair of Guyana, for
the way in which he conducted the Council’s deliberations
last month.
173.. The events taking place in Grenada are indeed very
disturbing. From what we have learned through the news
media and from what we have heard during the debate in
the Council Chamber, it would appear that diplomacy, as
such, is gradually ceasing to exist. This trend in the conduct of foreign affairs is a phenomenon which is assuming
alarming proportions, since one never knows which country will be the next,

179. It was with sorrow and a deep senseof frustration
that we learned of the death of Prime Minister Maurice
Bishop and some of his colleagues in the cabinet. It is
our firm belief that human -life, is too precious to be
wasted in internal squabbles provoked by ambition and
personality conflicts. At the time we deplored these ugly
events and prayed for a sane and political solution of the
problem. We fail to see the need for an invasion. We fail
to see the need for further bloodshed.

174. Small and defenceless countries like Sao Tome
and Principe can only exist if protected by international
law; It is based on this fear that I am addressing the
Council today, since we share many similarities with
Grenada. We were always under the assumption that a
few cardinal rules on international law were norms generally accepted by the vast majority of United Nations
Member States.

180. For all these reasons, my Government condemns
the brutal armed invasion of Grenada, which constitutes a
tlagrant violation of international flaw and of the sovereignty and the independence of Grenada.

175. Two,of these norms, simply stated, say that a country has the right to choose the form .of government it
wishes. to live under, and that its borders are inviolable.
The principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of
another country and the inviolability of its borders are
probably the cornerstone of the Organization. In fact,
Article 2. paragraph 4, of the Charter states:

181. We urge the Council to take steps to stop the invasion of that country and to ensure the immediate withdrawal of the invading forces. We are convinced that if the
Council does not act to stop this flagrant violation of the
Charter of the United Nations, we will be setting a bad
precedent. We will be creating a climate of international
insecurity that will eventually engulf not only a small country like Sao Tome and Principe, but strike at the very
fabric of international relations.

“All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the tenitorial integrity or political independence of any State, or in
any other manner inconsistent with the Purposes of the
United Nations.”
Furthermore, article 21 of the charter of the Organiza$ion of American States is clear. It states:

182. In conclusion, I would like to raise this question: is
it true that “when history cannot be written with a pen,
must it be written with a gun?’

“The American States bind themselves in their international relations not to have recourse to the use of
force, except in the case of self-defence, in accordance
.. with existing treaties or in fulfilment thereof,”

183. The PRESIDENT
(intupreetationfr-om At-a&c): The
next speaker is the representative of Bulgaria. 1 invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to ‘make his
statement.

176. The events of the last few days in Grenada and the
pattern of violence in Central America are indeed alarming. It means that if one does not like the Government next
door or elsewhere. one is justified to use force in the name
of “law and order”, “restoration of democracy”, “protec‘tion of one’s nationals”. “menace from international
;thugs”, and so forth. if this pattern is not stopped, we will
‘be drifting toward interntitional anarchy and entering a
,bIind alley where all will be losers and where we will even
lose our most precious commodity, human value.

184. Mr. TSVETKOV

(Bulgaria) (interprptafion from
is now meeting in urgent
session to consider an act of armed aggression which has
practical as well as moral implications. It is a new act of
armed aggression by the United States, this time against
the young Republic of Grenada. It has shown the world
that without the slightest doubt American imperialism is
now committing an act of direct military interference on a
large scale against a sovereign, independent State in the
Caribbean and is thereby trampling underfoot, in the most
brutal manner, the fundamental freedoms and rights of its
people.

French): The Security Council

‘177. In violation of the Charter of the United Nations
and the charter of the Organization of American States,.
a military expeditionary force of the United States of
America, supported by Antigua and Barbuda, Barba,dos, Dominica, Jamaica, Saint Vincent and the Grenai&es,
and Saint Lucia. has invaded the sovereign
(territory of Grenada invoking unacceptable arguments.

185. The international community is already aware of
the tragic facts. The latest information confirms that tighting is continuing in Grenada and makes mention of the
resistance against the aggressors. Members of the civilian
population have been killed, including several Cuban spei:

ity with Grenada in its just struggle in defence of its
sovereignty and independence.”

‘cialists there to lend their fraternal assistance to the people
of Grenada. Once again American Marines are using force
against a people and destroying
its governmental
institutions.

192. The PRESIDENT
(interpretafionfiom
Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of German Democratic
Republic. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
an’d to make his statement.

186. The open armed aggression, planned and prepared
in advance a long time ago, by the United States against
Grenada constitutes a flagrant violation of the fundamental norms and principles of international law- and the Charter of the United Nations. This action by the United States
against Grenada is a further challenge to the international
community and the United Nations.

193. Mr. OTT (German Democratic Republic): First of
all, I should like to thank you, Mr. President, and the other
members of the Security Council, for giving me this opportunity to explain my country’s position on the very important question now under consideration.

187. The arguments arbitrarily invented by the American
side to justify this act of ‘,aggression are absolutely
unfounded. Thus, there is only one logical explanation,
namely, that the policy followed by Grenada and its people’s choice of the way to build its future are not to the
liking of American imperialism. It is clear that the United
,States decided to impose its neo-colonialist will on the
people of Grenada whatever the cost, despite the heroic
resistance to the invaders and the profound sense of outrage felt by the international communit

194. The German Democratic Republic joins all those
who most resolutely condemn the predatory and unscrup
ulous attack of the United States and the mercenaries recruited by it on a sovereign, non-aligned State in the
Caribbean. This act of piracy is a gross violation of the
Charter of the United Nations and all the norms regulating
civilized intergovernmental
relations. We therefore welcome the fact that the Security Council, pursuant to its
mandate, has convened without delay to consider the existing extremely critical situation. It is a matter ‘of great
urgency to counter this latest onslaught of the United
States on world peace and security with effective measures
by the United Nations and to put an end to the outdated
policy of military aggression, colonial oppression and
blackmail.

188. Of course, this is not the first time that we have
witnessed such actions by American imperialism directed
against peoples and Governments, whether in Asia, Africa
or Latin America. The region of Central America and the
Caribbean has for a long time been the object of massive
acts of armed provocation by the United States. The peoples of Cuba, Nicaragua, Grenada and other countries in
the region are well aware of this reality. There is absolutely
no doubt that this unacceptable pressure on those countries and the brutal interference in their internal affairs are
designed to stifle progressive change, to hamper social progress and to change the substance of their policy.

195. The aggression against Grenada has again unmasked the overtly militaristic and presumptuous character of present United States policy, which has recourse to
the use of its military machinery wherever it seeks to
achieve its aims of domination, to force its dictates upon
other countries and peoples and to impress its mark of
neo-colonialism on the developing countries. This military
invasion of the United States into Grenada is part of the
global policy of confrontation
and super-armament
of
United States imperialism, which endangers peace and
international security to the very utmost; This revival of
the ill-famed gunboat policy aimed against the social progress and self-determination of peoples in all regions of the
globe, whether in the Caribbean, in Central America, in
the Middle East, in the Indian Ocean or in Europe; using
the nuclear big stick, must be brought to a halt. This is the
precondition for preventing the unimaginable escalation of
tensions to a nuclear holocaust. While aircraft carriers
from the United States-equipped,
as is known, &h
nuclear weapons-are
constantly cruising in the Caribbean and in other regions, preparations for the deployment of new American medium-range nuclear weapons in
Europe are in full swing. Do not the peoples have to expect
that those who make use of such aircraft carriers to
employ conventional weapons aiainst a country such as :
Grenada will one day make use of nuclear weapons
against other States under the flimsy pretext of vital
interests?

189. The “big stick” policy practised by the United
States against countries and peoples in this region and
elsewhere is the fundamental cause of the creation of tension in international relations and of the provocation of
conthcts which truly threaten international peace and security. At the present time this is noted once again by the
international community, which raises its voice in protest
against Washington’s
militaristic policy.
190. The Security Council, the United Nations organ
which under the Charter is responsible for the maintenance of international peace and security, must categorically condemn this act of aggression against Grenada and
take all the ‘appropriate urgent measures to ensure the
immediate cessation of this act of aggression and the withdrawal of the foreign invasion troops.
191. Yesterday, the following statement
the Bulgarian Telegraph Agency:.

was issued by

“The People’s Republic of Bulgaria and Bulgarian
public opinion strongly condemn the United States
aggression against the peace-loving people of Grenada
and call for the immediate cessation of this aggression
and the ‘withdrawal of foreign troops from that country,
The Bulgarian people express their unreserved solidar-

196. One important lesson to draw from the invasion of
Grenada by the thirty-eighth
session of ‘the General
Assembly, therefore, should be the need to adopt effective
18

moiuriuna
tu aveti tlje mrcat of a nuclear war and to
return to commonsense in international relations.

leagues in the Security Council what our common aim
should be and how we can contribute to bring it about.

197. The United States is fully responsible for the military action of force against the independent, non-aligned
country of Grenada and for the consequences of that
action. That action is aimed at reversing the revolutionary
process in Grenada and at subjugating that country to the
neocolonialist rule of the United States. This shows what
we must understand by democracy, freedom and human
rights in the United States manner and how Washington
views peace-keeping operations for guaranteeing the selfdetermination and sovereignty of countries such as Grenada and Lebanon. What region and what country in the
world would not be of vital interest to those quarters
today? Does that not mean that every State that permits
citizens of the United States to study at its universities or to
stay for other reasons in its territory has to expect an
armed aggression under the pretext of the protection of
those citizens should it happen to fit into the globalstrategic plans of the United States Administration? The
aggression against Grenada demonstrates with what dangerous consequences the peoples and States must reckon if
the United States succeeds in achieving global military
superiority.

202. I suggest that in accordance with the vast majority
of the speeches we have heard and on the basis of the
Charter our common aim should be the emergence of a
constitutional Grenadian Government freely elected by
the Grenadian people. I am talking, of course, about a real
democratic Government based on the exercise of selfdetermination by the Grenadian people. This is a very
different thing from the regime-it
did not call itself a
Government-which
was holding hostage the people of
Grenada and potentially some other residents in the
island. It is evident that in the murky situation created by
the murder of the Prime Minister and other cabinet ministers of the Grenadian Government there was an atmosphere of uncertainty and even terror in the island. Lives,
liberty and self-determination were at risk. Indeed, it seems
possible that Mr. Bishop was assassinated because he and
some of his colleagues were moving-not
before time, I
may add-in the direction of holding elections. As a great
British historian, Lord Acton, repeatedly stressed, political assassination is the great crime against liberty.
203. Given this situation, it is not surprising that the
terror in the island produced a sense of fear in the region.
The Prime Minister of Dominica, who is also the Chairperson of the OECS told us, in measured and eloquent terms,
that all the existing Governments of that organization
were afraid. They were afraid, she said, that, “this situation would continue to worsen, that there would be further
loss of life, personal injury and a general deterioration of
public order” [see 2489th meeting, paru. 6-j. Her Government and others considered that the military group in control intended, by imposing a draconian curfew “to
suppress further the population of Grenada, which had
shown by numerous demonstrations their hostility to this
group” [ibid, para. 7J

198. We share the deep concern expressed in this regard
by preceding speakers from non-aligned countries during
this debate, and we most resolutely support the demands
for an immediate cessation of the invasion and for the
withdrawal of United States troops, together with its foreign mercenaries, from Grenada.
199. Before concluding, I wish to offer to the peoples of
Grenada and Cuba the heartfelt condolences of the people
of the German Democratic Republic on the occasion of
the violent deaths of their compatriots who became victims
of this barbarous aggression.

204. The splendid and moving speeches by the representatives of the OECS and of Jamaica and Barbados have
reinforced these points. These speeches have, I think, had a
profound effect on those delegations which have not
hitherto been closely informed about the situation in the
eastern Caribbean.

200. Sir John THOMSON
(United Kingdom): My delegation has already offered to you, Mr. President, our congratulations and our thanks to your predecessor, Mr.
Sinclair, for his tireless and effective conduct of the presidency of the Council. However, I cannot resist adding my
personal respects to you, Sir, and my admiration-for the
way in which you have conducted affairs.

205. Nor is it surprising that foreign Governments were
concerned about the safety of their nationals in Grenada.
My Government was one of those. We took what we considered were appropriate steps: we sent a British diplomat
to Grenada to investigate the situation, and, more or less
simultaneously, we directed a British frigate, HMS Antrim,
to proceed to the vicinity of Grenada on a contingency
basis in case the situation should deteriorate to the point at
which British nationals had to be evacuated from Grenada
under difficult circumstances. We were cautious and did
not go beyond these contingency preparations.

201. We began this debate at a late hour on Tuesday in
response to an immediate request from Nicaragua. We
have heard many speeches, some of them highly emotional, about the situation in Grenada. By common consent that -situation was serious. After all, the Prime
Minister had just been murdered, and the population were
confined to their homes at’gunpoint. But apart from the
fact that all delegations agree on the serious situation that
had arisen in the island, we have heard sharp disagreements about the actions taken to meet it. My Government
made it plain in an emergency debate in the House of
Commons that it had serious doubts about some of those
actions. Our position is on record, and I will not repeat
today everything that was said at greater length in London
yesterday. What I aim to do is to consider with my col-

206. Other Governments were, iike mine, highly concerned for the safety of their nationals. Members of the
Security Council will be familiar, for example, with the
statements on this point, made through the public media,
19

by the President of the United States and the Prime Minister of Dominica.

cratic Governments, freely elected and representing people
who enjoy liberties that have been suppressed in many
other countries.

207. We must all be grateful that the Governor-General,
a distinguished Grenadian citizen and the only remaining
constitutional authority in the island, has survived the
bloody events of recent days. He will, we assume, now
have to play his constitutional role as a focus for the reestablishment of constitutional government ,in Grenada.

214. If on occasion our judgements differ, we do not
doubt their sincerity or that their motives were honourable.
Their stated objective is to restore democratic and constitutional government to the island. That is an objective we
fully share. I need hardly say that my delegation’s respect
for all the members of CARICOM
is the same. In this
particular instance we agree with some more than with
others, but I repeat that we attach equal importance to the
views of all the honourable, independent and democratic
members of the Commonwealth in the Caribbean.

208. I do not pretend to give here a full account of all the
events of recent days. But I hope I have said enough to
illustrate that internal events in Grenada had created a
situation which led to terror in the island and fear in the
region and which gave legitimate grounds for concern to
many Governments, especially those with nationals on the
island. There was thus a tense and difficult situation.

215. Against this background it will be no surprise that
my Government cannot go along with a draft resolution
which does not take adequate account of the concerns
which have motivated the OECS, Jamaica, Barbados and
the United States. But, as I said at the outset, it should be
,the aim of the Security Council to consider ways in which
our common’aim of the emergence of constitutional Grenadian government, freely elected by the Grenadian people,
can be promoted. It is not for us to tell the Grenadian
people how to run their affairs. But I believe we can legitimately give encouragement to the forces of constitutionality and to the right of self-determination.
That is the
message which my delegation would like to see go out
from this debate.

209. Meetings were held of the OECS and of CARICOM.
This latter body comprises all the members of the
---OECS, plus six other Caribbean countries. There was, it
seems, a debate and a legitimate difference of opinion
about what steps to take regionally to deal with what was
evidently becoming a regional problem. These differences
of opinion have been reflected in the interventions made in
this debate.
210. Approaches were made to my Government as to
what action we would be willing to take in conjunction
with certain Caribbean countries. It is no secret that we
urged on all those who consulted us prudence and caution.
Other views prevailed. My Government took no part in
the military operation which has been carried out in Grenada. It is very plain that my Government did not support
those operations and that we wished a different course of
action to be followed. But that is not to say that we did not
consider the situation grave, risky and difficult. We can
understand the concerns of those who took action. We are
glad that several other speakers in this debate have
expressed similar understanding.

216. Vituperation and unmeasured rhetoric will not get
us anywhere. What we need now is common sense and a
respect for democratic decencies. My Government knows
that these are qualities which preeminently characterize
the members of the Commonwealth.
We are confident
that the people of Grenada, when enabled once again to
participate in free and fair elections, will themselves display these qualities.
217. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of India. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

211. We regret that this understanding is not reflected in
the draft resolution [S/16077/&~
13 before us. Of course,
emotions run high and some of the speeches which have
been made in support of the draft resolution were, to say
the least, highly charged.

218. Mr. KRISHNAN
(India): I begin, Sir, by reiterating
my congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
and the manner in which you have been conducting the
proceedings of the Council. I also thank you and, through
you, the other Council members for permitting me to
address the Council on this subject.

212. Reputation is important in international as well as
in domestic politics. The Governments which took action
in Grenada are of the highest reputation. The suggestion
that the United States of America is a foe to liberty and
democracy, as some speakers have allowed themselves to
say, is simply ridiculous. It is a pity that our debates should
be sullied by such untruths. I must say that I resent such
statements.

219. I should like to begin by reading into the records of
the Security Council the text of the statement issued by the
Government of India yesterday, 26 October:
[The speaker read the text of the annex to documents
S/16078.]

213. Similarly, I must draw the attention of the Council
to the high reputation of the Caribbean States involved in
the Grenada operation. I am proud to acknowledge them
as fellow members of the Commonwealth.
In a world
where all too often
we
are
faced
with
mbvements,
cuups
.
and regimes whrch act against liberty and in contravention
of the inherent right of self-determination, theseare demo-

220. Recent developments in Grenada and the invasion
of that country have aroused widespread concern and
indignation all over the world. Non-aligned countries in
particular are profoundly affected and concerned ‘by these
developments and the serious implications
and far20

reaching consequences of this military action against an
independent and sovereign State Member of the United
Nations, member of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and member of the Commonwealth.
221. The Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries has
always resolutely condemned the use or threat of use of
force as well as intervention or interference in the internal
affairs of sovereign States. It has always reaffirmed the
right of all countries to preserve their independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity and the right of their peoples to choose their own political, economic and social
systems and pursue their own development free from any
external interference or pressures. The Charter of the
United Nations provides the basic framework for the conduct of States in their relations with one another. The
Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Cooperation
among States in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations’ and
the Declaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention in
the Domestic Affairs of States and the Protection of Their
Independence and Sovereignty3 provide additional guidelines derived from the purposes and principles of the Charter. Armed intervention, such as that which has now
overtaken the hapless and helpless people of Grenada, is a
clear violation of these norms of behaviour and should be
firmly rejected as impermissible and unacceptable.

nomic pressures and efforts at destabilisation
against it.” [S/26035, para. 71.1

directed

225. It is imperative that the invasion of Grenada be
brought to an end without further delay, that all foreign
forces be withdrawn immediately from that island and that
all intervention and interference in the internal affairs of
that country be ended, so that the people of Grenada can
exercise their .inalienable right freely to determine their
own future.
226. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
227. Mr. GOLOB (Yugoslavia): Once again my delegation is addressing the Security Council to pledge ourselves
to the defence of peace and to plead for respect for the
basic principles of the Charter of the United Nations, the
principles of non-interference and non-intervention, the
prohibition of the use of force in international relations
and the obligation to resolve all disputes peacefully. We
feel that too little responsibility is shown in seeing that
these principles are implemented. If we are to avoid
anarchy and disaster we shall have to show more responsibility and more respect for the rights of others.

222. The developments in Grenada have, therefore,
caused deep disquiet and grave concern among the nonaligned countries. If immediate remedial action is not
taken, the consequences for international peace and security could be dangerous and the credibility of the United
Nations will be seriously impaired.

228. The already tense international situation is deteriorating further. Armed force is being applied ever more
frequently, and negotiations as the only viable way of
resolving problems are being ever more disregarded. All
too frequently the stronger, using military force, intervene
in the affairs of the weaker, imposing their will in order to
promote their so-called vital interests and to strengthen
their hand in bloc rivalry.

223. I should like to recall that the Seventh Conference
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi from 7 to 12 March 1983,
declared:

229. We feel we have to reject resolutely any use of force,
interference, intervention and the suppression of the rights
of peoples freely to decide on the manner of their development. We cannot accept this becoming a common practice
in international behaviour. Assaults against sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence should be
condemned wherever they occur.

“The Heads of State or Government condemned the
covert and overt actions and the political and economic
pressures being exerted by imperialist forces against
Grenada. Mindful of the adverse effects of such pressures on economic development efforts, they expressed
support for the inalienable right of the Government and
people of Grenada to pursue their own political, economic and social process free from all forms of external
pressures and threats. The Heads of State or Govemment expressed support for the Government and people
of Grenada and called on all countries to respect Grenada’s independence and sovereignty.” [S/15675 and

230. The recently concluded general debate in the General Assembly was nearly unanimous in its assessment of
the overwhelming gravity of the present international
situation and in its demand for a political solution to the
numerous hotbeds of crises and for the strengthening of
international peace and security. The principles of the
Charter have been unanimously supported as the basis for
such solutions.

Corr.1 and 2, sect. I, para. 253.1

224. I should also like to recall that the recent Meeting of
Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Heads of Delegations of
the Non-Aligned Countries to the General Assembly at its
thirty-eighth session, held in New York from 4 to 7 October, stated in its final communiqut:

231. In our view, every people has an inalienable right to
decide on its internal social and political system and its
way of life. We feel it is the duty of all others to respect
such sovereign decisions whether they like it or not. The
right to decide one’s own destiny is inalienable and is the
highest principle in international
relations, a principle
which constitutes the basic pre,condition for security and
international co-operation,

“The Meeting reaffirmed solidarity with the Government of Grenada in its efforts to preserve its sovereignty
and territorial integrity in the face of political and eco21

232. Yugoslavia has consistently opposed, and will continue to oppose, any encroachment upon freedom, any
violation of sovereignty, territorial integrity and the independence of countries. We feel that there is not and that’
there cannot be any justification for intervention, either
military or political, ideological or economic.

on the disturbing events that took place on 25 October in
Grenada and which are now the main focus of the intemational scene.
240.. Sir, on behalf pf the delegation of Guinea-Bissau
and on my own personal behalf, I should like to say how
happy we are at seeing you preside over the work of the
Council. We are convinced that with your great ability and
your well-recognized qualities as a diplomat we shall arrive
at successful results. I should also like to thank and congratulate Mr. Sinclair of Guyana for the brilliant manner
in which he presided over the work of the Council during
the. month of September.

233. The Caribbean and the region of Central America is
faced with deep social, economic and political problems.
Those problems should be left to the peoples of that region
to resolve, respecting the principle that every people
should be able to choose the path of its own development.
That basic principle is not being observed and there is a
grave and growing crisis in the region.

241. In view of the tragic situation in Grenada since the
foreign military invasion of 25, October, which once again
endangers peace and security, already so fragile, my delegation would like to recall the Declaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention and Interference in the Internal
Affairs of States, adopted by the General Assembly in
resolution 36/103 in December 1981. That Declaration
makes crystal clear, in unambiguous language, the duties
flowing from the principle of non-interference and nonintervention.

234. This time Grenada and the people of Grenada are
the victim of an armed intervention. This time again the
victim is a non-aligned country. In the case of the invasion
of Grenada, as in all previous instances, we see no possible
justification for such an act.
235. At this point I should like to recall that, in its statement of 26 October, the Government of Yugoslavia
pointed out that it received the news of the armed intervention in Grenada with great concern. The statiment says
that the invasion by the armed forces of the United States
and some Caribbean countries is an act unacceptable in
international relations, contrary to, the ,principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and the principles of respect
for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States, non-interference in their internal affairs and the
right of peoples to a free choice of the manner of their
development. The statement of my Government further
says that the tragic death of Prime Minister Maurice
Bishop, which we deeply regret, and the internal upheavals
caused thereby, or any other reason, cannot be the pretext
for foreign-especially
military-intervention
and the violation of the independence of a sovereign and non-aligned
country, which in the present exacerbated international
situation can have serious consequences for peace and
security in the region and beyond.

242.

“to refrain in their international relations from the
threat or use of force in any form whatsoever to violate
the existing internationally
recognized boundaries of
another State, to disrupt the political, social or economic order of other States, to overthrow or change the
political system of another State or its Government, to
cause tension between or among States or to deprive
peoples of their national identity or cultural heritage”.
243.

Secondly, it is the duty of a State

“to refrain from armed intervention, subversion, military occupation or any other form of intervention and
interference, overt or covert, directed at another State
or group of States, or any act of military, political or
economic interference in the internal affairs of another
State, including acts of reprisal involving the use of
force”.

236. The statement of my Government concluded that,
proceeding from the known principles of its foreign policy,
the Government of Yugoslavia calls for an urgent cessation of the foreign intervention and for the withdrawal of
all foreign troops from Grenada, in order to enable its
people to decide its own destiny, undisturbed and without
outside pressures.
._
237. In conclusion, I should like to thank the Security
Council for giving me the opportunity to express the views
of my Government.

First, it is the duty of States

244.

Thirdly,

it is the duty of a State

“to refrain from any action or attempt in whatever
form or under whatever pretext to destabilize or to
undermine the stability of another State or any of its
institutions”.

238. The PRESIDENT
(in!erpreta$o@ f@m,Ap7bic);,The
next speaker is the “representative of. Guinea-Bissau. I
invite him to take a-place at the Council,table and to make
his statement.
\
,.
. /I.
,/

245. My country, Guinea-Bissau, a member of the Movement of.Non-Aligned Countries, is faithful to these princi’ pies’ and believes that any foreign aggression against a
sovereign State is a flagrant violation of international
norms and shows complete disregard of Article 2, paragraph 4 of the Charter of the United Nations.

239. Mr, SEMEDO (Guinea-Bissau) (inteipretutionfiom
French): Mr. President, I should like to begin by thanking
you for permitting me, as the representative of a”smaIl
State, to speak here before the Council to state our views

.246. ‘The ‘tragic’ developments that have brought such
bloodshed to the sovereign State of Grenada through
aggression and occupation by foreign forces, which can in
22

.

.

.

.

no circumstances ‘be justified, have serious consequences i attack‘ to topple whatever would be left of the revolutionfor the maintenance of international peace tind security+‘.-,- ary order in that country.
We believe that this foreign intervention is a serious and
dangerous development and that such military action leads.- 254: ‘What are at stake now are some of the most vital
principles constituting the backbone of international relato the development of new hotbeds of tension and greater.
tions, namely, those of non-interference and noninstability in the Caribbean region.
: ‘: intervention
in the internal affairs of States, the
247. The Republic of Guinea-Bissau strongly. condemns ,‘. inadmissibility of the use or threat of use of force in interthe act of aggression committed against Grenada and calls _ national relations, respect for the sovereignty, territorial
for the immediate cessation.of this intervention and the :. integrity-and independence of States, respect for the right
unconditional withdrawal of all foreign forces froni that ‘. of all nations,to choose their own socio-economiti systems,
-country. In this spirit of solidarity the delegation of : peaceful coexistence among nations, the inviolability of the
Guinea-Bissau fully supports the draft resolution sport-~ internationally recognized frontiers of States, and so on.
sored by Guyana, Nicaragua and Zimbabwe.
-_
i55. United States officials, in a vain attempt to justify
248. In conclusion, I should like to express the sympaihy ‘:, their .brutal and cowardly action against the people of
and the solidarity of the Government and the people of the ., Grenada, have advanced a few flimsy arguments, which I
should like to discuss here.
Republic of Guinea-Bissau to the people cif Grenada id‘
.^
this, time of trial.
256. First, they said that the invasion of Grenada was
necessary in order to protect the lives of some 1,000 Ameri.249. The PRESIDENT
(inrerprerazion fi& Arabic): ihe
can citizens. Was it not the President of the United States
next speaker is the representative of Afghanistan. I invite.
him to take a place at the Council table and tc?make
his himself who announced only the day before the invasion
I
that the lives of United States citizens, among them the
statement.
‘.
,.
,_
;.
‘.. medical students, were in no danger? He stated this while
250. Mr. ZARIF (Afghanistan): First of ail, I shouid like,. .:. final preparaiions for the invasion were already in proSir, to congratulate you on your assumption d;f thi: p@i- : = giess. Two days ago the individual most concerned with
dency of the Security Council for the month 6f October.--.. ‘.tFe safety of the students, namely, the Chancellor of St.
May I also congratulate your predecessor,- the’ iepresen; ; George’s Medical College, stated uniquivocally that on the
tative of Guyana, on the manner in which he guided the -.:.. basis of many reports and much information he had
work of the Council during September. 1. also wish to .’ received, including some direct contacts with the students
thank you and, through you, the other membersof the ...-. on.*the’ island and United States diplomats in the region,
Council for having afforded my delegation the .opportu-., .. ; ,$here was no reason to believe that any danger was threat..nity to participate in the Corincif’s discuss&n ofi the situa-...
:. ’ .ening’the security or the lives of the students. The Grena...:. ,- .,,.,,.i dian auth,qrities had also assured visiting American
tion in Grenada.
” .:;
.._ ‘:1 diplomats-fhat all United States citizens would be under
25 1. The Council is seized of a situati&n i&ic’h -cdnsti- .: , their prdtection and that, if requested, they would facilitate
tutes the gravest of breaches of every basic norm of intei-‘.-, ,. the safe evacuation of all United States citizens who
.,.&shed to !&VI? the’island. The mask of concern for the
national legality and morality.
. safety of Uniied States citizens, therefore, cannot cover the
252. In response to the overwhelming desire of.na&ns :, .,_ugly -face of this American act of lawlessness.
for peaceful relations and thi pl’even@rf of wai ‘and- -.
.’
destruction, the drafters of the Charter ‘of the United .i ;, 257. .-Secondly, we were told that they had intervened in
Nations attempted to formulate principles’and n&s .that ‘1. GrMada tqforestall further chaos and establish law and
would guide future international relations. Thus the noble ; order. One might have considered the possibility that bad
,advice br ignorance had led the President of the United
ideas which had stood the test of man% experience.
Statis to believe that Grenada was one of the States of the
throughout history were selected to bk adhered to and
strictly observed by all nations choosing to join $e Organi-. ., United States. But we have seen high-ranking United
zation. Having assumed the form of an organization of all . ,States officials pointing at the location of Grenada on the
sovereign States, the United Nations has since its inception. .i inap and .now and then referring to it as a country. That
tirelessly endeavoured to formulate instruments that
being the case, is it then ignorance of international law that
led’ to the ruthless invasion by the United States?
would govern inter-State relations in a %ie variety of
fields. By virtue of their special status under the Charter,,
258. We know for a fact that the United States does net
the five permanenf members Qf t& Seg,tiJy COunCi! were;-,..-~.,,.
.&igned i;pecial resp&@$@l&% &@~&&&ti.&
$%I&+;
:Y.
&rib&ribc to Sotiti .6f the i~%rnafional instruments contain;.‘.~.
;..I,:
i
.
,.
in6
the. cipdinal pri’nciples I have ‘mentioned, bat there
” ter princcpies.
-jl
__ ,: -. -:
‘. ‘. ‘.’ “temaiti mariy other i&truments to which the United States
253. The world was outragd. by. the rie&:.&tt:;6%e&:-‘:J
:is-a p&tty>and of which it was a co-author. The Chbrter of
small island nation in the Caribbean.had become ‘a victim’:..I.<ihe ,United Nations and that of the OAS stipulate that to
of inhuman and barbaric aggression by the big@% iii@- - -f0restaIl further chaos and establish law and order in one
cquntr)i is no business of any other country. That machia-rialist monster, a permanent member of the,- Council.
Manipulating
the internal developments in GyCda, the .. vellian pretext, therefore, lose? its validity before internaUnited States had been preparing for an overt military
iional law.
-23.

259.. Thirdly, we were told to believe that they invaded
Grenada to restore democratic institutions in that country.
Since when, one may ask, has the United States acquired
the right to prescribe political and social systems for other
nations?

265. Sixthly, there has also been talk of a multinational
force. No matter how disappointed we are with the accomplices of the shameless American military attack, it can in
no way help to disguise the imperialist and neocolonialist
nature of ,the invasion in which 95 per.cent of ,the troops .
participating were from the United States armed forces.
Aggression is aggression even under any other name, uninational or multinational
and thus ,unjustifiable under
international law.

260. The demagogic hue and cry with regard to democracy a la Washington notwithstanding, has any nation the
right under international law to invade another country
and install the social system of its liking? Is it not the
people of a country who have the sole authority to decide
on their own future? Here again, we do not believe that the
pretext advanced by the highest United States official
res+ed from this ignorance of the most fundamental principles of international law.

266. Taking into consideration these and many other factual aspects of the situation, what has happened constitutes a flagrant violation of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations. This blatant aggression has
given legitimate cause for grave concern among small and
independent countries who wish to maintain their independence and sovereignty; As the representative of Guyana,
Mr. Sinclair, stated at the extraordinary meeting of the
Coordinating
Bureau of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, today it is Grenada, tomorrow it will be Guyana; and the next day some other country.
:
267. The urgency of the matter requires that the Security
Council adopt, as soon as possible, effective measures to
put an end to the aggression against the people of Grenada
and to demand the immediate withdrawal of aggressive
forces from that country. In order to prevent occurrence of
similar actions by the United States it is necessary to condemn that nation, in the strongest possible terms, for its
act of aggression against Grenada.

261. Fourthly, they said-and it was later echoed by certain subservient leaders-that
internal developments in
Grenada posed a threat to the security of the United States
and other countries in the area. This argument is particularly surprising, the more so when it is stated by the ruler
of probably the most powerful nation on earth. Even
through analysis of the carefully selected news reports in
the United States press monopolies, one hardly gains the
impression that there was any threat from the purely internal developments in Grenada to the security of the United
States or other countries of the region. The unfortunate
internal developments in Grenada on the eve of the invasion can in no way serve as a pretext for the American act
of banditry against that country.
262. Fifthly, with sheer arrogance and hypocrisy, we
were’asked to believe that the United States invasion -was
at the request of a number of countries in that area. To
portray the “invitation”
as legal, article 8 of the 1981
Treaty Establishing the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States was invoked. Even a glance at this article
would suffice to establish that the collective defence and
security measures stipulated there were meant to safeguard
the countries of the area against external aggression, and
to adopt such measures there must be a unanimous decision of member countries. In the first place, the authorities
in Grenada were not invited to the meeting where discussion of the internal events in that country took place.
There existed no external aggression, other than that perpetrated by the United States aggressors, which would
have prompted a joint action by the OECS countries. No
request was made by the Grenadian authorities for assistance from the OECS or from the United States. The
United States is not a party to the OECS treaty of 1981.
Therefore, the United States has neither rights nor obligations under that treaty.

268. We hail the heroic struggle and resistance of the
Grenadian ‘people against the’united Stat& forces of invasion. The delegation of the Democratic Republic of
Afghanistan expresses its firm solidarity with them and
with other nations of the region, particularly Cuba, Nicaragua, Suriname and Guyana, who have recently become
targets of political, economic and military pressure and
provocation from United States imperialism.
269. The PRESIDENT
(inrerpreturionfiom
Arabic): The
next -speaker is the representative of Guatemala. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
.,
statement.
270.

Mr. QUmONES-AMEZQUITA

(Guatemela) (inzer-

pretation from Spanish): Mr. President, the delegation of

Guatemala wishes to congratulate you on having assumed
the presidency of the Security Council. We believe that ”
your knowledge and the shrewd competence with which
you are guiding these debates augur well for the work of
the Council. I thank the Security Council for having .
allowed me to speak on this matter.. ’

263. The only regiona! treaty which governs the relations
between the United States and Grenada is the Charter of
the Organization of American States. Article 21 of that
charter strictly prohibits the use of force under any pretext
whatsoever by member States against each other.

271. I have precise instructions from the Ministry of
External Relations of Guatemala to state the following.
My country views with concern the events that have
occurred in Grenada, where forces OFvarious countries of
the Caribbean, with the assistance of the United States of
America, have landed, having invoked as basic reasons for
their action the protection’of citizens, a state of anarchy,
the nonexistence of a government recognized by the inter-

264. Based on those reasons, the unlawful decision of the
six member countries of the OECS does not provide a legal
basis for the launching of aggression by them, or by the
United States for that matter.
24

national
region.

community,

action which those States might take in order to ensure the
restoration of normalcy in Grenada.

and the collective security of the

272. Faced with the riefacro situation, Guatemala takes
an attitude of understanding for the various reasons put
forward, but we state that we cannot favour, encourage,
justify or support this type of intervention by violent
means. The main responsibility for what is taking place in
Grenada falls on the shoulders of those who sought to.
impose a Government without popular support and who
prevented the holding of elections, which appeared to be
the desire of the Government of Mr. Bishop. That responsibility falls also on the shoulders of those who propagate
principles of selfdetermination ‘but who use that term to
mean extracting a country from one sphere of economic
influence to place it into another, and who justify the perpetuation of power by putting forward the principle of the
need for development without consulting the people and
who intervene in the internal affairs of other countries
using new means of aggression, not yet regulated by internationai law, which serve as spearheads for imposing their
principles and their hegemony.

278. At the same time, and without prejudice to any de& I
sion that might emanate from such a meeting, the Govemment of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago took an
independent decision to institute certain measures with
respect to its trade and other relations with Grenada.
These were that Trinidad and Tobago would not participate in any CARICOM
meetings whatsoever at which
Grenada would be present; that no Grenada citizens or
nationals would be allowed entry into Trinidad and -.-.
Tobago without a visa; that no exports from Grenada into
Trinidad and Tobago would be afforded CARICOM
treatment and that no vessels registered in Grenada would
be allowed the facilities of the CARICOM jetty in Trinidad
and Tobago. Additionally
the Government resolved to
take such steps as were necessary to protect the safety of
Trinidad and Tobago nationals in Grenada.
279. The emergency meeting of CARICOM just alluded
to took place as planned in Port of Spain. At that meeting
proposals were advanced which were consistent with Trinidad and Tobago’s foreign policy and which were based on
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, to
which we fully subscribe. Among the fundamental eiements of that policy are the principles of non-interference
in the internal affairs of other States and the non-use of
force in the conduct of international relations and in the
settlement of disputes. The proposals discussed were, first,
that there would be no involvement of any external elements in the resolution of the Grenada situation; secondly,
that the resolution of the Grenada situation should be
wholly regional, that is to say CARICOM
in nature;
thirdly, that the regional solution pursued should not violate international
law or the Charter of the United
Nations; and, fourthly, that any proposed solution should
have as its primary purpose the restoration of normalcy in
Grenada.

273. Only votes confer legitimacy, and only when they
are cast in free and pluralist elections. That is why we hope
that, as an act which is an inherent part of sovereignty, the
people of Grenada will be able promptly to determine its
own future through free elections.
274. The PRESIDENT
(inrerpreturionfrom Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Trinidad and Tobago.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
275. Mr. ALLEYNE (Trinidad and Tobago): Mr. Pmsident, I wish to thank you and the other members of the
Council for having been so kind as to accede to the request
of the Government of the Republic of Trinidad and
Tobago to participate in this debate. Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council. My delegation is confident that your vast experience and skill, particularly in the United Nations system,
will contribute to a balanced and successful outcome to
these deliberations. Our thanks are also due to Mr. Sinclair
of Guyana, who presided over the Council in September.

280. In addition, certain measures were proposed precisely for the restoration of normalcy in Grenada. These
were as follows: the Governor-General, as the legal wpresentative of the Queen, the head of State, should be used as
the point of contact in Grenada; through contact with the
Governor-General a broad-based civilian Government of
national reconciliation whose composition was acceptable
to him should be established, and a primary function of that
Government would be the putting into place of arrangements for the holding of elections at the earliest possible
date; acceptance of a fact-finding mission comprising
eminent CARICOM
nationals; the putting.into place of
arrangements to ensure the safety of nationals of other
countries in Grenada, and/or their evacuation, where
desired; and the acceptance of the deployment in Grenada
of a peace-keeping force comprising contingents from
CARICOM
countries.

276. I should like to outline the position of the Govemment of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago on the
unprecedented, ominous and tragic events which have
overtaken Grenada in’ the last few weeks. These events
have shocked the world not only because of the horror of
the brutal execution of the Prime Minister, Mr. Maurice
Bishop, of several of his cabinet Ministers, of trade union,
leaders and of civilians, but ‘also because such events are
without precedent in the Commonwealth Caribbean.
277. On learning of those deaths, the Prime Minister of
Trinidad and Tobago, as current Chairman of CARICOM, consulted with other CARICOM
leaders and
agreed to act as host to an emergency meeting of the heads
of 12 CARICOM
States in Port of Spain on 22 and 23
October in order to discuss the G-renada situation and the

281. However, as a result of developments in Grenada
over the tast few days, further action on these proposals
has not been possible. It is now public knowledge that
military forces have landed in Grenada and are currently
engaged in hostilities there. In this connection I wish to
25

inform the Council that the first and only oflicial notification to the Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago about
the landing of forces in Grenada was sent to him several
hours after the actual landing.

287. ‘.My delegation has highlighted for the Council’s
benefit the position of the Government of Trinidad and
Tobago, fully elaborated by Mr. George Chambers, Prime
Minister, in a statement on this question before Parliament
on Wednesday, 26 October.

282. The situation in Grenada as it stands today is most
delicate and poses a grave threat to the peace and stability
of the region.

2%8. The Republic of Trinidad and Tobago deeply sympathieses with the people of Grenada in what is obviously
a most troubled time not only for them but for the region
as a whole. It expresses the hope that the Council in its
deliberations will take account of the objectives and proposals enunciated and will focus on the alleviation of the
plight of the people of Grenada. In this connection, the
Government of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago reiterates its readiness to-assist in a resolution of the crisis in
accordance with the stated principles.

283. During the general debate at the thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly, at the 18th meeting, the
Minister of External Affairs of Trinidad and Tobago
appealed to all States to desist from seeking to impose any
settlement of disputes by the use or threat of the use of
force and to exercise due respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of all individual States. .He further
appealed against the importation of foreign rivalries, conflicts and tensions into the Caribbean. He expressed the
hope that the Caribbean area would remain a zone of
peace in which peaceful and amicable solutions would continue to be found to the problems of the area.

289. The PRESIDENT
(inrerpre~afionfrom Arabic): The
next speaker is Mr. Clovis Maksoud, observer of the
League of Arab States, to whom the Security Council has
extended an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules
of procedure. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

284. Further, it should be noted that at meetings of the
heads of Government of CARICOM in Ocho Rios in 1982
and again in Port of Spain in July 1983, specific decisions
were taken against the use of force in the settlement of
disputes. The Government of Trinidad and Tobago, as a
party to these decisions, could therefore not depart from
these agreed principles, particularly without resort, in the
first instance, to efforts at a peaceful solution of the
problem.

290. Mr. MAKSOUD
(League of Arab States): Mr.
President, I should like to express to you and, through
you, to the other members of the Security Council the deep
appreciation of the League of Arab States for allowing me
to address the Council on a very vital issue of principle,
and of behaviour. Let me at the outset express to you, Sir,
well-deserved congratulations.
You have been known
throughout your illustrious career for your wisdom, your
restraint, your commitment to the objectives of the Charter of the United Nations.

285. The Government of Trinidad and Tobago considers it most unfortunate that efforts to resolve the Grenada situation could not have been peaceful and regional
in nature. The Government maintains its original position
on this matter and continues to hold firmly to that view.
It is regrettable that a solution involving the non-use of
force, proposed during the emergency meeting of the
CARICOM
heads of Government, was not pursued. It is
regrettable that a solution of a purely CARICOM nature
was not agreed upon and was not pursued. It is regettable
that as a first resort measures involving the use of force
have been embarked upon and that military intervention
of this nature has been imported into the CommonwealthCaribbean.

291. Turning to the subject of this meeting, I would first
state the locus srandi: why we are interested in this great
debate. People might say that, logically, .we are geopolitically somewhat distant from the area of the Caribbean.
This is a matter in which the super-Powers are involved.
And yet we feel a need to have our input factored into this
debate. For the League of Arab States, too, is a regional
organization. Our member States are interwoven as one
people, to use the terminology of the representative of
Saint Lucia. Yet we too submit that this concept of
national destiny and unity and oneness of purpose, of culture and of people, does not warrant at any juncture the
violation of the sovereignty of our member States, even
within the context of the regional organization.

286. In the present situation and in pursuance of its original objectives, the Government of Trinidad and Tobago
remains committed to pursuing a course of action that will
result in: first, the earliest possible withdrawal of combat
forces in Grenada: secondly, the earliest establishment
there, through appropriate channels, of a CARICOM
peace-keeping presence in which we are prepared to
participate-in
this regard we wish to emphasize a clear
distinction between the role of an occupation force and that
of a peace-keeping force; thirdly, the establishment of a
broad-based civilian Government, the primary function of
which w-ouid be the earliest putting into place of arrangements for holding free and fair elections; fourthly, the establishment of a fact-finding mission comprising eminent
nationals of CARICOM States; fifthly, the restoration of
normalcy in Grenada; and sixthly, the preservation of the
unity of the Caribbean Community.

292. Therefore. the notion, the precedent, the pattern of
behaviour that have been introduced in the past few days
concern us deeply. If all this is allowed to go unchecked, it
can lead to a process of destabilization that can infect
many regions of the world.
we are fascinated by the thesis
293. Furthermore,
advanced this evening by the representative of the IJnited
States-the thesis that the prohibition of the use of force is
contextual and not absolute. This is a very interesting the&and
I think it is necessary for the Council to examine
it-especially when it is juxtaposed with the original thesis
that Mr.. Kissinger expounded last Sunday in connection
26

with another region; namely, that the United States has the
right to intervene, with another ally-Israel-in
Lebanon
to redress the balance of political forces, in consonance
with the interests of the United States.
294. Now here we are bordering on dangerous ground;
we are legitimizing-if
we accept these theses taken
together-intervention,
we are in fact allowing counterlegitimacy to become the new legitimacy.
295. What is the meaning? That the notion and the theory of non-intervention is not absolute but contextual. If it
is contextual, it means that it should be put in a context.
Therefore it is .relative; it is subject to interpretation; it
allows subjective policies to be marketed as objective realities; it legitimizes the use of force; it allows intervention; it
reverses the whole jurisprudence of the Charter of the
United Nations; it establishes a precedent that, if allowed
to go unchecked, would let irrational forces loose on the
world community and would require a total revision of the
international equation and international jurisprudence.
296. Needless to say, what we have heard today-the
eagerness to follow the principles of international law, to
acquiesce in the Charter, to respect the mechanism of the
United Nations-naturally
many of these are ideals that
cannot be obtained. Although we all profess commitment
to international law and principle, we do not always follow
them meticulously, but at least the Charter and the principles of international law, although they might not be as
binding as they ought to be, constitute guidelines for our
whole behaviour and they condition a great deal of our
international relations.

this juncture is-does an invasion till up an institutional
vacancy? Does an invasion constitute the filling of a gap
which enables it to treat itself as a substitute for the
accountability of a regime or a government in Grenada?
The answer is definitely no, because invasion cannot be an
instrument of policing the destiny of any State or any
society. If there is a vacuum, would it not have been in the
interest of mankind and of peace in the world for those in
the region to have sought to fill that vacuum by exhausing
all political and diplomatic means available to the region,
in the context of the United Nations and of the Security
Council? Would it not have been in the interests of intemational peace and understanding to have resorted to the
mechanism of the United Nations in order either to fill an
institutional vacuum or at least to redeem and buffer whatever anarchy might develop in the aftermath of the
butchery that has taken place?
300. Yet under no circumstances can an invasion be vindicated or justified, even the pretence of interfering and
invading, because either an absence of authority or the
protection of citizens does not warrant this precipitate
jump into the vacuum. Therefore we find a near universal
condemnation of the invasion, because it sets a very dangerous precedent, because it does not exhaust the regional
means available and the means available in the OAS and
in the United Nations. It looks as if the vacuum was awaited in order to be tilled by an interfering and intervening
invasion force. That is why it is totally intolerable.
301. Furthermore, we are dealing with an issue of grave
danger to world peace, because we see that any internal
problem, any internal political crisis, any question of violation or fermentation in any third-world country is transforming the third-world countries that have sought to
remain independent and to protect their sovereignty into
arenas where super;Power accounts can be settled in localized areas. This is the danger: the polarization that is eroding the internal mobility of regional organizations, and
undermining the sovereign right of independence and the
sovereign territorial integrity of nations, and it constitutes
an initial step bringing us to the brink and allowing any
internal problem in any part of the world to bring the
super-Powers,to the b%ik of confrontation. This is where
the non-aligned countries and the Movement of NonAligned Countries, to which the Arab States and the Arab
League belong, realize that they must not allow their internal processes, however negative or positive, however
orderly or anarchical they might be, to be transformed into
excuses for the projection of polarization and for the projection of the super-Powers into the internal affairs of various States of the third world.

297. Therefore what has taken place in Grenada raises,
as the representative of the United States has rightly stated,
many issues of principle and many values. Yet it is not
important to use the terms principles and values, because
they too are subject to interpretation. What is necessary is
that we must allow a broad spectrum of opinion, that
constitutes the definition of international consensus, to be
the principal guide for deliberations, resolutions and international relations.
298. Therefore we in the League of Arab States and the
Arab nation and, I suppose, throughout the entire third
world, realize that the notion of what constitutes legitimacy is an important aspect of all international endeavours. In this respect, we have found that in Grenada the
Prime Minister was executed together with many members
of his Cabinet. There is no doubt that this form of internal
behaviour, by whoever it might be and whatever might be
the reasoning, constitutes a basic violation and an erosion
of legitimacy. We share in the universal condemnation of
this act of deliberate violence and the removal of members
of the Cabinet of the Grenadian Government. It is true, as
those invading forces have sought to vindicate, that a certain political vacuum did develop; there developed also an
institutional vacancy, which could be accountable to all
sorts of behaviour.

302. It is in this respect the deep concern of the thirdworld countries and societies, when they find a super-Power using invasion as a pretext to project its power by
projecting every issue in terms of East-West or superPower confrontations. That is why we in the Arab world
know full well that those who are advocating self,determination for the people of Grenada-and we support
this right of self-determination-should
not assume the
double standard that they apply when it comes to the
self-determination of the Palestinian people. And therefore

299. Yet the question that arises and perhaps the
dilemma that confronts the international community at
27

when the invasion of Lebanon bv Israel becomes absolved
by the subsequent invasion in G?enada we know that that
is playing havoc with sovereignty and independence and
the future of stability and peace in the world.

international law and practice. Only recently, Zambia
had strongly condemned the callous murder of Prime
Minister Maurice Bishop, and Zambia cannot now condone a similar act of violence by outside forces against
the people of Grenada.

303. That is why the issues that have arisen today in the
Security Council go far beyond the unfortunate crisis of
violence in the State of Grenada. They go far beyond even
regional concerns because they touch deeply on the future
of the notion of sovereignty and the values of independence and because they allow once and for all polarization
between the super-Powers to frustrate the ability and the
mobility of other countries that are not super-Powers to
move freely and to exercise their sovereignty and to bring
about the relaxation of international tension. But if every
issue internally, in every part of the world, is going to be
viewed exclusively in terms of super-Power confrontation,
then the arena might be in countries like Grenada or other
countries of the third world today, but they might become
ominous in terms of confrontation on a real scale. That is
why, although the third world countries, and Grenada in
particular, today might be the victims of a struggle on a
very super-Power level, this can be a dangerous precedent
for us in the Middle East, for the peoples of Central America, for the peoples of Africa. In Namibia, for example, we
find that every issue is projected in the East-West confrontation context.

“The action of the United States and its allies is morally indefensible and not consistent with the tenets of
the Charter of the United Nations, which guide proper
international conduct. Zambia does not accept the
argument that an invitation to the United States from
certain Caribbean States to act against another sovereign Caribbean State justified the invasion. To accept
such reasoning would be tantamount to giving licence
to any country or group of countries which has or have
grievances against another to extend an invitation to
any powerful nation to invade such other country. The
small and weak countries can have no security assured
for them in such a state of affairs.
“No country in the world, however big and powerful,
has the right to impose its will on another sovereign
State.
“It is in this context that Zambia calls upon the
United States and its allies to withdraw forthwith their
invasion forces from Grenada and leave the people of
Grenada to resolve their problems without outside coercion, intimidation
or any other form of pressure.‘* ‘.

304. I know that we are all concerned. We have to reconcile diflicult options. The option of legitimacy cannot be
imposed by means of invasion, by the intervention’of a
super-Power, because then whatever legitimacy might arise
becomes illegitimate. It is important that the usurpation of
the powers of the international community should not
become a precedent that can be pursued without challenge.
It must be challenged during the deliberations and in the
resolution of this Council.

308. I can only add that my Government is closely following the deliberations of the Security Council on this
grave situation and hopes that the Council will be able to
live up to its responsibilities. The Council should condemn
the invasion of Grenada in no uncertain terms and call for
the immediate withdrawal of the so-called multinational
force from that country. The Council is today the focus of
international attention on this matter.

305. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Zambia. I invite him
to take a place at ‘the Council. table and to make his
statement.

309. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Colombia. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

306. Mr. LUSAKA (Zambia): Mr. President, my delegation is grateful to you and the other members of the Security Council for allowing us to take part in the debate on
the situation in Grenada. We have asked to participate in
order to make clear Zambia’s position on the invasion of
Grenada by the United States under the guise of a socalled multinational
force.

310.

Mr. ALBAN-HOLGUIN
(Colombia) (inrerpreration from Spanish): Mr. President, I wish to thank you and

the members of the Council for allowing my delegation to
participate in this debate. We are pleased to see as President of the Council a person of your calibre and experience. We are sure that in these difficult times you will
guide the debate with decisiveness and prudence.

307. I wish, accordingly, to read out to the Council the
text of a statement issued by my Government on the
invasion:

311. The position of Colombia in relation to this particular matter is based on the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, the charter of the Organization of American States, and on the generally accepted principles of
international law. The actions with which we are concerned violate these principles and also those which appear
in the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations,’ unanimously adopted by the General Assembly
at its twenty-fifth session, which states in one of its relevant

“Zambia strongly disapproves and unreservedly condemns the invasion of the independent State of Grenada by United States ,forces and their Caribbean
collaborators.
“Zambia regards the invasion of Grenada not only as
a flagrant violation of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Grenada but also as a blatant disregard of
._

28

sections: “Every State has the duty to refrain from any
forcible action which deprives peoples.. . of their right to
self-determination and freedom and independence.” The
resolution also states: “No State.. . has the right to intervene, directly or indirectly, for any reason whatever, in the
internal or external affairs of any other State.“’ The intervention, whatever it may be, of a State in the internal
affairs of another State, under any pretext, however important it might be deemed to be, cannot be accepted.

318. When we are decidingnn the fate of this planet-in
which, according to the President of Colombia, Mr. Belisario Betancur, “As we ascend to gaze more closely into the
face of God we become more truly equidistant from any
given point on earth’@- attitudes such as these cannot be
understood. The great Powers appear to be involved in
daily battles. Surrounded on every side by imperialism,
our bewildered peoples unhesitantingly look to the law for
international protection and for respect of their human
rights.

312. I believe it is not incorrect to assert that the stunned
reaction of the citizens of Grenada to the events that
occurred in their territory is similar to that felt by the
people of the United States, for example, when Pearl Harbour, in the Hawaiian Islands, was attacked on Sunday, 7
December 1941, and by the people of Afghanistan on 25
December 1979.

3 19. Colombia feels a moral obligation, as was stated by
President Betancur, to affirm that it is urgent and necessary that foreign military troops and advisers withdraw
from Nicaragua, El Salvador, Honduras, Lebanon,‘.
Afghanistan, Kampuchea, Namibia, Mozambique, Angola and Chad and from any other part of the world in which
the self-determination of peoples is thwarted.

313. These are facts which disturb the world because
they constitute flagrant violations of the basic principles of
international law on which international peace and security are based. But the impression persists that these countries have become mere pawns on the chessboard of the
major Powers.

320. What is important is to foster, urgently and openly,
the development of peoples and to place them in a position
to keep on developing. It is necessary that neither chaos,
violence and disorder, but the best traditions of the civilization to which we belong should prevail in the hemisphere.
We must not lack faith to embark, within freedom, on
procedures which will consolidate the defence of democratic institutions. Economic development is the only war
which we should declare, a war which, in the words of an
eminent writer, has no other enemy than poverty, uncertainty and helplessness. The worthwhile adventure of
development will make us a continent of peoples united in
essential matters which will contribute to peace in the
world.

314. The greatness of a country does not begin nor does
it rest on its extraordinary economic development, nor on
the power of its weapons, but in its aspirations for freedom
and in its respect of those principles which make international coexistence possible. It is not impressive consumer
power nor material wealth which projects an image of
respectability beyond its borders, but the moral fibre of its
people who are proud of its behaviour, and an institutional
organization which inspires faith in democracy and freedom. The mission of a nation for the future is the progressive development of its virtues and culture.

321. Colombia, once again, comes to the defence of the
principle enshrined in the charter of our continental system
which it has practised with deep faith, that of nonintervention, the bases of which arc well known to
members of this Council. That principle is fundamental for
peace in America and its undermining would produce
grave upheavals. This also explains our deep concern at
what we view as an erroneous breach in the solidarity that
we have practised to ensure that no Power whatsoever
should flaunt in our area its designs for influence and
world power.

315. From its very inception Colombia has had a vocation for the law, confirmed throughout the vicissitudes of
its history and a deep-rooted faith in what is right and
legal, an environment in which the individual and States
may improve their relations and settle their differences
without damaging peace.
316. Facts tell us that ours are times of frustration and
regression. A poor contribution would be made to a world
anxious for solutions which would free it from fear, pain
and poverty when, on the threshold of the year 2000, we
still give validity to those ideas which accept that might is
right and that it is the decisive instrument for the settlement of disputes.

322. My delegation wishes to read the communique
issued by the Ministry for Foreign Affairs. It reads:
“The Government of Colombia notes with deep concern the act of force undertaken yesterday in the island
of Grenada by military units of the United States,
accompanied by contingents of some Caribbean countries. Colombia rejects the use of force in international
relations and therefore condemns this act of blatant
intervention in a country which recently has been
affected by violent situations which ended with the
overthrow and the unspeakable murder of the Prime
Minister, Maurice Bishop, and several of his colleagues
by a group of military and civilian extremists.

317. Never before has humankind, daily threatened by a
nuclear catastrophe, been in greater need of concrete facts
which will ensure it against a return to barbarism. It is
necessary, indeed essential, that international
law be
respected. Weak nations and defenceless peoples want to
know that they are protected by their membership in the
international community. They wish to preserve their independence and their sovereignty; they are anxious to
prosper, to create more egalitarian societies and to decide
on and achieve their own destiny.

“Gatherings such as the Contadora Group have
requested third countries to abstain from intervening
29

directly or indirectly in the internal affairs of other
States and have insisted on respect for the principles of
non-intervention
and self-determination
of peoples
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and the
charter of the Organization of American States, the
complete observance of which is absolutely crucial for
guaranteeing stable and lasting peace.

but that regime’s ability to act aggressively against our own
national interests. The indiscriminate mass killings were an
outrage to decency and demanded,‘from a senseof morality
and out of a genuine desire to preserve peace and stability in
the area, that such a brutal group, acting without any
legitimacy, should be removed from the exercise of authority and that the people of Grenada, in those circumstances,
should be given the right to determine within the democratic framework the type of government they wished.

“Colombia considers that armed occupation of the
island is unjustifiable and hopes that the military forces
of the United States and other countries will withdraw
immediately and that the same will be done by the
Soviet and Cuban advisers, all of which is indispensable
for the reestablishment of internal order, democracy
human rights and peace in Grenada.”

329. The Government of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines was gravely concerned about the military buildup of
armed forces in Grenada. This military might in the hands
of the present group posed a serious threat to our security.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines has no army. We share
.
a common maritime border with Grenada.

323. Finally, Mr. President, I wish to inform you and the
members of the Security Council that the President of
Colombia and President Felipe Gonzalez of Spain have
initiated humanitarian
measures so that the Cuban
workers in Grenada may soon leave that island for home,
as may those people of that nation who wish to seek refuge
in other countries. These steps are being taken for purely
humanitarian reasons, with the patronage of the United
States authorities. In this way Colombia believes, along
with Spain, that it can contribute to a prompt reestablishment of normality in Grenada.

330.# It is our view that urgent collective action had to be
taken. As a result of the imposition of a 96-hour shoot-onsite curfew, the killings, the demonstration of the brutality
and ruthlessness of the military regime, the apparent disintegration of governmental authority, and the distinct prospect for the spread of this violence into the neighbouring
States, the Government of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines agreed to participate in this humanitarian assistance
to the people of Grenada.
331. ,Pursuant to the collective recognition within the
OECS treaty, to which Grenada is a signatory, as well as
for group association, the maintenance of peace, order and
security within member States, and recognizing our limited
human and logistic capability, we sought the assistance of
friendly Governments. The Governments of Jamaica, Barbados and the United States responded to our request to
form a multinational force for the purpose of undertaking
a pre-emptive defensive action in order to remove this
dangerous threat to peace and security in the sub-region
and to establish a situation of normality in Grenada.

324. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
325. Mr. TONEY (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption to the Council
presidency and on the excellent manner in which you are
conducting its affairs. I wish to thank you and the other
members for permitting me to address the Council on the
important matter before us, the situation in Grenada.

332. The Government of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines gives the assurance that once the threat has been
removed, the Governor-General
of Grenada, the legal
representative of the head of State, will be invited to
assume executive authority over the country under the provisions of the Grenada Constitution of 1973 and appoint a
broad-based interim Government to administer the country pending the holding of elections.

326. The delegation of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
wishes to associate itself fully with the statement made by
the Prime Minister of Dominica, Chairperson of the
OECS, on behalf of the member countries of the OECS.
327. The events which have taken place in Grenada are of
grave concern to the Government and people of Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines. The situation in Grenada
arising out of the overthrow of Prime Minister Maurice
Bishop and the subsequent brutal killing of Mr. Bishop,
members of his cabinent and other citizens created conditions which posed a serious and immediate threat to the
security of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. The refugees
from Grenada who began to build up in the southernmost
islands of the Grenadines were a matter of grave concern to
the Government of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.‘This
signalled fear and insecurity within the community and the
general deterioration of public order.

333. The OECS countries, all members may be assured,
do not have expansionist ambitions. Motivated by the
highest principles of altruism and morality, we would not
have taken the course which we have pursued, except for
the fact that we were convinced that there was no other
believable option.
334. In -conclusion, we feel confident that peace and
prosperity can soon be restored to a free and democratic
Grenada.

328. The severity of the curfew imposed on Grenada convinced the member States of the OECS that the existing
regime was unstable and its conduct unpredictable. We
feared not only later reprisals that would have been
imposed en masse against defenceless citizens of Grenada,

335. The PRESIDENT
(interpreration from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Mongolia. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
30

i-

1 336. Mr. DASHTSEREN
(Mongolia): My delegation
joins previous speakers in unanimously condemning the
unprovoked armed aggression of the United States against
the sovereign, independent and non-aligned State of Grenada as a flagrant violation of the Charter of the United
Nations and the’norms of contemporary international law.
This act of aggression forms but a small part of the overall
global strategy of American imperialism aimed at establishing its hegemony.

.

citizens in Grenada is even more absurd, since the Govemment of Grenada in the last few days repeatedly reassured
those concerned that the lives of the United States citizens
were not in ‘danger. Another reason given by the United
States Administration was the restoration of law and order
in that country. Who has given the United States Administration the right to police law and order in other countries?
The only law and order that it is trying to restore is a
colonial type, which has already been rejected by, among
others, the people of Grenada.

337. It is well known and documented that ever since the
13 March 1979 revolution, when the people of Grenada
chose a path of socio-economic development, the United
States has been trying to destabilize and overthrow the
Government of Grenada. It is no secret that a spectre of
overt and covert aggression against Grenada has been
looming ever since 1979. The Government of Grenada and
the Governments of many other countries time and again
drew the attention of the international community to those
ominous schemes and preparations. Thus, it was revealed
that in Florida bands of mercenaries were being trained for
this purpose. Only a few months ago the late Prime Minister Maurice Bishop again drew the world community’s
attention to the imminent danger of armed aggression.

341. The Mongolian people expresses its solidarity with
the people of Grenada in these grim hours and its admiration for and solidarity with the Cuban workers and technicians who heroically fought the invaders for theirlife and
ideals.
342. Mongolia views the attack on Grenada not only as
an attack against a Caribbean or Latin American State,
.but also as an attack on the international community as a
whole, fraught with the gravest danger for international
peace and security.
343. I shall conclude my statement by quoting the following passage from a statement by Chairman Yumjagiin
Tsedenbal:

338. Mongolia. like other countries. stronalv condemns
this barbarii act’of imperialist aggression. The-token participation of troops of some other neighbouring island
States cannot conceal the fact that the main instigator,
executor and beneficiary of this heinous act is American
imperialism. The President, the Secretary of State and
other United States officials have tried in vain to justify
their aggression by invoking article 8 of the Treaty Establishing the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States.
However, that article deals with situations of “external
aggression”, while it is recognized that no such danger
existed and that neither Grenada nor anybody requested
any assistance from other OECS countries or any other
country. Furthermore, according to that article, the decision on collective action can be made only on the basis of
full agreement among all the member States of that organization, that is, in unanimity. However, Grenada and some
other member States were not consulted. On thecontrary, a
decision was imposed upon a group of island-States by the
United States, which is not a member of that body.

“The Government of the Mongolian People’s Republic believes that the United States bears full responsibility for the violation of Grenada’s sovereignty. The
Mongolian People’s Republic joins its voice to the
demands of the peaceful public that all interventionist
troops of foreign States be immediately withdrawn
from the territory of that State and that the Grenadian
people be given the possibility to resolve their internal
problems themselves. The aggression against Grenada
has a direct link with the American Administration’s
adventurist actions against the Republic of Cuba and
Nicaragua. Having staged the barbarous armed attack
on Grenada, the Reagan Administration
dangerously
aggravates the tense situation in the region and gravely
imperils world peace. In this connection, the Mongolian
People’s Republic believes that the world community
should take urgent and efficient steps to stop that insolent aggression of the United States.“,

339. By arbitrarily citing the treaty, the United States is ;
indeed trampling upon the aspirations of peoples of that
region to ensure collective security from external aggression. The aggression reveals the true nature of American
imperialism and its attitude towards international law in
general and international treaty obligations in particular.
The United States is grossly violating its legal obligations
under the Charter of the United Nations and the charter of
the Organization of American States-even assuming the
right to declare certain treaty obligations “inapplicable”.
340. As is well known to everyone, according to international law, no State has the right to commit acts of aggression or interfere in the internal affairs of others under any
pretext. Therefore, all the reasons given by the United
States Administration
cannot justify the armed intervention. The alleged concern for the lives and safety of their

344. ‘The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Mozambique. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
345 Mr. dos SANTOS (Mozambique):
I have a prepared statement to make concerning the question under
discussion, but since Colombia has on several occasions
mentioned the name of my country, once during the general debate in the General Assembly and again tonight, I
want to thank Colombia most sincerely for its love for and
preoccupation with Mozambique.
I wish to reassure
Colombia, however, that its preoccupation with my country may be overdone.
346. I am grateful to you, Mr. President, and to the
Council for affording mz this opportunity to address this

31

When no scarecrow is available, a ghost is invented. A
special dictionary was produced in which the word “democthe word “dictatorship”,
racy” means “dictatorship”,
“democracy”, and in which the expression “‘the tyranny of
the majority’* means “democracy” and the word “peace”
means “destruction”, “misery”, “war”, “death”.

important body of the United Nations family. Your experience, Sir, and the serene manner in which you have been
conducting the Council’s affairs are very reassuring to us.
Coming from a country, a nation and a region that have not
been able to taste peace in the past 35 years or so, you are in
a good position to understand the anguish that has invaded
us in the last 72 years. Allow me to add my frail but firm
voice to those that have preceded me in order to say a word
or two, for my frailty allows me no more than that.

353. It is in this light that events should be viewed in
Grenada. Events in Grenada were purely internal in nature
and could in no way-1 repeat: in no way-be construed
as constituting a danger to Grenada’s neighbours, must
less to the United States. It was therefore up to the Grenadiatis to determine when and how to solve their problems
and shape the future destiny of their nation, free from
outside impediments ayd, interference.
2
II!

347. it is frightening and disturbing for a small and
weak-but
proud-nation
like mine to entertain the
thought of the full consequences of what is happening in
Grenada. The ove&helming majority of States composing
the United Nations are in that category. Others, although
equally proud, are even smaller and weaker than mine.
Grenada is a case in point.

354. So insecure is this man ihat even his own shadow
frightens him to death. How can one think even for a
second that Grenada could pose a threat to a giant such Is
the United States of America? Grenada does not and cannot possibly represent the thin shadow of the United
States. The other day some one was telling me, jokingly,
that Grenada could not possibly pose any threat; for Grenadiak to get out .of their ‘country they need American
,
technical assistance.

348. In Mozambique there are 12 million people inhabiting a territory of 780,000 square kilometres. There are at
least 226 million Americans in an area of at least 3.5 million
square miles, and the territory populated by the 1 IO,000
Grenadines is only 344 square kilometres in area. I am told
that Grenadians do not take it lightly if one stretches out
one’s arms, for they think that one is measuring their
country.
349. It is said that the more powerful one is, the more
serene and the more accommodating one is. A boxer may
be vicious in the ring, but outside it he could never lift his
finger to harm a mosquito. This may be true as a rule, but
there are
. painful exceptions.
350. In some States power begets power, and the more
poweful one is, the less secure one feels. And the accumulation of destructive power for the sake of sheer accumulation becomes self-perpetuating and acquires a life of its
own. This kind of power can intoxicate exactly the way
alcohol does. Under .the influence of alcohol a man can
become anything-a
doctor, a policeman, a legislator, a
judge, a gendarme, an arbitrator, an umpire.

355. This sense of insecurity reminds me of a practice
very common among young Portuguese sdldiers in.
Mozambique. Guerrillas made extensive use of the element
of surprise coupled with constant and fast movement, so
that young Portuguese soldiers quite often thought that
the guerrillas disappeared as if by magic or turned themselves into monkeys. So members can imagine what used
to happen: it was the monkeys and the footprints that
suffered at the hands of the trigger-happy soldiers.
356. During the last hours events in Grenada took a sad
and tragic turn. The United States decided to flex its muscles at the cost of hundreds of lives, whereas before the
American intervention only a few lives had been lost.
There is no justification whatever for that drastic course of
action. What is the justification? It is a hypothetical threat
to American lives, a claim of anarchy and a plea from
puppets. None of this has been demonstrated. This act of
removing a thorn from the throat of the United States is a
political one. We are waiting for the day when the United
States will move in to remove organized thuggery in South
Africa, thus breaking the engagement before the marriage
is consummated.

351. Once upon a time there was a deranged doctdr who
thought that he could cure the evils, all and sundry, of this
one world of ours. His prescription was always the same:
whatever the malady, from a toothache to a scratch, from
an ulcer to a broken limb, he prescribed an amputation.
Needless to say, the remedy was more often than not worse
than the illness itself. As an economist and a political
scientist it was his desire that all countries should follow
the same blueprint, prepared by him, of course. As a legislator he saw to it that all the rules of the game were set
accbrding to his whims and wishes, and during the game he
could .change them if ,he saw that his interests-and his
: interests alone-were better served that way. As an umpire
he saw to it that the rules were strictly observed, by others
of course. He was also at the same time both prosecutor
and judge. His judgement was final and admitted of no
recourse. As a gendarme and a policeman he made sure
that the streets of the world were perfectly safe for himself.

357. It is a tragic irony of history that the tragic events
took place when the international community was celebrating United Nations Day and the General Assembly
was debating the Kampuchean question;. what irony
indeed.
358. But there are oiher ironies. .With the exception of
one or two of the participating eastern Caribbean States,
these countries have no armies; yet they have contributed
men to the so-called multinational forces. What have they
contributed besides their reprehensible political backing of
the invasion? Are they soldiers? Soldiers they certainly cannot bei Are they watchmen or cooks?

352. Despite all these powers, this man feels himself ever
more insecure. Everything threatens his security-a book
here, a pamphlet there, a railway here and an airport there.
32

359. The armed aggression,
underwritten almost exclu-sively by the United States, offendslaw, decency-and sense.
It constitutes a blatant and unwarranted intervention in
the internal affairs of Grenada and a brazen and gross
violation -‘of its territorial. integrity and sovereignty. It
flouts the most elementary and ‘basic norms of intemational law and practice. It violates the most cherished
mores of international behaviour and intercourse among
civilized nations during these last years of the twentieth
century.
.
360. The United States adventure in Grenada is an ominous sign and does not augur well’ for the developing
world. The shark has been furious of late, and the sardines
are in danger of being swallowed one by one. Grenada
today, Suriname tomorrow, Nicaragua the” day after
tomorrow. Would there be any end to the wars fought to
topple thugs?
~

invited by the Government of the country concerned:
Therefore, there are no reasons whatsoever, either legal
or political, to justify this brutal action by the Governments in question, an action contrary to the most elementary norms of international law and ethics. ’
“In this context, the People’s Republic of Mozambique cannot but condemn this aggression perpetrated
by troops belonging to the United States and other
countries of the region against the brotherly people and
territory of Grenada. There will be security and lasting
peace in the Caribbean and Central America only when
all States in the region and ouside it, big or small,
respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial
‘” .-’ “‘.
integrity of .the States of the region.
“The Government of the People’s Republic of
Mozambique and the Mozambican people render a profound homage to the memory of Maurice Bishop, a,
respected revolutionary and fighter for the Grenadian
people whose honesty and political and moral integrity
won him profound respect and admiration of people
the world over. During the visit of the President of the
People’s Republic of Mozambique to Grenada in May
of 1982, it was evident how Maurice Bishop was
esteemed and loved by his people. The people and
Government of Mozambique send their most heartfelt
condolences to Maurice Bishop’s aggrieved family as
well as to his companions who lost their lives during the
tragic events which took place in Grenada. -The
Government of Mozambique
equally deplores the
death of civilians as a consequence of the invasion perpetrated by foreign troops against this peaceful sovereign country. The People’s Republic of Mozambique
reiterates its solidarity and support to the people of
Grenada. It demands all Governments in question to
immediately and unconditionally withdraw their troops
from the territory, so as to allow the Grenadian people
to freely and effectively exercise their right to determine
their own process of development and to solve alone
their own problems.‘*

361. The United Nations, and especially this Council,
can do a lot to allay the fears of the developing countries
and protect their right to follow the pblitical and economic
path of their choice without in any way being hindered or
suffering aggression, The minimum -that the Council can
do is to seeto it that all foreign forces are’immediately and
unconditionally withdrawn from Grenada. The Grenadian
people have the right to demand that they be left alone, as
they should be, in accordance with the principles embodied in the Charter of the United Nations. Let the. law of
the jungle be banished for ever and ever.
362. I will conclude by reading the communique issued
yesterday by the Government ,of the People’s Republic of
Mozambique concerning events taking place in Grenada.
It is as follows:
- “The people and the Government of the People’s
Republic of Mozambique have been following with
great concern the dramatic events taking place in the
Caribbean region, where troops from the United States
and certain States ,of the region have invaded the small
State of Grenada.
..

363. Mr. van der STOEL (Netherlands): The Netherlands Government has taken note with deep concern of the
recent developments in Grenada, arising out of the-overthrow of Prime Minister Maurice Bishop’s Government
and the subsequent brutal killing of the Prime Minister
and some of his cabinet colleagues as well as a number of
other citizens.

“Guided by its principles of peaceful coexistence,
mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity,
sovereign equality and .non-interference in internal
affairs of other States-a policy that was reaffirmed
once again by the Fourth Congress of the FRELIMO
Party-the People’s Republic of Mozambique considers
that this invasion constitutes a flagrant violation of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of another State. It
is a violation of the .Charter of the United Nations.

364. My delegation has noted that the Governments of
six eastern Caribbean countries perceived the develop
ments in Grenada as a threat to the peace and security of
the eastern Caribbean sub-region as a whole, and that
these Governments made an urgent request to form a multinational force in order to remove this threat. Furthermore, my Government understands that there was concern
for the safety and well-being of foreign citizens on
Grenada.

“The Mozambique
Government was shocked to
learn of the death of Prime Minister Maurice Bishop, a
friend of the People’s Republic of Mozambique. It
deplores the wave of violence that led to assassination.
However, the Government of the People’s Republic of
Mozambique considers that the Grenadian people have
the sovereign right to solve their own problems without
external interference and free of any kind of intimidation. No State or group of States has the right to intervene militarily in another State without being expressly

365. Although we understand the concerns and preoccupations underlying this request, my delegation is of the
view that the action taken cannot be considered compati33

ble with the basic principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.

development that was begun for that country on 13 March
1979.

366. It is for this reason thay my delegation will vote in
favour of the resolution in its revised form. The people of
Grenada must be able to exercise their fundamental right.
to self-determination, free from outside interference. We
express the hope that that day will come soon.

372. If the States Members of the United Nations do not
resolutely condemn that act of open military aggression by
” the United States against Grenada and do not take effecrive measures to ensure the immediate withdrawal of the
inierventionist troops and the safeguarding of Grenada’s
full sovereignty, that lack of action may encourage the
current United States Administration
to commit further
367. The PRESIDENT
(interpretarionjto~
A~ubic): The
acts
of
aggression
both
on
this
continent
and in other parts
next speaker is the representative of Czechoslovakia. I,
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
-of the world.
his statement.
a.,
I
‘- “373.; ‘The PRESIDENT
(inrerprerafionfiom Arabic): The
‘next speaker is the representative of the Dominican
368. lVh. h&RIN
(Czechosfodda): Mr. President, -on
behalf of the Czechoslovak delegation I thank you for ,y_ Republic. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
giving us the opportunity to speak at today’s meeting of ‘.I-*. andI to make his statement.
the Security Council to express Czechoslovakia’s position.. ‘,’ ...
on the open armed aggression of the United States against.; ‘- 374.‘;. Mr. KNIPPING
VICTORIA
(Dominican RepubGrenada, a sovereign State Member of the, United
‘lit) (inrerpretatiun from Spanish): First of all, Mr. Presi.
.. ‘.‘.$lent, I should like, through you, to thank the members of
Nations.
.
‘T,:the Security Council for giving me the opportunity to
369. The people and the Government of Czechoslovakia ;- speak; I .also wish to. congratulate You9 Sir, on thevery
express ‘profound indignation over the aggressive attack ~.:.serene;~able and experienced way in which you are gutdmg
.the work of the Council during this discussion on a very
against peace-loving Grenada by interventionist troops of
the United States. The insidious attack by imperialist for-. t delicate and. important issue. I shall heed your cordial
appeal and endeavour to be extremely brief.
ces represents a violation of the independence and territor-.
ial integrity of Grenada and is sharply at variance with the
375; The .delegation of the Dominican Republic feels
Charter of the United Nations and with the basic norms of
international law. This act of open aggression is aimed not. 1dtity;bound to participate in this meeting of the Security
only at the suppression of the sovereign rights of the :. Council;which
is examiniflg the recent events that have
people of Grenada but also at the creation of a situation in ,....occurred in the Caribbean island of Grenada.
which the United States would want to decide-with impunity the fate of the peoples of Latin America and other parts ‘,376Y:‘Tie Do minican Republic-which
itself has suffered
of the world. The United States Administration bears full
.,at various times since the beginning of its life as a republic
responsibility for this international crime, which not only .;,;:,jhe ignominy
of having its honour, sovereignty and teniincreases tension in the region of Central America;. but ;s; torial ‘integrity’&@
by the occupation of its soil by
‘-(:$$ading foreign..troops-reaffirms
also poses a serious threat to world peace.
-in the clearest, most
.
‘-.
: - -pnequivocal and’ most categorical manner its unswerving
370. The United States has taken an openly hostile atti:~ :* traditional p&y
-df scrupulous adherence to the fundatude towards the revolutionary process in Grenada from. f,.%”
-=~mentai norms and principles of international law.
the very beginning. It organized subversive actions aimed .-. :
: :
at destabilizing the efforts of the Grenadian people .to ” 377. In .keeping with that steadfast course of conduct in
build a new society. It did not conceal the preparations for .:I, Dominicansforeign
policy,
expressed
with
the
same
fairdirect military intervention. The interventionists* aim is to ..~~~ness
.wheneverthdse norms and principles are flouted, we
stifle Grenada’s revolutionary process, as well.as fully to.
deplore all the tragic events that have occurred in Grensubordinate Central America and the Caribbean to irnpei” ‘:., ada, events which have given rise to the violent death of its
‘..
rialist and neo-colonialist rule.
Prime Minister, eminent members of its Government and
.. ,: other persons. We deplore the fact that force has been used
371. The people and the Government of the Czechos- : against the territorial integrity and political independence
of that State in a.way which is incompatible with the purlovak Socialist Republic resolutely condemn the armed
poses of the United Nations and in open violation of the
aggression of the United States against Grenada and other
actions directed against Cuba, Nicaragua and the national :_. principles of non-intervention and the self-determination
of peoples.
liberation struggle in Central America. They express their
full solidarity with, and support for, the heroic struggle of
378. In conclusion, we express the hope that Grenada
the people of Grenada for the defence of their revolutionary achievements and for their right to decide their fate
will recover its full normalcy as soon as possible and that
its people will. find the appropriate means to express its
independently. They emphatically demand an immediate
halt to the intervention and the withdrawal of all the
genuine political will peacefully and freely.
occupying forces from Grenada. The Czechoslovak delegation demands most resolutely that the people of Gren379. The PRESIDENT. (interprerarian from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of the United Republic of
ada be guaranteed the speediest possible return to the free
34

Tanzania. I invite him to take a place at the Council table.
and to make his statement.

tainly : ask ourselves seriously whether it is not the
beginning of the disintegration of world society. For, if a
Member can now be excused from observing such important norms of international conduct, is it not permission
for any other Member to do the same, indeed anything in
vidation of such norms?

380. Mr. RUPIA (United Republic of Tanzania): Mr.
President, on 25 October, the day after the United Nations
was marking its thirty-eighth anniversary, the world witnessed an act by a permanent member of the Security
Council which defied one of the most fundamental principles of this Organization and international law. The
United States of America, leading eight Caribbean States,
carried out an invasion of a Member of the United
Nations, resulting in widespread bloodshed and the loss of
many lives.

385. The question has been posed many times that if the
world accepts the excuse given for the invasion of Grenada, how many States in the world can rest assured that
they are not a target for the next invasion? And if these
reasons for the invasion are admitted in spite of the total
lack of justification under the Charter, can there not be
other reasons available outside the Charter to justify invasions elsewhere? Can it be difficult to get such excuses for
the many cases of differences between States of which we
are all aware?

381. That invasion was the culmination of successive
ominous statements and unfounded allegations by .the
United States against the Government of Grenada.
Although those statements were hostile enough to cause
concern and attract the sympathy of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries for Grenada in resisting efforts at
destabilization directed against it, it was not easy to believe
that the forces against that small island nation would go to
the extent of so blatantly and openly invading it. The
shock of the world community was compounded when the
reasons for the invasion were given by the invading
countries.

386. Today it is Grenada; tomorrow any one of us could
face the same fate for the same reasons. Today it is to
evacuate citizens and to restore socalled democratic institutions; tomorrow it could very well be to remove thirdparty nationals in other countries considered unacceptable
or to change the domestic or foreign policies of those weak
States-in other words, to restore regimes which are subservient to the invader and a socio-political system that is
acceptable to the stronger. Today it is to prevent the construction of an airport allegedly capable of use for military
purposes by a foreign Power; tomorrow it may very well
be to prevent the expansion of a harbour, the construction
of a railway or a building that is unilaterally and subjectively perceived capable of serving a military purpose. In
other words, outside the Charter there is no end to imaginary rationalisations for such acts of aggression.

382. The Charter of the United Nations permits the use
of force only in two sets of circumstances: first, when a
country or a group of countries invites one or more countries to assist in individual or collective self-defence against
armed external aggression; secondly, when the Security
Council decides to take enforcement measures under
Chapter VII of the Charter. None of those reasons was
adduced. Instead, the world was treated to completely
strange logic in justifying the invasion. We were told that
the justifications of the armed intervention were (a) to
evacuate citizens of the super-Power, and (b) to restore
so-called democratic institutions in Grenada.

387. As we are discussing the horror of the invasion of
Grenada, those of us who come from southern Africa cannot fail to see the encouragement this invasion has given to
the apartheid regime of Pretoria. We cannot fail to reflect
on the implications of this act of aggression coming from a
Power that has pledged so-called constructive co-operation
with that regime. Lacking any excuse for its unprovoked
acts of aggression and destabilization against neighbouring
States, the restless, racist and criminal regime of South
Africa has always been in need of such examples by
Members of the United Nations as a smokescreen behind
which to hide. The invaders of Grenada have, regrettably,
given that outcast regime consoling company.

383. To this shock the world community understandably
reacted without hesitation by categorically condemning
that invasion. With the exception of those involved in the
invasion, no country that has so far expressed itself on the
question has endorsed that act of aggression. Indeed,
speaker after speaker in the Council and every statement
made outside this chamber have only confirmed the gross
violation of the many international principles and -norms
which has been committed by the nine States-principles
of the very Charter this Council stands for, principles of
international law and obligations under treaties. The world
community has rejected the flimsy legal and political arguments which have been advanced in justification of this act
of aggression, which constitutes a dangerous and arrogant
departure from international norms.

388. The whole of Africa and all third-world countries
must get the message of the Grenada invasion. There is no
place in the third world which is remote from the military
reach of’any of the big Powers. After the invasion of Grenada, we must consider ourselves the next object of punishment for anything that offends a big Power that does not
respect the Charter of the United Nations or international
law.

-384. To defy the principles in the Charter which guarantee the territorial integrity and political independence of
Member States is to reject some of the very basic purposes
of the United Nations. It is to turn one’s back against the
desire of all peace-loving Members for world order and
peace. It is to dismiss the Charter as an irrelevant document. If this kind of conduct is allowed, we should cer-

389. The non-aligned countries must view this event as a
very serious development. It cannot but be frustrating and
worrying that some of its members have succumbed to the
temptation of being used by one of the super-Powers in its
ideological crusade in violent defiance of the cardinal prin35

_‘.

ciples of the Movement. To undermine the Movement is to
weaken and undercut one of the most important forces for
world peace, justice, independence and the dignity of man.

expressing the position of my country and my delegation
with regard to the question now before the Council. I will
be brief.

390. My delegation finds it regrettable that in this case it
has been the weak and the vulnerable who have found it
necessary to involve themselves in this action. Today it is
Grenada; tomorrow it may be Jamaica, Barbados, Dominica, Saint Lucia, Antigua and Barbuda, Saint Christopher
and Nevis, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines or Montserrat. For if military strength-either that possessed by ourselves or that which is placed at our disposal by our
friends-were the means of our existence as independent
and non-aligned countries, then I am afraid very few of us
would ever continue to exist as independent States. We the
weak derive strength in collective solidarity under the
Charter. We have survived the whims and dislikes of those
more powerful through the existence of the very principles
which the invasion has violated.

396. The Government and the delegation of Chile are
following the events in Grenada with deep concern. For
some time now a serious process of foreign infiltration and
interference has been observed in that country. An exaggerated arms buildup, the establishment of a disproportionate naval and military infrastructure, the presence of
Soviet and Cuban advisers and agents have constituted
elements in a disquieting picture and a situation of danger
and threat to the stability of other nations of the area. This
led countries belonging to the OECS, along with Barbados, the United States of America and Jamaica, to adopt
the decision to initiate action which the international community now knows about and deplores.

391. My Government has already issued a statement
rejecting this blatant act of aggression. Today we urge the
Council to express the indignation of the international
community. The gravity of the involvement of a permanent member of the Security Council in a crusade of lawlessness and piracy must be underlined. The Council must
be categorical in condemning this act and call upon the
United States and the eight Caribbean States to withdraw
their invading forces immediately and respect the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of Grenada.

398. My country has always opposed the use of force and
interference in the internal affairs of other States. When
questions have arisen concerning relations among countries of the hemisphere, we have always thought the best
way of avoiding confrontation to be the timely recourse to
precisely those mechanisms which the nations of the continent have agreed on in order to guarantee peace and
order and the security of their peoples.

397. Chile is certain that the invasion would not have
occurred had it not been for these developments.

399. My country has repeatedly expressed in’the United
Nations its concern at the obvious lack of the will to seek
by all possible means the peaceful settlement of disputes
and the maintenance of international peace and security.
For this reason it has insisted on the urgent need to devise
formulas which would allow the United Nations to keep a
close watch on the development of situations that could
deteriorate so severely as to make Security Council action
impossible or futile.

392. We extend our condolences to the people of Grenada who have lost members of their families as a result of
this invasion and occupation. We equally express our condolences to the Government of Cuba for the loss of its
citizens who in solidarity with their brothers and sisters of
Grenada chose to die rather than accept “protection” by
aggression.
393. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): I
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Brazil, Chile
and Singapore in which they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s
agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

400. My delegation again expresses the hope that the
tragic events affecting the American continent will give rise
to the reaction necessary to ensure that the most fundamental principles of the law of nations are respected by all
Member States, without any exception.
401. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Brazil. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
402. Mr. MACIEL (Brazil): Mr. President, let me first
express my appreciation to you and the other members of
the Council for giving us the opportunity to express our
views at this meeting of the Security Council.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Maciel (Bra.?@, Mr.
Trucco (Chile) and ‘Mr. Koh (Singapore) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
394. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Chile. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

403. Upon being informed about the recent events in
Grenada, the Government of Brazil issued a note, distributed on 26 October as an official document of the Security
Council, the text of which I shall read:

395. Mr. TRUCCO (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
Mr. President, I wish to thank you and the other members
of the Council for having given me the opportunity of

[rite speaker read the text of the note contained in document S/16084.]
36

404. I should like to add on behalf of my Government
that Brazil continues to follow closely the present develop
ments in Grenada. We hope that every effort will be made
to achieve a satisfactory settlement of that situation, in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, to which we are all committed and
which we are all bound to respect. We renew our appeal
for an honest and effective political effort and hope that it
will meet with a response. Brazil wishes to see the people of
Grenada assured of the free exercise of their right of selfdetermination.

Soviet occupation is probably larger than that of all the
casualties suffered in Grenada.
409. On 29 November 1982, the General Assembly at its
thirty-seventh session adopted its resolution 37137 on
Afghanistan. Which countries voted with the Soviet Union
against that resolution? They included: Angola, Bulgaria,
Byelorussia, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Yemen,
Ethiopia, the German Democratic Republic, Hungary,
Laos, Libya, Madagascar, Mongolia,
Mozambique,
Poland, Syria, the Ukraine and Viet Nam. By their support
for the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan those 18 countries have clearly shown that they owe no allegiance to the
principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of
States. The real motive for their opposition to the action of
the United States and others in Grenada is based not upon
principle, but upon the fact that those who have violated
the principle are their ideological adversaries, and those
who are the victims of foreign intervention are their ideological comrades. The world should not be deceived by the
opportunism and hypocrisy of those countries.

405. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Singapore. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
406. Mr. KOH (Singapore): My country, Singapore, is
one of the smallest States Members of the United Nations.
It is a militarily weak State. Because we are small and
because we are militarily weak, we therefore have a major
stake in the efficacy of international law, in the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and in the United
Nations collective security system. It is because our
national security is threatened whenever a small or militarily weak State falls victim to aggression, intervention and
interference by a bigger or militarily more powerful State
that Singapore has been so outspoken in defence of the
fundamental principles of the Charter. We believe that all
small and militarily weak States share with us the same
interest in protecting these principles, which afford us a
degree of protection in a world which is all too prone to
violence.

410. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): I
shall now make a statement as the representative of
JORDAN.
411. Jordan is following events in Grenada with profound concern. The invasion and the violence that preceded it are evidence of the deteriorating and dangerous
condition of international peace and security. These events
also highlight the weakness of the Security Council. We
have noted of late that there are those who disregard the
United Nations because they have no faith in i? ability, or
because they feel that they have sufficient strength and
power to do so. This is becoming common among States.

407. It is easy enough for us to demonstrate our adherence to principle when to do so is convenient and advantageous and costs us nothing. The test of a country’s
adherence to principle comes when such adherence is
inconvenient. I find myself in such a situation today. Barbados, Jamaica, the United States, and the member States
of the OECS are friends of my country. It would be
extremely convenient for me to acquiesce in what-they
have done or to remain silent. To do so, however, would,
in the long run, undermine the moral and legal significance
of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
which my country regards as a shield. This is why we must
put our adherence to principle above friendship. This is
why we cannot condone the action of our friends in Grenada. The stand which my country has taken in this case is
consistent with the stand which we have taken in other
cases where the principle of non-interference in the internal
affairs of States was also violated.

412. The invasion of Grenada is a violation of the principies of the Charter and of the rules of international law, in
particular in respect of the non-use or threat of use of force
and of non-intervention in the internal ,affairs of other
States. We cannot accept the occupation of an independent State, a Member of the United Nations, under any
pretext whatsoever. No one has drawn the attention of the
Security Council to a threat from Grenada to the security
of any neighbouring or distant country. We do not agree
with the attempts by some to intervene in the internal
affairs of States and peoples on social or ideological
grounds. As we condemn the invasion of Grenada, carried
out under security and moral pretexts, we reject any
further attempts to exploit social differences between
States or peoples to achieve any ideological gains or to
expand spheres of influence. The inability to influence a
situation cannot justify invasion or the use of force. We
cannot accept invasion and occupation under the pretext
that such and such a party has the intention to commit
aggression. If we were to accept that as a justification for an
invasion, then any party could invade another, and our
world would become like Hobbes’s world-that is, a world
in which everyone would be at war with everyone else.

408. I regret that I shall have to say that some of the
countries which have been clamouring the loudest for the
condemnation of the foreign intervention in Grenada have
not demonstrated their adherence to the principle of noninterference in the internal affairs of States in other cases.
Le me cite just one example. In December 1979, the Soviet
Union committed aggression against Afghanistan. Soviet
troops are in occupation of that country today, and the
number of Afghans who are killed every day in resisting

413. An assessment as to whether there is a threat by one
party against another cannot be made outside the intemational body that has responsibility for the maintenance of
37

international peace and security. Likewise, the right to selfdefence does not imply the right to carry out preventive
actions or to invade and occupy other countries. The
States that invaded Grenada a few days ago had not notified this Council of any threat to their security by Grenada. Moreover, the safeguarding of civilians in a country
where a war and military operations are under way is the
responsibility of the International Committee of the Red
Cross. An assessment as to whether there is a threat to
international peace and security is the responsibility of the
Security Council alone, under Article 34 of the Charter.
Under Article 53, the regional organizations and agencies
cannot play a role in dealing with any threat to international peace and security except on the request of the Security Council and under its auspices.
414. We feel that the military activities against Grenada
are in contradiction to the principles of the Charter and
constitute a grave danger, for it could serve as a precedent
to be invoked to justify similar occupation operations in
the future.
415. This invasion resembles Israeli military operations
in the Middle East-in other words, invade first and then
look for the justification. This invasion is reminiscent of
certain invasions carried out by a certain country to ensure
that the situation in neighbouring regions conforms to its
strategic interests. This ends up. by preventing countries
and peoples from exercising their right to selfdetermination.

420. -The international community has received further
proof as to what a gulf there is between talk about “loving
peace” and “morality” and the actual deeds of those who
determine United States policy in international affairs.
Representatives here still have fresh in their memory the
following words solemnly spoken in this Council by the
United States representative on 25 March this year: “The
United States indeed has no intention of invading anyone
or of conducting an armed action against anyone, or of
occupying any other country.*’ [See 2423rd meeting, para.
168.1 Lofty phrases about non-aggression, freedom and
democracy pours forth in endless waves on us here in the
Council, and also directly from the American capital.
However, “non-aggression” as Washington understands it
means intervention in the Dominican Republic, in Cuba
and in other parts of the world; it means armed intervention in the affairs of Nicaragua. It is clear that by United
States standards “democracy” applies only to those fascist
dictator regimes in Chile, El Salvador or racist South
Africa. That is why those regimes enjoy unconditional support from the White House, which simply closes its eyes to
the torture of political detainees, to terrorism and to the
activities of “death squads”.
421. We feel we must also say a few words in connection
with today’s statements by the President of the United
States and the United States representative in the Security
Council.
422. As the Council knows, Mr. Yuri Andropov, General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union and President of the Presidium
of the Supreme Soviet, said the following in his statement
on 28 September this year [S/16017, annex]:

416. In conclusion, I should like to recall that the Foreign Minister of my country, .at the 19th meeting of the
thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly, that one of
the reasons for the present tension in the international
situation is that some regulate their national interests in a
manner that is not clearly defined and on an ideological or
moral basis, and then exploit what they have seized by
military strength to serve those interests. The invasion of
Grenada and what has followed it furnishes clear proof of
this.
417.

“Even if someone had any illusions as to the possibility of a turn for the better in the policy of the present
American Administration, the latest developments have
finally dispelled them. For the sake of its imperial ambitions, it goes so far that one begins to doubt whether
Washington has any brakes at all preventing it from
crossing the mark before which any sober-minded person must stop.”

I now resume my capacity as PRESIDENT.

423. What has been said today on behalf of the United
States by way of justification of the American military
intervention against that small independent country boils
down to the following-if
we discard the unpardonable
United States demagoguery: the United States is declaring
that from now on it will regard as legal only those internal
orders in any country that bear the stamp “Made in the
United States”. All other orders it considers could be
undermined or overthrown. It is specifically to justify this
openly imperialistic policy that the cynical statements that
we have heard today have been made-statements alleging
that the Charter of the United Nations permits the use of
force and, above all, permits the use of force by the United
States of America.

418. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interprezationfimz Russian): The Soviet delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution calling for a
halt to this unceremonious high-handedness in intemational affairs, a halt to the military intervention by the
United States.
419. During the Council’s debate we have seen more
clearly than ever the great gulf between those who aspire to
be the supreme arbiter of the fate of the world and all those
who truly hold dear the ideals of.freedom, independence
and sovereign existence. In the Council chamber we have
heard virtually not one voice raised to justify the military
intervention, the flagrant interference by Washington in
the internal affairs of sovereign Grenada. The exceptions
were only such countries as Saint Lucia, Dominica, the
United Kingdom and Antigua and Barbuda.

424. This point was quite correctly noted by, for example, Mr. Maksoud, the observer for the League of Arab
. States. The United States invasion of Grenada and those
pathetic attempts to justify it show quite clearly that the
38

war machine of American imperialism is now going full
steam ahead, and this in turn shows what a dangerous
situation there would be if the United States were to attain
military superiority in the world which is something to
which it aspires. Fortunately, this will not be permitted.

and my President have no imperial goals. We will, as we
can, assist in the defence of freedom. As we are able, we
will assist in the establishment and restoration of democratic institutions, particularly when they have been cruelly
and violently destroyed. We will, as we are able, assist in
helping peoples preserve and extend human rights. All of
that constitutes the goals of my country and of my
Government. That is a lasting commitment. I wish only to
reaffirm it tonight.
.

425. At this very moment, as the Council meets here,
blood is being shed in Grenada, and those American “freedom fighters” are resorting to mass terror and intimidation against the population of the island. The fact that
behind this action there is an attempt to bring to power a
regime obedient to the United States is not even being
hidden now.

431. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): I
shall now put to the vote the draft resolution contained in
document S/16077/Rev.l.

426. The Soviet Union strongly condemns the aggression
against the Caribbean island -State and terms i& crime
against humanity. As was stated in the TASS statement
published on 26 October this year, “The bandit-like attack
on Grenada clearly shows the danger to peace and to the
freedom of the peoples inherent in the policy that is being
pursued in international affairs by the current American
Administration.”
American action against Grenada and
the flagrant military intervention in the internal affairs of
Nicaragua and El Salvador are attempts by sword and
blood-spilling to arrogate to itself the right to decide what
internal and external policies should be pursued by independent States. Today’s events in Grenada could at any
moment turn into a tragedy for other peoples, and primarily
those peoples that Washington so disdainfully calls the
“pseudo-non-aligned”.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, Zimbabwe.
Against: United States of America.
Abstaining: Togo, United Kingdom
Northern Ireland, Zaire.

of Great Britain and

The resuh of the vote was 11 in favour, 1 against, and 3
abstentions.
The draft resolution was not adopted, the negative vote
being that of a permanent member of the Council.

427. The aggression unleashed by the current Administration in Washington against a small non-aligned State
should not escape strong condemnation by those who hold
dear the ideals of true independence, justice and the right
of peoples to determine their own fate, and by those who
oppose high-handedness and lawlessness in international
relations.

432. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): I
shall now call on those representatives who have asked to
be allowed to make statements after the voting.
433. Mr. NGUAYILA
MBELA KALANDA
(Zaire)
(interpretation from French): As we said on Wednesday in
our statement to the Council 12489th meeting], Zaire
deplores and rejects aggression, diktat, shows of strength
and interference in the internal affairs of other States.

428. The struggle against the aggression committed
against Grenada will continue.
429. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America): I
had not intended to extend an already long and arduous
day of work, but I had thought that our work was serious
and that our purpose was to address genuine concern.
After listening to the diatribe of the representative of the
Soviet Union, I decided that I had best put aside my
intention.

434. In this spirit and this logic we did not vote against
the draft resolution, but by abstaining we wished to protect certain trends which, pursuant to certain alliances and
ideologies, consist in individualizing
the victims of condemnation instead of abiding by respect for and preservation of the principles of the Charter. In similar previous
cases, when the Council, with the authority and competence vested in it under the Charter, should have discharged its duties as the statutory guardian of world peace,
we have endeavoured, by concealing our divisions and
impotence, to shift our responsibilities to other organs or
to regional bodies. In other cases the Council has been
incapable of condemning or calling for the troops of an
aggressor to withdraw when circumstances so required.

430. I would remind the representative of the Soviet
Union that on 25 March, when the representative of the
United States made the statement that he quoted, indeed,
the United States did not intend to invade any country. On
25 October 1983, the United States did not intend to
invade any country. On 25 October 1983, the United
States, along with Barbados and Jamaica, acceded to the
request of friends-of
gravely, perilously threatened
friends-who sought our assistance in helping to restore
the freedoms of the people of Grenada and in helping to
repel the threat so imminently perceived to themselves.
The Soviet representative speaks, quoting his head of
Government, of United States imperial goals. My country

435. Therefore our abstention today is a protest and an
alarm signal, inviting the Council fully to discharge its
duties. We hope that henceforth it will play its part and
safeguard the security of small, poor and defenceless States
such as ours,
39

436. Mr. SINCLAIR
(Guyana): My delegation, along
with those of Nicaragua and Zimbabwe, submitted to the
Council a draft resolution which, we were convinced,
reflected well the feelings of indignation expressed in this
forum and elsewhere at the recent invasion of Grenada.
That draft resolution reflected what was overwhelmingly
recognized as a necessary course of action by the Council
in the circumstances, the need for an immediate cessation
of the intervention, withdrawal of the invading forces and
fullest respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Grenada.

people of Grenada under the guns of the occupying forces,
and we hope that we will soon be allowed to learn of their
welfare.
442. Far beyond the immediate issue we have been discussing this week, I fear that if this week’s events were to
become practice we should be entering into a new dark age
in relations between States in which the use of force is
given precedence over dialogue, military solutions take
priority over political solutions, and in which even small
States whose methods of political or .econom!c organization do not meet the standards of acceptability set by their
neighbours are now in danger of invasion to change the
status quo. I say this not to be provocative or to cause
offense. Guyana is a small State struggling to maintain and
strengthen its national independence, a State which sees
respect for the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations as the surest guarantee and protection of its independence. It is therefore with deep concern and in great
sorrow and anger that we have been following the events
in Grenada.

437. The draft resolution was not adopted because of the
negative vote of a permanent member, the United States of
America. But the overwhelming majority of the States that
participated in this debate have branded as illegal and
immoral the action taken by the United States in Grenada.
The sponsors of the draft resolution would like to say a
special word of thanks to the delegations of China, France,
Jordan, Malta, the Netherlands, Pakistan, Poland and the
Soviet Union for placing themselves so squarely and
unequivocally on the side of principle this evening.
438. We should also like to pay a tribute to those
Governments whose delegations have not spoken in the
debate but which have also made statements, whether formal or otherwise, often condemning but in every case certainly rejecting the invasion of Grenada as a violation of
international law. I refer, for example, to the Governments
of Belize, the Bahamas, Canada, the Federal Republic of
Germany, Italy and Sweden. I refer to the Council of
Europe, which declared that public opinion would find it
hard to reconcile the invasion with the principles of international law.

443. If States in any region can invite outside forces to
intervene in a country. whose policies and performance
displease them, we all stand threatened. This week it is
Grenada. Who will it be tomorrow7 For whom do the
bells now toll?
444. When a number of States combine to invite an outside Power to intervene illegally in a neighbouring State,
trampling underfoot the sovereignty and independence of
that State, they are also diminishing their own sovereignty
in the process. Let us make no mistake about that. The
intervening Power will not apply one standard in its relations with the victim State and another in its relations with
the inviting States. It will apply against the latter the same
standards on the basis of which they invited its intervention. What they are doing is in effect pledging their own
compliance with those standards, thereby diminishing
their own sovereignty. Did Caribbean States gain their
hard-earned independence in order to resubmit to a new
colonialism or to set ourselves up as a new breed of latterday imperialists? There is no room for that in the
Caribbean.

439. We are all aware, on the basis of information coming out of Washington, that the majority of delegates to
the OAS condemned the invasion of Grenada as a violation of international law and the principles of nonintervention in the internal affairs of States.
440. Stanstield Turner, former director of the American
Central Intelligence Agency, said on Monday that Grenada was so small that it could not even be found on the
map and that as a military force Grenada did not even
figure on the list. Yet Grenada was not too small for the
military might of a super-Power to be unleashed against it
complete with reinforcements, including additional helicopter gunships which, we heard this morning, were being
dispatched to that territory.

445. In this regard we noted with close attention and
much interest the statement by the representative of Trinidad and Tobago this evening in his capacity as representative of his Government-he
also happens to be current
Chairman of CARICOM-on
the deliberations of the
twelve Caribbean heads of State invited to Trinidad last
weekend. His report is critical to our assessment of the
tragic events in Grenada, for those who invaded Grenada
invoked the holy mantle of the sub-regional eastern Caribbean grouping. But all of the invading States-except the
United States or course, and encompassing more than the
eastern Caribbean in the form of Barbados and Jamaicabelong to CARICOM
and participated in that consultation last weekend.

441. The use of such armaments must undoubtedly be
causing tremendous suffering and death in Grenada. Yet
in the course of the reporting during the week on events
taking place there, does anyone remember reading or hearing anything about Grenadian casualties? We hear about
American casualties and Cuban casualties, but are we to
assume that there have been no Gtenadian casualties,
whether of a civilian nature or among the armed forces?
Our concern in this regard is all the greater when we recall
that there has been and continues to be a complete news
blackout by the occupying authorities. My delegation is
very concerned, and genuinely so, about the fate of the

446. We have heard of the deep concern and the need
expressed to seek a peaceful, diplomatic, regional solution.
The proposals agreed on by CARICOM
States were
40

designed to achieve a return to normality, the maintenance
of peace through a CARICOM
peace-keeping force and
the establishment of a broad-based national Government.
The CARICOM proposals were precisely besigned to meet
the objectives of those who in invading Grenada were so
proudly carrying the banner of democracy. These concerns
would have been fully met if the CARICOM
proposals
had been implemented by them. They were set aside by the
OECS and other States because they lacked that element
which would have satisfied the desire for suppression of
Grenada’s independence and sovereignty and thus the
creation of an opportunity to impose a form of government suitable and acceptable to those who, by their own
admission, had only tolerated the Bishop Government.
The desire to purge Grenada of unacceptable forces had to
be satisfied.
447. The American veto notwithstanding, or perhaps the
veto does underscore, there is a compelling need for us to
be very emphatic that we shall never condone intervention
and interference; we shall never condone the violation of

the sovereignty and territorial
never forsake the Charter.

integrity of a State. We shall

448. The events in Grenada this week and the outcome
of the debate this evening show the clear need for that
great majority of States which still see value in the Charter
and in international relations based on the rule of law to
redouble our efforts to ensure that respect for independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity shall never perish from the face of the earth.
The meeting rose on Friday, 28 October, at 3.05 a.m.
NOTES
’ General Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
’ See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-eighth Session,
Plenary Meetings, Vol. I, 5th meeting, para. 140.
’ General Assembly resolution 2131 (XX).
’ See Official Recorris of the General Assembly, Thirty-eighth Session,
PIenary Meetings, Vol. I, 19th meeting, para. 21.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes, New York ou Gentve.
KAK

I-IOJIYYkiTb

M3AAHMI1

OPTAHH3AUHM

.OFb~MHEHHbIX

HAUMR

&ilaHliK
OpraHll3aUuKO6aeuuHeHHbiX
HauttilMOxHO
KynriTi.
B KHUxHbIX
MaTa3HHaX
uareHTCTBaXBOBCeXpa~OHaXMUpa.HaBOLWTe
CnpaBKli
06 H3JIaHUXXBBKIlJeMKHA~HOM
Mara3UHe
ww numare
no, anpecy:
OpraHIiPallliK
06LeilkiHeHHbIX
HatruB,
GeKuna no
nponame
~fzla~wi&
HbKdiOpK
HJIW XeHesa.

COMO
CONSEGUIR
PUBLICACIONES
DE LAS NACIONES
UNIDAS
Las pubiicac’iones de las Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes de1 mundo. Cons&e a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in t’nitcd

Nltions,

New

York

00600

QO-60205-August

1992-2.050
