S/2016/384

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 April 2016
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and 2258 (2015)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the twenty-sixth submitted pursuant to Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), paragraph 17, 2165 (2014), paragraph 10, 2191 (2014),
paragraph 5, and 2258 (2015), paragraph 5, in which the Council requested the
Secretary-General to report, every 30 days, on the implementation of the resolutions
by all parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on the data available to United
Nations agencies on the ground, from the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic,
other Syrian sources and open sources. Data from United Nations agencies on their
humanitarian deliveries have been reported for the period from 1 to 31 March 2016.
More recent data have been included when available.

II. Major developments
A.

Developments on the ground
3.
The cessation of hostilities outlined in Security Council resolution 2268
(2016), by and large, continued to hold since entering into effect on 27 February
2016. As a result, March saw a clear decrease in the number of military operations.
With ongoing meetings of the Task Force on Humanitarian Access, formed by the
International Syria Support Group, and a simplified process for requesting approval
for inter-agency convoys from Syrian authorities, the United Nations has continued
to increase its assistance to people in besieged, hard -to-reach and priority cross-line
locations during the reporting period. From 1 January to 12 April 2016, the United
Nations reached 450,725 of 4.6 million civilians in those locations. In March,
inter-agency convoys brought food aid to 102,125 of 486,000 civilians in besieged
areas. However, more needs to be done to reach all people in besieged, hard -toreach and other priority cross-line locations to which access has been formally
approved. Delays in the final clearance of convoys, irregular access for medical and
humanitarian workers and the removal of medicine and medical supplies and
surgical items remain issues of significant concern.

16-06383 (E)

260416

*1606383*

S/2016/384

4.
In line with resolution 2258 (2015), developments on the ground with regard
to compliance with resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) by all
parties in the Syrian Arab Republic is briefly described below. This information is
without prejudice to the work of the Task Force on the Ceasefire of the International
Syria Support Group.
5.
While the cessation of hostilities decreased the level of fighting throughout the
country, the Syrian people continued to be particularly affected by the conflict in
those areas where military operations remained most intense, including areas of Rif
Dimashq, Aleppo, Idlib, Dar‘a, Hasakah, Dayr al-Zawr and Homs governorates. The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR)
documented attacks by all parties to the conflict, including government forces,
non-State armed opposition groups and designated terrorist groups. 1 Numerous
reports were received of air strikes, artillery fire and mortar and rocket attacks, as
well as of car and suicide bombings, killing and maiming inno cent civilians. Private
property, civilian infrastructure and protected buildings, such as schools and
hospitals, also continued to be damaged and destroyed.
6.
Fighting in Damascus and Rif Dimashq governorates continued to take a toll
on civilians. On 4 March, OHCHR received reports of two air strikes along with
artillery fire in the village of al-Shifoniya, near the town of Duma, allegedly killing
at least one civilian and injuring three first responders. On 10 March, information
received by OHCHR indicated that at least 4 civilians had been allegedly killed,
including a child, and 10 others injured by shelling by pro -government forces in
Duma. On the same day, intense fighting displaced 2,500 individuals within the
subdistrict of Tall. On 31 March, OHCHR received reports that 37 civilians,
including nine women and 12 children, had been killed and at least 40 others injured
by numerous air strikes on various areas in the town of Dayr al -Asafir. The strikes
had reportedly hit houses, a makeshift clinic, the grand mosque, a school and two
civil defence centres.
7.
In Barza, government and pro-government forces impeded freedom of
movement by preventing civilians, including public employees and students, from
moving in and out of the southern Damascus neighbourhood. The nearby area of
Qabun was simultaneously sealed off from outside traffic. The strict restrictions
remained in effect for more than two weeks in late March.
8.
In Aleppo governorate, attacks resulting in the deaths and displacement of
civilians continued to be reported. According to OHCHR, air strikes on 2 March on
I‘zaz killed six civilians, including three children. Fighting between the Syrian
Kurdish People’s Protection Units forces and non-State armed groups continued
along the Castello route, one of the last remaining major supply routes in the eastern
part of Aleppo city. On 3 March, OHCHR also received reports that non -State armed
opposition groups had attacked the Kurdish-held area of Shaykh Maqsud in Aleppo,
reportedly killing at least one civilian. On 6 March, similar attacks were reported to
have resulted in the deaths of at least 12 civilians and in injuring 40 others. On
11 March, OHCHR documented air strikes that struck the non-State armed
opposition group-held neighbourhoods of Marjah, Maʽadi, and Salihin in the eastern
part of Aleppo city, reportedly killing 8 civilians and injuring 15 others. On
__________________
1

2/15

On 30 May 2013, Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and the Nusrah Front were designated as
terrorist groups by the Security Council in accordance with resolution 1267 (1999). The two
groups operate in the Syrian Arab Republic.

16-06383

S/2016/384

20 March, Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) attacked the village of Kafr
Saghir in the north-eastern countryside of Aleppo, reportedly killing dozens of
civilians and illegally detaining several others. There are currently some 65,000
civilians displaced around Aleppo owing to the recent fighting.
9.
In Idlib governorate, attacks on residential and market areas resulted in the
deaths of civilians and damage to infrastructure. For example, on 1 March, OHCHR
reported that air strikes had struck residential areas in the village of Zʽayniyah,
reportedly killing at least 3 civilians and injuring 10 others. On 4 March,
pro-government forces reportedly hit residential areas in Khan Shaykhun, allegedly
killing three civilians, including a child, and injuring several others. On 7 March,
missiles fired from an aircraft hit a local marketplace in Abu al -Zuhur, allegedly
killing at least 19 civilians, including four children, and injuring 42 others. On
17 March, at least four civilians were reportedly killed and five injured when air
strikes struck houses in the village of Ghassaniyah. The village of Arihah was
allegedly targeted a number of times during the reporting period, including on
29 March when seven civilians were injured by an air strike allegedly hitting a
house.
10. Raqqah governorate also suffered from a number of deadly attacks. On
1 March, an air strike damaged the main water statio n in the city of Raqqah,
interrupting water service in 80 per cent of the city for several days. On 2 March,
OHCHR reported that several air strikes on Raqqah city had allegedly killed at least
seven civilians, including women and children, and injured dozens more. On 18 and
19 March, further air strikes in civilian-populated areas allegedly killed 43 civilians,
including nine children, and injured at least 60.
11. In Homs governorate, attacks resulted in civilians being killed or injured. On
19 March, OHCHR reported that an air strike on the village of Daminah, southwest
of the city of Homs, had allegedly killed one civilian and injured four others. On
27 March, government and allied forces seized the cities of Palmyra and Qaryatayn
from ISIL. On 9 April, the United Nations conducted an inter-agency mission to
Palmyra to complete a rapid assessment of the humanitarian situation on the ground.
The mission confirmed that few civilians remained in the area and that there was a
lack of water and electricity. Syrian and Russian forces have begun removing
explosive weapons, which are reported to pose a significant threat across much of
the area. Owing to the attacks in and around Palmyra during the reporting period,
OHCHR was not able to gather full information on civilian casualties. However,
OHCHR reports that air strikes against ISIL in Palmyra allegedly killed a child on
8 March and a civilian between 8 and 10 March. An analysis by the Operational
Satellite Applications Programme and the United Nations Institut e for Training and
Research indicates significant damage to civilian infrastructure in Palmyra, with
more than 600 damaged structures, including severe damage to the national hospital.
The Programme and the Institute have also identified a total of 37 dama ged
structures within the ancient city of Palmyra, with 14 structures destroyed, 8
severely damaged and 15 moderately damaged. The majority of the damaged
structures are in the vicinity of the Valley of the Tombs and the Necropolis, west
and southwest of Palmyra.
12. The local ceasefire agreement pertaining to the district of Waʽr in Homs,
which came into force on 1 December 2015, was suspended by both sides in early
March. This reportedly came as a result of a disagreement between both sides on

16-06383

3/15

S/2016/384

issues related to the status of detainees, weapons surrender by non -State armed
opposition groups and the evacuation of remaining non -State armed opposition
groups’ fighters from the neighbourhood. Since 10 March, government forces have
closed main roads leading into the district, trapping some 800 civilians in and out of
the community, and reduced the bread quota allocated to the district. The two
medical facilities in Waʽr were reported to be operating on a limited basis. Critical
medical evacuations are also reportedly being prevented by government forces. A
three-year-old boy who sustained a head injury while playing reportedly died on
19 March after being prevented from seeking medical care outside Waʽr for three
consecutive days.
13. Hasakah governorate has seen the continued displacement of persons during
the reporting period. On 3 March, the clashes around Markada (also in the
subdistrict of Arishah) displaced 6,000 civilians. OHCHR also reported an
improvised explosive device attack on 7 March, claimed by ISI L, outside a school
and restaurant in the Wasati neighbourhood of Qamishli, which injured five
civilians, including children.
14. In Dayr al-Zawr governorate, attacks by ISIL continued to be reported in
March. On 2 March, ISIL launched an unsuccessful offensive to advance on the city
of Dayr al-Zawr. On 7 March, ISIL reportedly fired mortars at the government -held
areas of Jurah and Qusur in Dayr al-Zawr, striking near a school and killing at least
10 civilians, including three children. At least 14 others, including children, were
injured, some seriously. On 13 March, ISIL fighters launched attacks on the Qusur
neighbourhood of Dayr al-Zawr, reportedly killing three civilians.
15. In Dar‘a governorate, attacks by artillery and mortar fire continued to be
reported, and the area has seen further displacement of civilians. On 8 March,
OHCHR reported that, during an alleged mortar attack by pro -government forces on
opposition-held areas of southern Dar‘a city, three civilians had been allegedly
killed and an unknown number of others injured. On the same day, two civilians
were reportedly killed near the neighbouring town of Mal, held by non -State armed
opposition groups, by either artillery or mortar fire. Partners on the ground estimate
that, since 21 March, as many as 12,500 civilians have been displaced from western
rural Dar‘a owing to fighting among several non-State armed opposition groups.
16. On 31 March, the Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation stated that
the Russian Federation was taking direct part in planning the military operation in
Palmyra, adding that its air force had launched more than 2,000 air strikes against
ISIL. Meanwhile, the Central Command of the United States of America confirmed
that, in March, at least 137 strikes had been carried out by the United States-led
coalition against ISIL targets in the governorates of Aleppo, Dayr al -Zawr, Hasakah,
Raqqah and Homs. OHCHR received various reports of air strikes, allegedly
conducted by international actors, which caused civilian casualties. However,
OHCHR was not able to verify adequately the origin of the reported air strikes.

B.

Human rights
17. The number of abuses and violations of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law documented by OHCHR during the reporting period
reflected the decrease in the level of fighting throughout the country.

4/15

16-06383

S/2016/384

18. Nevertheless, OHCHR continued to receive reports of abuses and killings by
ISIL in areas under their control. On 2 March, ISIL fighters allegedly shot dead t wo
civilians caught attempting to smuggle food items into the besieged area of Dayr
al-Zawr town. On 7 March, ISIL reportedly beheaded two young men in Dayr
al-Zawr accused of cooperating with government forces. On 14 March, ISIL
reportedly publicly stoned to death a woman accused of adultery in the Jaradiq area
of Mayadin, in Dayr al-Zawr.
19. OHCHR also received reports of the inhumane and degrading treatment of
detainees held in Tartus Central Prison, in violation of their human rights. Around
215 of the 700 people detained in the Tartus Central Prison are alleged to be held
under the Counter-Terrorism Act, with all 215 detainees reportedly being housed in
the same living quarters. Reports were received of beating and attacks with sharp
objects. OHCHR received information that a hunger strike started on 1 March had
ended on 16 March, allegedly after those taking part had been threatened by a prison
official.

C.

Humanitarian response
20. In March 2016, United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners continued
to reach millions of people in need through all modalities from within the Syri an
Arab Republic and across borders, pursuant to resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014)
and 2258 (2015). Non-governmental organizations (NGOs) also continued to deliver
assistance to people, in line with previous months. The Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic continued to provide basic services to areas under its control as well
as in many areas beyond its control.
Table 1
Number of people reached by organizations in March 2016
Organization

Number of people reached

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

259 836

International Organization for Migration

64 487

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
United Nations Children’s Fund

235 029
2 800 000

United Nations Development Programme

365 975

United Nations Population Fund

207 000

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East

450 000

World Food Programme

3 700 000

World Health Organization

622 000

21. Cross-border deliveries continued during the reporting period. As at 31 March,
the United Nations and its implementing partners had sent 17 convoys from Turkey
and Jordan to the Syrian Arab Republic under the terms of resolutions 2165 (2014),
2191 (2014) and 2258 (2015), benefiting millions of people (see annex, map 1, for
more information on United Nations cross-border convoys in March). In line with
Security Council resolutions, the United Nations notified the Syrian authorities in

16-06383

5/15

S/2016/384

advance of each shipment, including content, destination and number of beneficiaries.
No reports were received of any convoys being refused or found to be irregular.
22. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic
continued its operations in Jordan and Turkey. In March, it monitored 17 United
Nations humanitarian shipments consisting of 419 trucks, confirming the
humanitarian nature of each and notifying the Syrian authorities after each
shipment. The Mechanism continued to benefit from excellent coopera tion with the
Governments of Jordan and Turkey.
23. In March 2016, inter-agency convoys to the besieged and hard-to-reach
locations listed in table 2 were completed, assisting almost 327,000 people in need
(see also annex, map 2, for more information on access to besieged and hard-toreach locations).
Table 2
Inter-agency convoys in March 2016
Date

Location

Type of assistance

2 March

Muʽaddamiyah al-Sham (Rif
Dimashq)

Portions of previously excluded medicine and medical supplies

3 March

Waʽr (Homs)

Food, health assistance, non-food items, nutrition supplies,
water and sanitation support and education supplies. Surgical
items were removed from the convoy

4 and 7 March

Saqba, Ayn Tarma, Hazzah,
Bayt Siwa, Jisrayn and
Hammurah (Rif Dimashq)

Food, nutrition supplies and health assistance. Surgical items
and medicine and medical supplies were removed from the
convoy

16 March

Bludan (Rif Dimashq)

Food, wheat flour, medicine and medical supplies, nutrition
supplies and non-food items

17 March

Fuʽah and Kafraya (Idlib)

Food, wheat flour, medicine and medical supplies, nutrition
supplies and non-food items. Surgical items and medicine and
medical supplies were removed from the convoy

Madaya (Rif Dimashq)

Food, wheat flour, medicine and medical supplies, nutrition
supplies and non-food items. Surgical items and medicine and
medical supplies were removed from the convoy

Zabadani (Rif Dimashq)

Food, wheat flour, medicine and medical supplies, nutrition
supplies and non-food items. Surgical items and medicine and
medical supplies were removed from the convoy

21 March

Urum al-Kubra (Aleppo)

Food, medicine and medical supplies and nutrition supplies

22 and 24 March

Subdistrict of Hulah (Homs)

Surgical items and some of the medicine and medical supplies
were removed from the convoy

24. In March, United Nations agencies also undertook single -agency deliveries to
hard-to-reach and cross-line locations. For example, the World Food Programme
(WFP), in coordination with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, reached 6,440 people

6/15

16-06383

S/2016/384

through cross-line deliveries in Aniq Bajra, Akash and Salba in rural Hama. The
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) delivered water, sanitation and hygiene
supplies and health and nutrition supplies for more than 72,200 people through
single-agency convoys to Big Orem (Aleppo), Qalʽat al-Madiq (Hama), Waʽr and
Taldu (Homs). The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA) delivered food parcels, hygiene kits and health -care
services to up to 6,000 Palestine refugee families from Yarmuk, Yalda, Babila and
Bayt Saham.
Humanitarian access
25. Notwithstanding the recent progress made in gaining access to some besieged
and hard-to-reach locations, the delivery of humanitarian assistance to people in
need of assistance in the Syrian Arab Republic remained challenging in many areas
of the country as a result of active conflict, shifting conflict lines and deliberate
restrictions by the parties on the movement of people and goods.
26. Access to the 4.6 million people living in besieged and hard-to-reach locations
remained of critical concern. During the reporting period, the United Nations
agencies and partners reached 66 of the 154 hard-to-reach locations (43 per cent).
Details of assistance to people in hard-to-reach areas in March 2016 are contained
in table 3. Nearly half of the people in hard-to-reach areas are in areas controlled by
ISIL, to which the United Nations has extremely limited access.
Table 3
United Nations deliveries to the 4.6 million in hard-to-reach areas, March 2016
Sector (United Nations delivery only)

Number of people reached (as a percentage of 4.6 million)

Food security

364 800 (7.9)

Health

623 500 (13.5)

Non-food items

155 700 (3.4)

Water, sanitation and hygiene

176 600 (3.8)

27. Since the beginning of 2016, 72 inter-agency convoy requests have been
submitted to reach 2.3 million people in besieged and hard -to-reach locations, and
the status of those requests is outlined in table 4. On 23 March, the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic approved 6 of the 11 locations requested in the April
inter-agency convoy plan, as outlined in table 5. The remaining five locations were
not approved owing to cited security conditions on the ground; however, a verbal
indication was subsequently given for Zabadani. A verbal approval was also given
for Muʽaddamiyah. The United Nations sent a note verbale to the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of the Syrian Arab Republic on 24 March to seek a revision of the
number of approved beneficiaries in Zabadin, Irbin and Zamalka. No formal
feedback has been received but the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and the United
Nations are proceeding with planning those convoys on the basis of the revised
beneficiary numbers.

16-06383

7/15

S/2016/384

Table 4
Status of inter-agency convoy requests for the period from 1 January to
31 March 2016
Status of requests

Number of requests

Approved (and convoy proceeded)

16

Approved in principle; awaiting final facilitation letters

21

Denied

5

Submitted and unanswered within a three months’ period

30

Total submitted

72

Table 5
April inter-agency convoy requests in March 2016
Location

Status

Kafr Batna

Approved

Zabadin

Approved

Madaya

Approved

Irbin and Zamalka

Approved

Fuʽah and Kafraya

Approved

Eastern Aleppo city

Approved

Darayya

Not approved

Duma

Not approved

Eastern Harasta

Not approved

Muʽaddamiyah

Not approved

Zabadani

Not approved

28. Active conflict in several governorates hindered the effective delivery of
humanitarian assistance, as well as people’s access to essential services. For
example, disruptions to the power supply in the Aleppo area, owing to damage to
transmission lines and power plants, have resulted in reduced access to drinking
water for around two million people in western and eastern Aleppo. Although access
and security conditions improved in most of Aleppo and Idlib governorates
throughout March, aerial bombardments and ground fighting in areas controlled by
ISIL have hampered access and disrupted telecommunication channels.
29. Deliberate interference and restrictions by the parties also continued to prevent
aid delivery. For example, WFP continued to be unable to rea ch people in need in
areas controlled by ISIL owing to the inability to work independently and to
monitor activities. This affected some 600,000 people in need in Dayr al -Zawr and
Raqqah governorates, parts of rural Aleppo, southern rural Hasakah and

8/15

16-06383

S/2016/384

northwestern rural Hama. Meanwhile, seven requests from WFP to the Syrian
authorities to reach 14,000 people in Rif Dimashq (Herne, Sahl, Rankus and Hafir
al-Tahta) were not approved on grounds of security conditions.
30. The Nusaybin-Qamishli crossing in Hasakah governorate has been temporarily
closed by the Turkish authorities owing to security concerns since 27 December
2015. In March, the last available food rations in the Qamishli warehouse, sufficient
for 2,400 people, were distributed to people in need in Hasakah city. WFP has
supplies to cover the needs of 17,000 people for one week in case of sudden
displacement. Reports continue to be received that people have adopted negative
coping strategies, including eating only one meal per day and drastically re ducing
the types of food consumed.
31. As at 31 March, 52 United Nations visa requests (either new visas or renewals)
remained pending, 7 of which had exceeded the 15 working -day limit. In March, a
total of 279 visas for United Nations staff from nine age ncies were approved, of
which 112 were new visas and 167 renewals.
32. A total of 16 international NGOs are authorized to operate in the Syrian Arab
Republic. Three more such organizations have applications for approval by the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic pending. International NGOs continued to
face a series of administrative hurdles and restrictions that had an impact on their
ability to operate, including in gaining permission to undertake independent needs
assessments.
33. The number of national NGOs authorized to partner with United Nations
organizations increased from 142 to 143 in March. Authorized national NGOs
continue to operate under complex procedures in partnering with United Nations
agencies.
Besieged areas
34. Of the 4.6 million people living in hard-to-reach areas, some 486,700 people
remained besieged. This includes some 268,200 people besieged by the Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic in various locations in Rif Dimashq, 6,000 people
besieged by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and non-State armed
opposition groups in Yarmuk, in Damascus, some 200,000 people besieged by ISIL
in Dayr al-Zawr city, and some 12,500 people besieged by non-State armed
opposition groups and the Nusrah Front in Fuʽah and Kafraya, in I dlib governorate.
35. In March, inter-agency convoys assisted 102,125 people (20.9 per cent of the
total population) in 8 of the 18 besieged areas, while some people in Yarmuk could
receive assistance in the adjacent town of Yalda. During the reporting pe riod, Syrian
authorities did not approve requests for inter-agency convoys to Darayya,
Muʽaddamiyah and parts of eastern Ghutah (including Duma and Harasta).
Humanitarian conditions in those areas are reportedly dire and the United Nations
stands ready to deliver assistance to those besieged locations as soon as access is
granted. The flow of commercial supplies through official routes remained largely
blocked, leading to high prices for commodities reaching besieged areas through
unofficial and irregular supply lines. Freedom of movement remained heavily
restricted, though limited numbers of people were sporadically allowed to exit and
re-enter some besieged areas.

16-06383

9/15

S/2016/384

36. In eastern Ghutah, in Rif Dimashq governorate, some 176,500 people remain
besieged by government forces in the following locations: Duma, eastern Harasta,
Irbin, Zamalka, Ayn Tarma, Hammurah, Jisrayn, Kafr Batna, Saqba and Zabadin. As
previously reported, the United Nations and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent convoys
reached Saqba, Ayn Tarma, Bayt Sawa, Jisrayn and Hammurah on 4 and 7 March,
delivering multisectoral assistance for some 36,800 people overall, and vaccines
were delivered to the sub-branch of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent in Duma on
4 March and vaccinations have started in several locations in Eastern Ghutah.
37. In Madaya (and Buqayn), in Rif Dimashq governorate, some 42,000 people
remain besieged by government forces. United Nations and Syrian Arab Red
Crescent convoys delivered multisectoral assistance on 17 March. Surgical items
and medicine and medical supplies were removed from the convoy by the
authorities. While the nutrition status of people in Madaya has significantly
improved, five deaths have been reported in the area since February, including two
children suffering from diseases associated with malnutrition. A high number of
others are reported to suffer from oedema, which is associated with a lack of
protein. On 31 March, the evacuation of two humanitarian cases and 10
accompanying family members from the towns of Fuʽah and Kafraya in Idlib was
completed. In addition, three humanitarian cases and seven accompanying family
members were evacuated from Zabadani and Madaya. However, on 29 March, a
landmine explosion in the town of Buqayn caused the deaths of three children, two
of whom died after they were denied medical evacuation, and injured two people.
38. In Fuʽah and Kafraya, in Idlib governorate, some 12,500 people remain
besieged by non-State armed opposition groups and the Nusrah Front. United
Nations and Syrian Arab Red Crescent convoys delivered multisectoral assistance to
Fuʽah and Kafraya on 17 March. Surgical items and medicine and medical supplies
were removed from the convoy.
39. In Zabadani, in Rif Dimashq governorate, some 700 people remain besieged
by government forces. On 17 March, an inter-agency convoy delivered multisectoral
assistance sufficient for one month for 1,000 people in Zabadani. Surgical items and
medicine and medical supplies were removed from the convoy. On 25 March, the
last surgeon in Zabadani and two other men were repor tedly killed by gunfire from
pro-government militias. A number of other individuals were injured in the incident.
40. In Darayya, in Rif Dimashq governorate, about 4,000 people remain besieged
by government forces. The United Nations has been unable to de liver assistance to
Darayya since November 2012.
41. In Muʽaddamiyah al-Sham, in Rif Dimashq governorate, about 45,000 people
remain besieged by government forces. On 2 March, United Nations and Syrian
Arab Red Crescent convoys delivered portions of previously excluded medicine and
medical supplies to Muʽaddamiyah al-Sham.
42. In Yarmuk, in Damascus, some 6,000 people are besieged by government
forces and non-State armed opposition groups. All UNRWA operations in Yarmuk
remained suspended in March. UNRWA continued its missions to Yalda, following
approval on 13 February, and has so far distributed 11,700 family food parcels,
19,160 blankets and 11,600 hygiene kits to families from Yarmuk, Yalda, Babila and
Bayt Saham. Since 9 March 2016, 1,100 Palestine refugees have received medical

10/15

16-06383

S/2016/384

care through a mobile medical team, and 80 patients have received dental care at the
UNRWA mobile dental clinic deployed in Yalda.
43. In the government-controlled western neighbourhoods of the city of Dayr
al-Zawr, some 200,000 people are besieged by ISIL. The humanitarian situation in
the besieged area continues to deteriorate, with shortages of food and medical care,
and severe malnutrition reported during the reporting period. On 10, 12 and 14 April,
WFP successfully carried out high-altitude airdrops over the besieged city, dropping
a total of 55 tons of urgently needed food assistance. The Syrian Arab Red Crescent
distributed partial food rations for up to 25,000 beneficiaries in the areas of the
besieged city most affected by food insecurity.
Free passage of medical supplies, personnel and equipment
44. Although at lower levels than in previous months, attacks on medical facilities
and personnel continued during the reporting period. Physicians for Human Rights
documented one attack on a medical facility in Ladhiqiyah governorate and the
deaths of four medical personnel in March.
45. The World Health Organization (WHO) and health partners delivered some
622,248 medical treatments, including 546,743 across conflict li nes in Aleppo,
Idlib, Damascus, Rif Dimashq and Homs governorates. Between 13 and 17 March,
WHO, in partnership with the Ministry of Health, conducted a national polio
vaccination campaign reaching 2.1 million children under five. The Ministry of
Health, with support from WHO, also conducted a rubella vaccination campaign in
the north of the country. In Idlib, nearly 290,066 children were vaccinated (97 per
cent of the target). UNICEF also reported that more than 7,200 children received
routine vaccinations in Aleppo, Ladhiqiyah, Tartus, and Raqqah in March.
46. Since 1 January 2016, WHO has submitted 18 individual requests to the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to deliver medical supplies to 54 locations
in nine governorates. The Government has approved four requests, one of which is
to deliver medical supplies to 25 locations in six governorates. Meanwhile, 14
requests remain unanswered.
47. Despite ongoing access to besieged areas during the reporting period by
inter-agency convoys, the removal of life-saving medicine and medical supplies
continued, with nearly 19,000 treatments removed from convoys in March intended
for Muʽaddamiyah al-Sham, Zabadani, Madaya (Buqayn) and Hammurah in Rif
Dimashq, Fuʽah and Kafraya in Idlib and Taldu in Homs. Remove d items included
surgical supplies, emergency kits, trauma kits, mental health medicine, insulin, burn
kits and antiseptic.
Safety and security of staff and premises
48. A total of 35 United Nations staff members, 33 of whom are UNRWA area
staff, 1 is from the United Nations Development Programme and 1 from UNICEF,
continue to be detained or missing. The total number of humanitarian workers killed
in the conflict since March 2011 is 87, divided as 17 staff members of the United
Nations, 53 staff members and volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, 8
volunteers and staff members of the Palestinian Red Crescent Society and 9 staff
members of international NGOs. Two of those victims have been killed since
1 January 2016.

16-06383

11/15

S/2016/384

III. Observations
49. The cessation of hostilities and the resumption of aid to certain areas have
offered much needed relief for some of the Syrians who have suffered most heavily
during years of conflict. While this is a welcome development that shows what can
be done with sufficient political will and access, too many people remain threatened
by fighting and unable to have access to the assistance they need. Needless deaths
continue to be reported from indiscriminate attacks on civilians as well as through
the use of siege and starvation as a tool of war. As indicated in my previous report
(S/2016/272), the ceasefire and the initial progress in humanitarian access provided
a glimmer of hope to Syrians that an end to their suffering migh t be near. The
decrease in fighting during March is a concrete result of the cessation of hostilities,
but it is not enough. I call on all parties to immediately end the killing and the
destruction of essential infrastructure. Initial progress must be sust ained as we strive
to finally end this dark chapter in the history of the Syrian Arab Republic and the
world.
50. The United Nations is delivering assistance at levels higher than in 2015, both
in cross-border convoys coming from Turkey and Jordan and through our
inter-agency convoys to besieged and hard-to-reach areas. United Nations convoys
brought food aid to more than 100,000 people in besieged areas alone in March. I
welcome the progress made in assisting those difficult areas and I also recognize the
ongoing work of humanitarian actors to provide assistance to millions each month
around the country. However, I am concerned that the initial momentum of the first
part of the year may be slowing. Recent gains in access have been comparatively
limited and each deployment is hard won. March saw a slight decrease from
February in the number of people reached in besieged areas, and access in the last
weeks has slowed further. Delays in receiving final clearance from Syrian
authorities and denials from local authorities have held back a number of convoys in
the past weeks, as has ongoing fighting. While we will continue to call for increased
access, those sieges must end. Reopening besieged areas is the only way to truly
ensure the provision of assistance to all and to guarantee that assistance can be
sustained.
51. I condemn the ongoing blockage of medical evacuations, which has led to
unnecessary deaths and suffering. After years of conflict, only 40 per cent of
medical facilities remain functioning, most of which are in severe disrepair, and too
many injured do not have the chance to receive even basic levels of care. In March,
for example, three children in Madaya and Waʽr perished after their evacuations
were refused by those laying siege to their towns. An other young man in Madaya
faced the same terrible fate. Access to health care and medical treatment is a
fundamental human right protected under international law. Parties must adopt a
more timely and systematic system for evacuations that is neither linke d to
negotiated agreements nor quid pro quo in nature.
52. For those displaced by conflict, returning to their homes brings untold
challenges in resuming their daily life. An important element of addressing
protection risks is removing or reducing the threat of explosive weapons. It is
estimated that some 5.1 million people are living in areas highly contaminated by
mines and unexploded ordinance, with more than 2 million children at risk. I call on
the Syrian authorities to facilitate all efforts to address the presence of explosive
weapons.

12/15

16-06383

S/2016/384

53. Finally, my Special Envoy for Syria, Staffan de Mistura, held intra-Syrian
negotiations in Geneva from 14 to 24 March. The negotiations continued in the
proximity format. Based on his meetings with the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic, the opposition and civil society, the Special Envoy developed 12 points of
commonalities on the future political solution for the Syrian Arab Republic. He
reconvened the negotiations on 13 April and sought to obtain detailed proposals
from the Government and the High Negotiations Committee on their respective
visions of transition, in line with Security Council resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva Communiqué. It remains our collective responsibility to ensure that the
provisions, so carefully set out by the Security Council and the Inte rnational Syria
Support Group on all three tracks, humanitarian, cessation of hostilities and
political, are preserved and consolidated in parallel.

16-06383

13/15

S/2016/384

14/15

Annex
Map 1

16-06383

16-06383

Map 2

S/2016/384

15/15
