S/PV.8486

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8486th meeting

Monday, 18 March 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Ms. Hidalgo
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Duclos
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Mogashoa
Mr. Clay
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Letter dated 15 February 2019 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2019/159)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2019/218)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-07559 (E)
*1907559*

S/PV.8486

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

context that is far more tranquil than was the case in
December and January.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Letter dated 15 February 2019 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2019/159)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2019/218)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and Ms. Anny Tenga Modi, Executive Director
of Afia Mama.
Ms. Modi is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Kinshasa.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/159, which contains a letter
dated 15 February 2019 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council, and
document S/2019/218, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
I now give the floor to Ms. Zerrougui.
Ms. Zerrougui (spoke in French): Over the past
year, the Council has invited me to brief it every month,
and sometimes several times a month, and I thank you
for it, Sir. Your interest has been commensurate with
the stakes in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Happily, my statement today shall be delivered in a
2/25

18/03/2019

The handover of power in the wake of the elections
was the first in the recent history of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and unrolled peacefully. I
cannot fail to note that the results of the elections
were contested by a segment of the opposition, but we
can also say that the majority of Congolese welcomed
the inauguration of President Tshilombo Tshisekedi
with relief.
I should like to point out that the electoral process,
which continues with the scheduled elections of
governors and the holding of postponed polls in four
constituencies owing to insecurity and the Ebola
epidemic, is a decisive step towards strengthening
democracy and the rule of law in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Nevertheless, the reactions of
some political parties and their supporters to the results
of last week’s senatorial elections represent a challenge
and reveal the fragility of the political process under
way in the country.
In his first public statements, the Head of State
has pledged to work for the consolidation of peace,
the rule of law and democracy, and the promotion and
protection of human rights. These statements of intent
have been followed by concrete actions, especially with
respect to the easing of tensions. Some political and
opinion prisoners have just been released; meetings
held across the country by the opposition leader and
presidential candidate Martin Fayulu have unfolded
without hindrance; and announcements have been
made in favour of the return of political exiles. It is
important to continue in this direction, especially by
maintaining spaces for expression by the opposition,
which we encourage to work closely with all political
parties, the Congolese authorities and civil society.
Discussions for the formation of a new Government
are currently under way between Front commun pour
le Congo, which won the majority of legislative seats
at the national and provincial levels, and the Cap pour
le changement platform, which had supported the
candidacy of President Tshilombo Tshisekedi. The two
parties agreed last week on the upcoming appointment
of a formateur, who will in fact be the future Prime
Minister of the Republic.
It is hoped that the new Government team will
soon be established and operational and able to work
according to the guidelines of President Tshilombo
19-07559

18/03/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Tshisekedi’s programme. Indeed, the expectations of
the Congolese population are immense and it is crucial
not to make them wait too long or to disappoint them.
These expectations of a better life, as embodied in
easier access to education, care and employment, and
an existence free from fear and threats, is one of the
greatest challenges facing the authorities currently
in place.
I assure Council members that I continue to take
to heart the mission of good offices that they have
entrusted to me in order to support this political
transition and thereby advance the peace and security
agenda in the Republic. Democratic Republic of the
Congo. There are now real opportunities to strengthen
peace and security in several provinces of the country
following the voluntary surrender of hundreds of
fighters of armed groups or their expressed wish to do
so, thanks to the change of presidential power.
Another current challenge will be to seize these
opportunities in time by quickly identifying options
for reintegrating these ex-combatants into their
communities. The task will not be easy but it is urgent to
act together here, in the field and in capitals to provide
qualitative support to the Congolese authorities. We
have noted other positive signs in this regard, including
the reaffirmed will of regional actors at the level of
States and organizations to tackle the root causes of the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and,
we hope, thereby end it.
(spoke in English)
Despite the opportunities arising to achieve lasting
peace and security in the country today, I remain
concerned about several developments in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In North Kivu’s
Grand Nord region, where the now second-largest Ebola
outbreak in history is ongoing, the Allied Democratic
Forces and Mayi-Mayi elements continue to attack
civilians and the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo (FARDC) alike, and in several
cases, humanitarian workers and the personnel of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
MONUSCO’s force, including the Intervention Brigade,
and the Mission’s police component, are sparing no
effort to protect civilians and to support the FARDC
and the Police nationale congolaise in the provision of
security, while our civilian teams are actively pursuing

S/PV. 8486

good offices, advocacy and dialogue initiatives at the
local level.
Following recent attacks against Ebola response
centres in Butembo and Katwa, MONUSCO redeployed
additional uniformed and civilian personnel to support
the security of Ebola response staff and operations and
efforts to address community resistance to the response.
Meanwhile, preparations are ongoing in the area for
upcoming national and provincial elections at the end of
this month. We will be doing our utmost to prevent and
mitigate any risk of violence throughout this politically
sensitive period. In Minembwe, South Kivu, clashes
have flared up between the militias of two communities,
resulting in significant displacements of the population,
with the potential of further deterioration. MONUSCO
is supporting a reinforcement of the FARDC presence
in the area, in addition to our own standing combat
deployment and intercommunal mediation efforts. In
these hotspots, the Government has shown a genuine
willingness to respond quickly, although the capacity
of national security forces must be further enhanced.
However, in North and South Kivu, structural violence
is profoundly entrenched and conflict dynamics related
to identity, access to land and resources and regional
issues have taken deep root in the fabric of everyday life.
To sustainably address those drivers of insecurity,
concentrated engagement will be needed in the period
ahead, including with the region. Even areas not
historically affected by armed conflict can prove fragile,
and we must collectively encourage the Government to
take measures to preventively address and mitigate the
potential causes of violent conflict country-wide. The
shocking violence in Yumbi in December 2018 — which,
as documented by our Office, left at least 535 dead,
111 wounded, 19,000 displaced and many homes and
livelihoods destroyed — is a troubling reminder of how
quickly violence can escalate.
In the light of the opportunities and the challenges
that exist in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
at this time, I encourage the Security Council to
continue to support the consolidation of that which
has been achieved in the country in recent months and
to support the country in addressing the remaining
threats to peace and security. We must support the
Government in its efforts to honour the expectations of
the Congolese population to advance political dialogue
and collaboration and seize the opportunities we are

19-075593/25

S/PV.8486

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

now seeing for a sustainable reduction of armed groups
in some areas.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Zerrougui for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Modi.
Ms. Modi (spoke in French): On behalf of
Congolese women, I thank the Council for giving me
the opportunity to brief it on the situation of women
and girls in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I also thank the members of the Security Council for
their commitment and for recognizing and highlighting
the leadership of African women in the area of peace
and security last month by adopting resolution 2457
(2019). That resolution clearly acknowledges the
platform of the African Women Leaders Network, in
which I participate as a member of the Young Women
Leaders Caucus and FemWise, which champion the
revolution in conflict prevention and mediation.
First of all, we welcome the civic maturity of
the Congolese people, who have managed to ensure
a peaceful turnover of power at the pinnacle of State
authority, including by making the ultimate sacrifice.
We dedicate our thoughts to all those, including
women, who lost their lives in the period leading up to
the elections held on 30 December 2018.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo, as a
Member of the United Nations, has signed a number
of legal human rights and international humanitarian
law instruments, including resolutions 1325 (2000) and
2250 (2015). In that regard, we welcome encouraging
signs that spaces, such as media outlets, are beginning
to reopen, as well as the release of prisoners. My
briefing today will focus on the electoral process under
way, an overview of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the importance of the participation of
women, including young women, in efforts to build
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
provide a few recommendations.
The electoral process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has been marked by a political and security
crisis, with electoral disputes and the organization
of public demonstrations. Government authorities
have worked, among other things, to restrict public
freedoms by considering draft freedom-destroying
laws for adoption by Parliament. That situation has
led to a stalemate in the political process. That is why
4/25

18/03/2019

two dialogues — the first facilitated by the African
Union and the second by the Conférence épiscopale
nationale du Congo — were held in 2016 with a view to
identifying a mechanism that would bring together the
various stakeholders around the same table to reach a
political consensus by easing tensions and implementing
practical methods for organizing elections.
The Commission électorale nationale indépendante
(CENI) was made responsible for the practical aspects
of organizing the elections. In that regard, it used
election technology — voting machines — which
reignited the debate because there was no consensus
in their regard. The organization of the elections was
not perfect. Certain shortcomings led to contestations,
which raised several challenges. CENI used only
one channel of the two recognized by law — USB
flash drives but not the hard copy of minutes — for
announcing the election results.
Civil society organizations, in particular women’s
organizations, were barely involved in observation
missions. Political parties did not prepare the observers
and the people had not been sufficiently educated about
the electoral process. The failure to consider gender
parity remains an obstacle to the effective participation
of women. The delivery of materials to polling stations
presented another challenge.
Notwithstanding such shortcomings, the elections
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo provide a
reference point for the rest of the region. The country
is at a historic and decisive juncture. However, with
regard to the 2006, 2011 and 2018 election cycles, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has not made rapid
progress. Fears persist with respect to local elections,
which could spark inter-ethnic conflicts, similar to
those that occurred during the senate elections, if the
process is not monitored and supported.
Resolution 1925 (2010) conferred a new mandate
on MONUSCO by replacing the previous peacekeeping
mission. The new MONUSCO mandate seeks to support
the efforts made by the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including with respect to the
protection of civilians; humanitarian workers and
human rights defenders threatened by violence; efforts
to end impunity; support for the political process so as
to ensure stability and peacebuilding; and ending the
conflict by restoring the rule of law. To that end, the
participation of women, including young women, in
peacebuilding efforts is crucial.
19-07559

18/03/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

With regard to the protection of civilians, it should
be noted that the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has made useful arrangements to ensure that women
are represented in the security sector, in particular
the army and police force, through the reform process
under way.
The new functions of the Police nationale
congolaise, operating in the community-based policing
mode, focus on combatting reprehensible behaviour,
including gender-based violence. This has led to the
establishment of a special unit to address gender issues
and gender-based violence. The executive secretariat of
the Monitoring Committee for Police Reform — through
its technical sub-working groups on the legal and
regulatory framework and on gender, sexual violence,
the rights of the child and human rights — has
produced several draft laws and regulations promoting
gender parity and eradicating gender-based violence
within the national police. The list is not exhaustive.
It includes the establishment of a national secretariat
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
the adoption in 2018 of a national action plan for the
second-generation implementation of the resolution.
Women and young women are engaging in community
work, advocacy and mentoring to promote the further
participation of young women.
I would like to share some recommendations with
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
We need to raise awareness among men in Parliament
and provincial assemblies on gender and women’s rights
so as to ensure their participation in the peacebuilding
and security process. We recommend the adoption of
specific measures to facilitate the inclusion of women
in the defence and security forces. We recommend
that our Government implement a disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme for
armed groups at the local level in the context of crisis
prevention efforts. We call for the implementation of
laws and measures related to gender and the women and
peace and security agenda. We call on the Government
to accept support for the organization of local elections.
Article 13, paragraph 3, of the electoral law must be
revised to mandate the inclusion of more women on
partisan candidate lists.
We recommend the rollout of training programmes
to boost managerial capacities, mentoring programmes
and the sharing of best practices in order to establish role

S/PV. 8486

models for the youngest sector of the population. We
call on the members of the Security Council to support
efforts to boost mass civic gender-awareness education
at the community level, targeting leaders, young people
and boys, in order to promote a model of positive
masculinity in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Efforts must also be made at the subregional, regional
and international levels to strengthen instituional
capacities and regional and national mechanisms in the
area of gender, women and peace.
It would be remiss of me to conclude without
thanking Secretary-General António Guterres, Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and the African
Union for all they have done to support us and the
African Women Leaders Network.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Modi
for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Zerrougui for today’s briefing
and for her tireless efforts, which contributed to the first
peaceful transfer of power in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo earlier this year. I also thank Ms. Modi
for joining us and adding her voice to those of other
Congolese calling for change.
Since taking office, President Tshilombo Tshisekedi
has responded to this historic moment by committing
to combat corruption and human rights by Democratic
Republic of the Congo security forces, improve
security, strengthen the Democratic Republic of the
Congo’s investment climate and promote development.
He has also committed to working closely with the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
to neutralize armed groups and pave the way for
MONUSCO’s drawdown and departure.
Just two months since this historic transfer of power,
the Congolese people are already beginning to see
positive developments. Last month, President Tshisekedi
moved to arrest and prosecute police accused of firing
on peaceful protesters. He has released prisoners of
conscience and pledged to reform the Democratic
Republic of the Congo’s abusive national intelligence
agency and close unofficial detention centres.
Partly in response to that change, thousands of
combatants are laying down their weapons in hopes

19-075595/25

S/PV.8486

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

of transitioning into a peaceful civilian life. We urge
President Tshisekedi to keep the commitments he has
made to fully implementing this hopeful vision for the
future of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
look forward to the naming of the Cabinet ministers
who will help him carry that out.
The United States is committed to helping the
Congolese people create a more peaceful and prosperous
Congo. We hope to work with the new Government to
forge a more constructive relationship with MONUSCO.
We would like to recognize and support the proactive
decisions taken by MONUSCO’s leadership, consistent
with its mandate, to redirect efforts away from
Kinshasa and towards the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, streamline the force and renew efforts to
address the root causes of violence.
Turning to the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, we are deeply concerned about rising tensions
among Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda, including
reports of cross-border attacks. Given the history, these
are especially worrisome developments. No one wins
from a proxy war in the Great Lakes. The United States
urges all parties to refrain from the use of violence and
to respect the territorial integrity of all States in the
region. We urge MONUSCO, the Office of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region and the Office of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Burundi to work more closely
together as we refocus the peacekeeping efforts of the
United Nations in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

18/03/2019

briefing, which captured in broad terms the main
developments in the country, the progress made by the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
in the fulfilment of its mandate and the challenges that
lie ahead. We extend our gratitude to the entire staff
of MONUSCO, the United Nations country team, the
representative of civil society, Ms. Anny Tenga Modi, as
well as to the troop- and police-contributing countries,
regional organizations, bilateral and multilateral
partners and non-governmental organizations for their
commitment, ongoing support and devotion to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Equatorial Guinea, as a member of the Security
Council and as a brother country to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo — we are both part of the
same regional and subregional economic communities
and participate in the same subregional security
council, the Council for Peace and Security in Central
Africa — welcomes the progress made in our brother
country. We value the spirit of resolution 2424
(2018), which calls for respect for the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as for the
full respect for the principles of non-interference,
good-neighbourliness and regional cooperation
in that country, neighbouring countries and other
countries of the region as guarantors of their stability
and development.

Finally, it has been two years since the murders
of United Nations experts Michael Sharp and Zaida
Catalán. From the first time he travelled to the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo to support the
demobilization of child soldiers, Michael Sharp was
deeply committed to peace and reconciliation. We
regret that he did not live to see the changes taking place
today in the Kasais and wish we could still benefit from
his thorough reporting and his thoughtful analysis.
The United States continues to call for accountability
for those responsible for those murders. We urge the
Council to continue to give robust support to the
follow-on mechanism of the United Nations in support
of Congolese investigations.

We believe that the Congolese have been able
to take advantage of this historic opportunity by
undertaking the first democratic transfer of power in
the country in a civilized manner. We are sure that
this is a decisive step towards the consolidation of
democracy, peace, stability and social progress for all
the Congolese people and that it represents the greatest
expression of popular sovereignty. We commend the
progress achieved following the elections and welcome
the decisions issued by the Commission électorale
nationale indépendante, reporting on the ongoing
electoral process and establishing the definitive
calendar of the combined direct elections of national
deputies in the electoral districts, which were officially
postponed for health and security reasons, and the
indirect elections of senators, governors and deputy
governors in the provinces.

Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for her

We welcome the appointment of His Excellency
Mr. Félix Antoine Tshilombo Tshisekedi as second
Vice-President of the Bureau of the Assembly of Heads

6/25

19-07559

18/03/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

of State at the thirty-second Summit of Heads of State
and Government of the African Union, which took
place in Addis Ababa. We also welcome with optimism
his statements reiterating his commitment to working
to build peace, the rule of law and democracy and the
need to foster socioeconomic development, eradicate
corruption, address the scourge of armed groups,
begin meaningful reforms in the security sector and
strengthen good relations throughout the region,
which has resulted in several visits after assuming his
responsibilities as Head of State.
Thanks to those acts, the country is moving with
determination towards building a rule of law that
guarantees respect for the fundamental freedoms
of citizens and communities, equal opportunity,
democracy, good governance and the freedom of
opinion, which makes the dream of genuine national
reconciliation a reality that will solidify stability in the
country, the establishment of the conditions necessary
for its development and the maintenance of a peaceful
and harmonious post-electoral atmosphere.
We appreciate the measures taken by the
Government, such as the release of political prisoners,
the improvement of the human rights and humanitarian
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
However, the destabilizing activities of armed groups
and the ongoing conflicts among communities ensure
that 12 million people continue to need humanitarian
assistance and protection and remain exposed to
malnutrition, cholera, measles and Ebola, requiring the
provision of adequate technical and financial assistance.
The international community must provide sufficient
funds for the updating of the three-year humanitarian
response plan that ended in mid-January.
We condemn the frequent attacks on humanitarian
personnel, their transport and equipment. Such
actions are considered to be violations of international
humanitarian law. All parties to armed conflicts
must guarantee and facilitate full, safe, immediate
and unhindered access for humanitarian and medical
personnel, their equipment, transport and supplies
and the timely delivery of medical assistance to
affected areas and people in need. We encourage
the Government to pursue its efforts to ensure the
accountability of perpetrators of crimes of all kinds and
to combat impunity.
As far as my delegation is concerned, it is essential
that steps be taken to effectively apply and implement

S/PV. 8486

the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
which was signed on 24 February 2013 in Addis Ababa,
in order to neutralize the armed groups operating in the
country, especially in the eastern regions of North and
South Kivu, which are very rich in the natural resources
that are plundered by the armed groups.
We welcome with optimism the surrender of
weapons by some armed groups, which requires
the effective implementation of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme for former
combatants and persons linked to armed groups so that
they can convert and participate actively in the process
of peace and stability in the country. We call on the States
members of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, the African Union, the International
Organization of la Francophonie, the Southern African
Development Community and international partners
to continue participating in the post-electoral period
to strengthen stability and democratic governance
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Similarly,
we encourage the Congolese authorities and regional
partners to take measures to strengthen cooperation
and good-neighbourly relations among the countries of
the Great Lakes region, including in the fight against
armed groups and the pursuit of economic integration.
In conclusion, I would like to highlight the
important work to promote peace, security and stability
being undertaken by the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which has risen to the occasion and carried
out its work within its mandate in a very complex
context. I would like to mention in particular Special
Representative Leila Zerrougui for the leadership and
determination with which she is addressing the situation.
We are convinced that the collective endeavours
of the United Nations, the African Union and regional
and subregional organizations in support of the
cause of peace and security in Africa will redound
to greater effectiveness and ensure that due attention
is paid to conflicts, which has led to the signature
of a memorandum of understanding among those
organizations as a concrete way of implementing the
Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for an
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): At the outset, I would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,

19-075597/25

S/PV.8486

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and Ms. Anny Tenga Modi for
their briefings, which, along with the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/218) on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
give us a better overview of the current situation in the
Democratic Republic of Congo.
I would like to focus my statement on three
key messages.
First, with regard to the political situation, we
welcome the statements of the new President in favour
of change, which was sought by the population, and we
encourage all political stakeholders in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to adopt tangible measures to
produce that profound change in the political space,
following in the steps of the initial gestures, which we
welcome, such as the release of some political prisoners.
In the European and bilateral context, we also welcome
the recent developments, which demonstrate a genuine
willingness to strengthen our relations.
However, we must not forget that the electoral
process has not yet ended. Elections have yet to be held
in Beni, Butembo and in Yumbi. In the meantime, the
formation of a new Government is still pending. There
are numerous reports of widespread corruption in
the context of the recent senatorial elections, despite
the fact that the most senior judicial authorities in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo had issued
explicit warnings.
Against that backdrop, President Tshilombo
Tshisekedi has decided to address the situation. As
the guarantor of institutions, we exhort him not only
to restore institutional order and the rule of law, but
also to credibly begin combating the corruption that
threatens the country’s governance. The consolidation
of solid, competent and impartial national institutions
must make it possible to strengthen the legitimacy
of the State, prevent future institutional crises and
promote a lasting entrenchment of the culture of
democratic change.
My second message concerns the pacification of
the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the restoration of State authority. In that regard,
we hope that particular attention will be paid to the
persistence of violence and attacks against civilians,
which continue to plunge the Congolese population into
one of the worst humanitarian disasters in the world.
We recall the unprecedented violence of the recent
8/25

18/03/2019

organized intercommunal attacks in Yumbi, which
killed several hundred people and displaced thousands
in a few days in December 2018. That violence, which
according to the United Nations could constitute crimes
against humanity, would not have been possible if the
authority of the State had been present in the area.
The persistence of fighting between armed groups in
Masisi, deadly attacks by the Allied Democratic Forces
in Beni territory and recent fighting in Minembwe are
all dramatic situations that require strong and urgent
measures. The restoration of State authority is essential
to ensure the pacification of the territory, but also
the resolution of the root causes of conflicts and the
security of populations, as well as development and the
rule of law for the benefit of the Congolese people.
My third message concerns MONUSCO and
its future. In our opinion, the future of MONUSCO
must be based on a genuine exit strategy based
on reference points — “benchmarks” in proper
French — clearly identified by an independent strategic
review. Such a strategy must be based on the capacity
and real willingness of the new Congolese authorities
to themselves take on the tasks currently being carried
out by MONUSCO. In the meantime, the protection
of civilians in the military, health and human rights
contexts must continue to be the cornerstone on which
MONUSCO is based. Belgium is of the opinion that an
interim mandate that would be limited in time would
allow us to deepen our reflection on these points of
reference while avoiding the risk of being immobilized
in a changing context.
Finally, we must remain attentive to the regional
context and its evolution. Our attention today to the
future of MONUSCO should not divert our attention
from the fact that the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Great Lakes region are closely linked.
The problems are often shared problems; the solutions
must therefore also be shared solutions. In that regard,
we welcome the opportunity that will be given to the
Security Council in the coming weeks to discuss the
latest developments in the region.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany) (spoke in French):
I thank the French presidency for having chosen
two women as speakers — or, in the new French, as
“briefers” — which was very encouraging. I would like
to thank Ms. Zerrougui for her testimony. As she said,
the context is much better than the last time she briefed
the Security Council (see S/PV.8318), and I think what
she just said is really encouraging. I do not want to
19-07559

18/03/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

repeat everything he has done, but the new President
Tshilombo Tshisekedi has taken some good and very
important steps. He has opened up the political space,
which I think is very important. But Ms. Zerrougui also
said that the political process remains fragile, which is
why I would also like to take advantage of the presence
of the Ambassador of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and his delegation to encourage them to continue
along that path. It is difficult, but in my opinion that is
the only alternative.
In that context, let me mention what the briefer from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ms. Anny Tenga
Modi, said. I think what she just said was very important,
and perhaps in his statement the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo could answer some
of the Ms. Modi’s questions she asked and respond to
her demands, namely, for a stronger role for women in
the country’s political process. I would like to repeat
some of what she said because it is extremely important
to make men in the military and political forces aware
of the issues that need to be addressed in terms of
integrating women into the military forces.
There are not enough women in the military and
police forces. In the elections, as was the case in the
past, there were not enough women on the electoral
rolls. We really must see to it that more women appear
on the rolls in the communal elections and that there
be more female observers in local elections. In general,
I understood what Ms. Modi said: there is a need for
broader civil education to highlight the rights and
strengths of women and what they bring to politics
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I see that
already the President’s diplomatic adviser is a woman,
for which I offer my congratulations.
I would like to mention an issue that is very
important, even if my colleagues have already raised
it: the rule of law. I believe that every effort should
be made to strengthen the rule of law. Justice must be
strengthened. We must curb corruption, as my Belgian
colleague said, and fight impunity. I would also like to
echo what my American colleague has just said about
the murders of Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalán, which
remain unsolved. And there is still sexual violence
used by security forces. Also, as my Belgian colleague
said with regard to Yumbi, there a real possibility that
crimes against humanity were committed there. The
rule of law is needed. There must be no impunity for
crimes that have been committed.

S/PV. 8486

With respect to the region, I echo what my American
colleague said: the situation between Uganda and
Burundi is not encouraging. The situation in the region,
including Burundi, has security implications for the
east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We have
to keep watching this situation, especially in a region
that has been hit by Ebola and where humanitarian
assistance providers continue to be attacked.
With regard to the future of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, I think we have to wait. We have
to see how the President sees the situation. There are
still some tasks to be done. We must focus on the most
important tasks, and we have just referred to them. I
think that a drawdown and exit of the Mission should
not be a goal in itself. There must be an independent
strategic review to identify what the future looks like
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo. That is also
very important for the troop-contributing countries, as
it will give them an idea of how long they can expect
to remain in the country. There is currently no real
path towards withdrawal. We also need to make sure
that we send a clear message that the international
community remains fully engaged on the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Ms. Mogashoa (South Africa): At the outset, let me
join others in thanking the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, as well as Ms. Anny Tenga Modi, of the
civil society organization Afia Mama.
South Africa welcomes the peaceful holding of
the elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We congratulate the millions of Congolese people
who went to the polls. True to his promise to not hold
onto power, former President Joseph Kabila Kabange
peacefully transferred power to the opposition-party
leader President Félix Tshilombo Tshisekedi. We
commend that young leader’s positive legacy in the
Central African region.
We encourage the Congolese people and political
actors to continue with their peaceful conduct during
the local Government elections and approach those
elections with the same spirit as they did in the
presidential and legislative elections. We furthermore
encourage reconciliation in the post-election period to
build a peaceful Democratic Republic of the Congo.

19-075599/25

S/PV.8486

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

18/03/2019

We commend the opening up of the political space by
President Tshilombo Tshisekedi, marked by peaceful
demonstrations and access to media.

South Africa welcomes the positive developments
in the Kasai region with the laying down of arms. As
such, we encourage other regions to do the same.

South Africa welcomes the important role played by
national and regional observation missions, including
by the Southern African Development Community
(SADC) and the African Union. In that regard, South
Africa calls for a sharper focus on the situation in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
while acknowledging the importance of addressing
the intercommunal violence in provinces such as MaiNdombe and Kasai. We therefore support the SecretaryGeneral’s call for MONUSCO’s adjustment to redirect
the priorities of the Mission to the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where instability
and violence remain prevalent.

South Africa reaffirms the importance of
fully supporting the Force Intervention Brigade, in
collaboration with the Forces armées de la République
Démocratique du Congo, in order to neutralize
belligerent groups, such as the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda, the Allied Democratic Forces and
other armed groups that continue to threaten the stability
of the entire region. We commend the complementary
support provided by the Force Intervention Brigade in
containing the Ebola epidemic.

South Africa supports the Secretary-General’s
recommendation for a 12-month extension of the
mandate of MONUSCO. That will enable adequate time
for a more comprehensive review of MONUSCO, in full
consultation with the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Government, as well as SADC and all the relevant
stakeholders. In that regard, South Africa would like
to emphasize considering a 12-month mandate renewal,
taking into cognizance that there is a newly appointed
Government. As such, South Africa believes that the
new Government should be given time to determine
and outline its priorities prior to the drawdown of
MONUSCO, while mitigating a security vacuum.
The South African delegation therefore further
supports the Secretary-General’s proposed strategic
review of MONUSCO. Furthermore, any consideration
of an exit strategy should be based on the positive
evolution and evaluation of the security situation
on the ground. South Africa therefore calls for the
strengthening of the multidimensional nature of
MONUSCO in order to address the challenges of peace,
security, governance and development in a concurrent
manner, based on the understanding of the nexus
between peace and development.
South Africa welcomes the contribution made by all
troop-contributing countries (TCCs) in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We further call on all TCCs and
police-contributing countries to make a concerted effort
to increase the participation of women peacekeepers in
MONUSCO to address those and other challenges.
10/25

South Africa emphasizes that it is of the utmost
importance to uphold and implement the protection-ofcivilians mandate, which should be conducted without
any hindrance and in a manner that strengthens the
trust among the people of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the Government and MONUSCO.
Ultimately, South Africa sees the protection of
civilians in the Democratic Republic of the Congo as
dependent upon the broader stabilization of the country.
In that regard, we call for a more proactive approach
through mechanisms such as the International Security
and Stabilization Support Strategy in order to support
and fulfil the implementation of the broader Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region. South Africa
calls on the Security Council to reaffirm its calls for
all signatories to the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework to implement their commitments under the
Framework to ensure long-term, sustainable peace and
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
South Africa also emphasizes the need for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
strategies and support provided by MONUSCO to
take into account the socioeconomic environment
and economic prospects of demobilized combatants.
We call for support to be provided for skills
development for demobilized individuals in order to
facilitate reintegration and economic development
in communities.
South Africa continues to support a zero-tolerance
policy against sexual exploitation and abuse. In
that regard, South Africa has institutionalized in
its legislation the zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse. In that regard, we call for the
necessary support and mechanisms to be established to
19-07559

18/03/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

support victims of sexual exploitation and abuse and
enable the reporting of such incidents.
South Africa encourages all those countries and
partners that have economic interests in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to ensure that the natural
resources of the country are used for development and
the benefit of the Congolese people.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to heartily thank Ms. Leila
Zerrougui for her enlightening briefing. I would also
like to thank Ms. Anny Tenga Modi for her statement.
I would like to focus on three issues in my statement:
first, the political process; secondly, the security and
humanitarian situation; and, thirdly, the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
With respect to the political process, despite the
shortcomings of the electoral process, we hope that the
new President and the new Government will show their
commitment to carrying out the necessary reforms and
work towards inclusive and sustainable development in
their country. If that is the case, historians will point
to the recent elections as an important turning point
in the history of the country. If that is not the case,
those elections will be seen as a new disappointment
for Congolese society, which has overwhelmingly voted
for change. The society’s expectations are very high,
and the new President and the new Government face
many challenges. Those aspirations can be achieved
only through profound institutional, social and
economic reforms.
Poland welcomes the statements made by President
Tshilombo Tshisekedi on the occasion of the first
100 days of his term, including those on the release
of political prisoners, respect for and the promotion
of human rights and good offices, the fight against
corruption and the strengthening of good relations with
the region. We also welcome the decision to reopen
Schengen House in the country’s capital.
Poland appreciates the fact that, despite the reported
and undoubtedly justified concerns about the conduct
and transparency of the electoral process, candidates
who question its results have used legal remedies and
that the situation in the country remains generally
calm. We believe that the upcoming elections in the
cities of Beni and Butembo in North Kivu and Yumbi
in Mai-Ndombe province, as well as the local elections

S/PV. 8486

to be held next year, will be a positive continuation of
the institutional transition. It is extremely important
that all citizens, especially the most vulnerable, such as
women and people with disabilities, can participate in
the elections safely.
Tensions and strains in community relations
associated with rumours and a lack of transparency in
decision-making processes are a threat to society. We
hope that there will be an inquiry into the tragic events
of December 2018 in Yumbi and that the culprits will
be brought to justice.
At the same time, we are deeply concerned about
the ongoing Ebola epidemic in the east of the country.
Poland strongly condemns the continuing attacks
against humanitarian workers, medical personnel and
hospitals and other medical institutions. We call on all
parties on the ground to create the necessary conditions
for the safe delivery of humanitarian aid. We also call
for access to areas affected by Ebola.
Despite the efforts made so far, the actions of
foreign and national groups in the east and south of the
country have had a significant impact on the security
situation. We welcome the encouraging signals we
received after the elections from several armed groups
demonstrating their willingness to join the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme, which
is supposed to be the focus of the efforts to stabilize
the security situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Irrespective of those developments, Poland stresses
the need to ensure responsibility on the part of those
accused of crimes against humanity, war crimes and
other serious violations of international law. State
institutions are responsible for providing security to
citizens. There is a need to prioritize resolving problems
linked to the fact most human rights violations and cases
of sexual exploitation are committed by representatives
of the State.
Despite the taking of important steps to stabilize the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, it is clear that much
remains to be done. MONUSCO needs to be adapted
to the post-election reality. Poland considers that the
Mission should prioritize a comprehensive approach
to the protection of civil society. At the same time, we
see the need for MONUSCO to engage in a process of
support for political transformation and strengthening
State authority at all levels.

19-0755911/25

S/PV.8486

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Yet all United Nations efforts in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will require good cooperation
with the Government. We believe that the Security
Council should give the new authorities a few months
to define their agenda and demonstrate a willingness
to cooperate closely with the United Nations in order
to stabilize the country. In addition, we call on the
Secretary-General to present to the Security Council
an independent strategic assessment of the Mission,
including proposals for key objectives for the future
engagement of the United Nations on the ground.
In conclusion, allow me again to express our
gratitude to Ms. Zerrougui and the entire MONUSCO
team for their tireless efforts in support of stability in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Poland hopes
that the authorities will cooperate constructively with
the Mission to consolidate the important achievements
already made and lay the foundation for lasting peace,
stability and development.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation commends Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
for the quality of her briefing on the situation in that
country. We also thank Ms. Annу Tenga Modi, civil
society representative, for her informative briefing.
Côte d’Ivoire notes with satisfaction the generally
stable socio-political and security environment in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo two months after
the presidential, legislative and provincial elections.
We welcome that positive dynamic, which will
undoubtedly be reinforced by the measures taken by
President Félix Tshilombo Tshisekedi, in particular the
release of nearly 700 detainees, which will contribute
to a peaceful atmosphere and the establishment of a
socio-political environment conducive to consolidating
peace; the intensification of diplomatic efforts to
restore confidence and strengthen cooperation between
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, neighbouring
countries and the international community; and
the resumption of dialogue with national and
international actors.
In that regard, my country urges the international
community, in particular the United Nations, the
African Union, the Economic Community of Central
African States, the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region and the Southern African
12/25

18/03/2019

Development Community, to continue their support to
the Congolese people and the new authorities, with a
view to consolidating peace and stability in the country.
The post-electoral stability in the Democratic
Republic of Congo suggests that improving the
security situation in the east of the country remains
possible. My country calls on the armed groups
operating on Congolese territory, particularly those
in the Kasai region and the provinces of Tanganyika
and Ituri, to definitively join the peace process, cease
all destabilizing activity and engage resolutely in the
ongoing process of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. We also call for increased cooperation
between MONUSCO and the Forces armées de la
République Démocratique du Congo, as well as the
continuation of joint military operations by the two
forces, which is essential for the neutralization of the
armed groups.
Despite progress on the socio-political and
security fronts, my country notes with concern the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in the
east of the country. According to the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF), about 260,000 children in
the Kasai region suffer from severe acute malnutrition
and need life-saving treatment. That situation is
exacerbated by the return of at least 300,000 Congolese
from Angola, which puts additional pressure on health
centres, schools and other basic social services. My
country therefore calls on the international community
to support UNICEF’s efforts to improve the living
conditions of the people.
My delegation is of the opinion that MONUSCO
should proceed with the redeployment of its troops and
assets, with a view to better focusing on the hotbeds
of violence and continuing the stabilization process
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. To that end,
Côte d’Ivoire fully supports the recommendations
of the Secretary-General for the renewal of the
MONUSCO mandate.
In conclusion, my delegation welcomes the
continued commitment of Ms. Zerrougi and all
MONUSCO staff, as well as on the part of United
Nations agencies, for strengthening peace, security and
stability throughout Congolese territory.
Ms. Hidalgo (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): First of all, we would like to thank Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Organization
19-07559

18/03/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), for her briefing. We commend her
good offices during the difficult post-electoral process
and the political transition. We urge her to continue
supporting the Congolese people in the consolidation of
peace, stability and economic development. Similarly,
we thank Ms. Annу Tenga Moda, Executive Director
and co-founder of the non-governmental organization
Afia Mama and initiator of the movement of young
women leaders of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, for being with us today and for her insights
and recommendations on the subject of women and the
changes needed to provide them greater opportunities.
We once again congratulate the Congolese people
for the display of political maturity in establishing the
legislative bodies, the procedures for appealing the
results of the elections and the peaceful coexistence
with the elected authorities. We hope that the indirect
election of senators, governors and deputy governors,
as well as the delayed elections in the city of Beni in
North Kivu province and the area of Yumbi, will be
conducted in a peaceful and transparent manner.
Due to the continuation of destabilizing activities
by armed groups, inter-communal conflicts and
the military operations of the Armed Forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo against those groups,
we understand that the security situation remains tense.
Clashes in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, with attacks perpetrated by the Allied
Democratic Forces against the national security forces,
civilians and MONUSCO and the activities of foreign
and local armed groups alike continue to drive insecurity
and displace thousands of people. The presence of
such armed actors and groups poses a serious threat
to civilians and a great challenge to the authorities.
The time has come for the Congolese authorities,
the countries of the region that are affected and the
international community to implement strategies at the
regional level to eradicate armed groups and finally
bring to an end the interminable internal displacement
and suffering of the civilian population.
We urge the authorities to uphold their stated
intention to collaborate with MONUSCO in defining a
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
approach. Such reintegration plans must take into
account the needs of young people affected by armed
conflicts through investment in capacity-building
for them to meet labour demand through relevant
educational opportunities designed to promotes a

S/PV. 8486

culture of peace. We believe that the effectiveness of
weapons-collection and DDR programmes depends
upon sustainable opportunities being provided for excombatants and the capacity of State institutions to
foster an inclusive environment where people feel safe
and secure, as envisioned in resolution 2220 (2015).
We must not forget the humanitarian situation
generated by those conflicts. According to the
MONUSCO report (S/2019/218), almost 13 million
people need assistance and protection in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Moreover, according to
UNICEF, more than a quarter of a million children
in the Kasai region, and thousands more having fled
with their families to nearby provinces, suffer severe
or acute malnutrition, requiring urgent assistance. We
urge donors to honour their pledged commitments to
cover the funding shortfall.
Such a generalized humanitarian crisis can lead to
the occurrence of epidemics. The Dominican Republic
is concerned in particular about the Ebola virus.
Already more than 500 people have died from Ebola,
and hundreds more have been affected by the disease.
Insecurity, attacks by armed groups against treatment
centres and lack of access for health authorities and
emergency services to Ebola-affected areas have
hindered the monitoring of infections and other aspects
of the humanitarian response. That puts the health of
those affected at risk and multiplies the probability of
the virus spreading to other cities.
In that regard, the Dominican Republic condemns
and deplores the recent attacks on humanitarian, and
especially medical, personnel. We recall that all parties
to the conflict are under an obligation to respect
international humanitarian law and to ensure full,
secure, immediate and unimpeded access for medical
personnel to the affected areas. We commend the
Government and the United Nations system, including
the World Health Organization, for their efforts to
eradicate the disease under such difficult circumstances.
With regard to the protection of civilians and human
rights, we commend the decision of the new President
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Félix
Tshilombo Tshisekedi, to pardon approximately 700
political prisoners and arrest 15 people linked to the
massacre of more than 800 people in the west of the
country. However, we are alarmed at the ongoing
threat posed to the life and well-being of the civilian

19-0755913/25

S/PV.8486

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

population by the clashes between the Congolese armed
forces and armed groups.
While we commend the work of the MONUSCO
in preventing and swiftly responding to attacks on
civilians in the country, we believe we must continue
strengthening early-warning mechanisms in the most
vulnerable areas. In that context, we must underscore
the particular vulnerability of women and children,
who continue to be disproportionately affected. We
therefore view it as crucial to work with the national
Government to develop a strategy and implement an
action plan to end and prevent sexual violence by the
armed forces and armed groups.
Such violence, like the repeated human-rights
violations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
must not go unpunished. Greater effort must be made
to prosecute human rights violations and abuses,
without privilege or exception. We call on MONUSCO
to continue promoting respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights law, to ensure that
those responsible are prosecuted and victims receive
appropriate reparations.
In conclusion, we welcome the holding of
consultations between MONUSCO and the Government
on the future presence of the Mission and its priorities,
pursuant to the recommendations of the 2017
MONUSCO strategic review and the Mission mandate
for the post-electoral period. Any modification or
adjustment to MONUSCO must be based on a robust
strategic evaluation of the political, security and human
rights situation, focused on consolidating and building
on the progress attained to date, and aimed at the
effective and efficient execution of its mandate.
We commend the MONUSCO for its work and
express our hope that this new chapter in the political
life of the Democratic Republic of the Congo will be
characterized by full respect for human rights, thereby
consolidating peace, the rule of law, democracy and
socioeconomic growth in the country.
Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome
the holding of this meeting and the informative
briefings by Special Representative Leila Zerrougui
and Ms. Anny Tenga Modi.
Peru welcomes the first acts of the Government
of President Félix Tshilombo Tshisekedi aimed at
achieved badly needed political de-escalation in the
country, in particular the pardoning of 700 political
14/25

18/03/2019

prisoners, many of whom had been arrested in the runup to the elections last December, and the agreement for
the return of the representative of the European Union
to Kinshasa. We likewise welcome the commitment
undertaken by the Government to tackle corruption and
strengthen State authority throughout the territory, as
well as the progress aimed at facilitating the holding
of the forthcoming elections in the cities of Beni
and Yumbi. We believe that those efforts aimed at
consolidating reconciliation in the country are essential
prerequisites for overcoming the major challenges still
facing Congolese society.
We are concerned at the prevailing insecurity in
various parts of the country, primarily in the Kivu,
Kasai and Tanganyika regions, with the presence
of numerous armed groups, as well as ongoing
inter-communal violence.
In addition, the humanitarian situation in the
country is critical — with almost 3 million people
still dependent on assistance and protection — which
is aggravated by the fact that there are millions more
Congolese internally displaced or in third countries
as refugees.
We also note with alarm the continued spread of
the Ebola virus in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We are confident that the third
strategic response plan prepared by the Ministry of
Health with the technical support of the World Health
Organization and other United Nations agencies will
make it possible to finally contain the crisis caused by
that scourge.
In that regard, we recognize the courageous and
hard work of officials of the Government, the World
Health Organization, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) and humanitarian agencies, who
are in the field under difficult security circumstances
undertaking outstanding prevention work through
vaccination campaigns and humanitarian support to
the population. Those efforts should continue to be
supported by the international community as a whole.
Meanwhile, the stated desire to ensure a climate
of trust and calm among the population cannot be
achieved if measures are not taken at the same time to
protect and promote human rights, particularly those
that deal with the ongoing incidents of sexual violence.
We welcome the efforts being made to that end, such as
those mentioned by Ms. Tenga Modi, but they must be
19-07559

18/03/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

complemented by robust measures to combat impunity
through transparent and impartial investigations that
will allow for those responsible for atrocity crimes to be
brought to justice. In that regard, we wish to highlight
the work of MONUSCO aimed at establishing effective
measures to address the recruitment of children by
armed groups.
I conclude by expressing our full support for the
crucial role of MONUSCO in the country, particularly
in protecting civilians and defending human rights, as
well as its efforts to help bring about greater stability
and lasting peace. We fully support the renewal of the
MONUSCO mandate.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Ms. Zerrougui, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for her briefing. We also listened
to the briefing by Ms. Modi, Executive Director of
Afia Mama.
At the end of last year the Democratic Republic of
the Congo successfully held presidential and legislative
elections, which achieved a smooth transition of power.
Currently, the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo remains stable. President Tshilombo Tshisekedi
is actively forming a new Government, strengthening
governance, building security capacity and promoting
economic and social development. In areas such as
the Kasai region, militiamen and armed groups are
voluntarily engaging in the disarmament process.
China welcomes those positive developments and
commends the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) for their efforts. That testifies
to the will and ability of the Government and people
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to resolve
their own issues through their own efforts. Meanwhile,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo still faces
challenges with regard to security, the humanitarian
situation, the Ebola outbreak and development, among
others. The international community should therefore
focus assistance on the following three priorities.
First, in order to demonstrate its full respect for
the country’s sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity, the international community should support
the ownership and leadership of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in dealing with its own
affairs, enhance its cooperation with the Government,
assist the country in overcoming its challenges in the

S/PV. 8486

humanitarian, security and development fields, among
others. The current focus should be on helping the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to strengthen its
security capacity-building and support the efforts of
the Government to maintain peace and stability.
Secondly, the international community should
continue to support the African Union, the Southern
African Development Community, the Economic
Community of Central African States, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and other
regional and subregional organizations in doing
their part to facilitate increased cooperation between
the parties and the Government so as to promote
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. In order to jointly contribute to realizing
peace and stability in the country and the wider region,
international partners should support efforts to ensure
that armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo abandon the military option and resolve issues
through dialogue and consultation instead.
Thirdly, to continue to provide necessary humanitarian
assistance and economic support to the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, international
partners should focus on increasing contributions in
the areas of education, health care, infrastructure and
other assistance in order to help the country to increase
employment opportunities, improve people’s livelihoods
and engage in socioeconomic development. We hope
that bodies such as the United Nations Development
Programme and the Peacebuilding Commission can
play a greater role. The international community should
continue its active response to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo’s call for humanitarian assistance, support
the activities of the World Health Organization and the
International Committee of the Red Cross and help to
contain the Ebola outbreak.
The MONUSCO presence is currently crucial to
the peace and stability of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. China supports the renewal of the Mission’s
mandate. We hope that MONUSCO can continue its
activities in accordance with its mandate in order to help
the country to achieve peace, stability and development.
We hope that the Secretariat, the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the troopcontributing countries can work together, conduct
a timely assessment in the light of the developments
and put forward proposals for the adjustment of the
MONUSCO mandate so as to ensure a gradual and

19-0755915/25

S/PV.8486

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

orderly handover of security responsibilities from
the Mission to the security forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. China stands ready to work with
the wider international community to continue to assist
the efforts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to achieve peace, stability and development as soon
as possible.
Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and Ms. Annу Tenga Modi,
Executive Director of Afia Mama, for their informative
briefings this morning. I will focus my intervention
on four issues: human rights; the political situation;
the humanitarian situation; and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
Helping survivors of sexual and gender-based
violence is a priority of the United Kingdom in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We welcome
the opportunity to hear from Ms. Tenga Modi this
morning, whose non-governmental organization does
vital work to empower women, particularly those who
are survivors of violence.
In that context, I would like to very briefly raise
a project that United Kingdom aid has funded in
15 villages in the Ituri region, which is working to
challenge the social acceptance of violence against
women and girls. Over just two years the percentage of
women experiencing domestic violence fell from 69 per
cent to 29 per cent and the percentage of men reporting
that they had carried out domestic violence dropped
from 68 per cent to 24 per cent in the same period. Those
results show that sexual and gender-based violence can
be tackled effectively, even in conflict-related settings.
The United Kingdom remains concerned that rape,
including mass rape, continues to be used as a weapon
of war by armed groups and State actors. The United
Kingdom condemns all acts of sexual and gender-based
violence, including conflict-related sexual violence. We
call on the new Government to deliver on its promises to
bring perpetrators of sexual and gender-based violence
and other human rights abuses to justice.
This morning several other delegations have
raised the situation in Yumbi. The United Kingdom is
deeply concerned about the violence that took place in
Yumbi territory in December 2018. The latest report
of the United Nations Joint Human Rights Office in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo indicates that
16/25

18/03/2019

as many as 890 people were killed and thousands
more displaced. We echo the comments made by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Michelle Bachelet. We condemn all such violence and
call for the perpetrators of those abhorrent crimes
to be brought to justice swiftly. Our Embassy in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has raised our
concerns with the Government authorities in the region
and with local United Nations representatives.
The United Kingdom remains concerned over the
reported discrepancies in the official results for the
presidential, parliamentary and provincial elections.
Continued efforts for increased transparency and
inclusive dialogue with all political parties remain vital
as the electoral process in Democratic Republic of the
Congo continues towards local elections in late 2019
and 2020.
The Congolese people clearly voted for change.
The United Kingdom will engage with President
Tshilombo Tshisekedi and his team to understand
their plans for improving stability and prosperity in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. A stable and
prosperous Democratic Republic of the Congo is vital
for the Congolese people, the region and the rest of the
international community.
Turning to the Ebola outbreak, the United Kingdom
commends the response to date, particularly given the
challenging environment in which humanitarian and
medical workers are operating. We deplore the recent
attacks on Ebola treatment centres and those responding
to the outbreak. We once again strongly urge all parties
to the armed conflict to fully respect international law
and to full, safe, immediate and unhindered access for
humanitarian and medical personnel. The Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo just set out its
Ebola response plan until the end of July. It is crucial
that the international community steps up to support
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and cure the
outbreak as quickly as possible. The United Kingdom is
making significant contributions to that plan and urges
others to do the same.
Finally, as we approach the renewal of the
MONUSCO mandate, the United Kingdom agrees
that now is the time for the Mission to refocus on an
exit strategy. It is incumbent upon all of us to ensure
a responsible and sustainable exit of MONUSCO.
Therefore, a fully consultative strategic review of the
19-07559

18/03/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Mission will need to be undertaken before the Council
makes a decision on the shape of MONUSCO’s exit.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we very much thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), for her valuable briefing, as well as
for the briefing of Ms. Anny Tenga Modi, Executive
Director of Afia Mama.
Before I proceed with my statement, I would like
to extend my sincerest condolences to the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to the
families of the victims as a result of the merchant train
crash in Kasai, which claimed scores of lives and left
several injured people, whom we wish a speedy recovery.
I would also like to extend my sincerest condolences
to the families of the victims in several States of the
Southern African region, namely, Mozambique and
Zimbabwe, as well as Indonesia, owing to the natural
disaster that claimed many victims. We extend our
deepest condolences to the families of those victims.
I would like to focus on the following basic
issues in my statement: first, the political situation;
secondly, the security situation; and, thirdly, the
humanitarian situation.

S/PV. 8486

satisfaction with his commitment to endeavour towards
promoting peace, the rule of law and democracy in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo — something
in evidence on multiple occasions since he assumed
office. The most recent declaration was made during
his participation in the thirty-second summit of Heads
of State and Government of the African Union, held in
Addis Ababa. We also welcome the support extended
during the elections period by the African Union, the
Economic Community of Central African States, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
the Southern African Development Community and
all international partners. We hope that such support
will continue in future and that the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will take advantage
of that important period to step up its cooperation
and partnership with regional and international
organizations, as well as with States in the Great Lakes
region. That is important for achieving stability and
ensuring economic integration.
We also call upon all Congolese stakeholders to
continue to embrace the same spirit that prevailed
during the elections and during the announcement of the
official results, by refraining from violence and moving
towards reconstruction, development and safeguarding
the gains attained.

First, with regard to the political situation, I
would like to begin with the conclusion of the most
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/218),
published on 7 March, on the holding of elections and
the peaceful handover of power in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as well as the taking office
by Mr. Félix Tshilombo Tshisekedi, the new President
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. That was
a significant turning point in the country’s history
and in the implementation of the 31 December 2016
agreement. Indeed, since the beginning of 2018, the
political situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has seen positive developments, which was
confirmed by Ms. Zerrougui in her briefing (see
S/PV.8483) during the meeting with troop-contributing
countries on Thursday, 14 March. We hope that those
positive developments will continue to achieve political,
security and economic stability in the country.

Secondly, with regard to the security situation,
despite general improvements during the elections and
following the announcement of the results, the incidence
of violence and armed conflict continues to plague
certain regions, particularly in the east of the country
in North Kivu, where has been armed escalation,
with direct repercussions and a threat to the lives of
unarmed civilians. We call upon all parties involved
in armed violence to end those acts, save civilian
lives and achieve peace and stability. In that regard,
we commend the great efforts of MONUSCO and its
personnel to counter armed attacks and safeguard
civilians. We also commend the decision taken by
certain armed groups to lay down their weapons and
rejoin their communities. We call upon other armed
groups to lay down their weapons and cooperate with
the Congolese Government. The Government must also
provide special programmes for reintegrating into their
communities those who have put down their weapons.

We welcome the official visits by President
Tshisekedi to neighbouring States to discuss issues
of common interest and strengthen partnerships
among States in the region. We also express our

Thirdly, with regard to the humanitarian situation,
it is still a source of concern in certain regions due to
continued fighting among armed groups. A total of
13 million people are still in need of urgent humanitarian

19-0755917/25

S/PV.8486

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

assistance. Epidemics of chronic diseases, such as
cholera and measles, continue to wreak havoc, as well
as the Ebola outbreak in North Kivu and Ituri. It has
been reported that 859 individuals have been stricken
by Ebola, of whom 536 have died.
We commend the efforts of the Congolese Ministry
of Health, in coordination with the United Nations and
World Health Organization (WHO), to combat the Ebola
virus. We also welcome the third strategic response plan
adopted by those three entities on 13 February — drawn
up by the Ministry of Health with technical support
from WHO and United Nations agencies, for a duration
of six months. We hope that the virus will be totally
eradicated in the upcoming months.
We are also concerned about nearly 13 million
people suffering from malnutrition in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, of whom a total of 4 million
children suffer from acute malnutrition due to persistent
armed clashes. In that regard, we recall the inter-ethnic
armed violence between the Banunu and Batende
groups in mid-December 2018 in Yumbi, which resulted
in at least 500 victims.
Also on the issue of violence and murders, more
than two years have passed since the assassination, on
12 March 2017, of Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalán,
who were members of the Council’s Group of Experts.
We urge the Congolese Government to identify the
perpetrators of those crimes and hold them accountable
as soon as possible, as well as to cooperate with the
mechanism established by the Secretary-General in
that regard.
In conclusion, I again thank Ms. Zerrougui and
all MONUSCO personnel for their tireless efforts
and steadfast support for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We look forward to the discussions on
the draft resolution on the extension of MONUSCO’s
mandate. As penholder, France will soon circulate it to
the members of the Council, with a view to adopting
it by the end of the month. We support the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation in his report on the extension
of the mandate.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): At the outset, I would also
like to join my Kuwaiti brother in extending our deepest
condolences to the people and the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo following the tragic
train crash in Kasai. I also thank my Kuwaiti brother
for his condolences on the recent natural disaster in
eastern Indonesia, as well as in other parts of the world.
18/25

18/03/2019

I would also like to thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
her important briefing. Her vast experience in the
Democratic Republic of Congo has given weight to
the updates, and we commend her tireless efforts
in ensuring the effective contribution of the United
Nations to peace and stability in the country.
Like others, I also wish to thank Ms. Anny Tenga
Modi, Executive Director of Afia Mama. Ms. Modi’s
statement on women’s participation in peacebuilding
efforts in the Democratic Republic of Congo indeed
provides viewpoints for the Security Council in
moving forward on the country. In my view, we
cannot separate the peaceful transfer of power in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo from the role that
women play in it. During last week’s series of meetings
of the Commission on the Status of Women, we were
constantly reminded of the important role that women
play in maintaining peace and security, and of course
we applaud the work that Ms. Modi has been doing.
The Secretary-General’s report of 7 March 2019
(S/2019/218) provided ample food for thought. Indonesia
is certainly ready to work with the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for the country’s
future. I would now like to focus on three pertinent
points, which are, first, progress in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo; secondly, the role of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO); and
lastly, providing resources for MONUSCO.
With regard to the first point, I would like to echo
the Secretary-General when he says that the peaceful
transfer of power in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is a turning point in the country’s history.
Like others, we welcomed the peaceful holding of
presidential elections in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and we hope that the local elections still to
come can be conducted peacefully. Now is the time for
reconciliation and building a prosperous country, and
I believe the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are expecting to see peace, stability and growth.
We also welcome the support that has been provided by
regional and subregional partners and their willingness
to remain engaged in the post-electoral process.
Nevertheless, we realize that there is still a lot
of work to be done, as the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General also said. We must ensure a
successful start for the delayed elections in Beni,
19-07559

18/03/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Butembo and Yumbi now scheduled for the end of the
month. We must work on the issue of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of armed groups, as
well as enabling the new Government, once it has been
formed, to tackle a number of problems, including
the outbreak of the Ebola virus and the establishment
of good governance. With regard to the progress that
we hear has been made on the ground, as well as
the challenges that remain and that Ms. Zerrougui
mentioned, such as the attacks in northern areas and on
civilians in various places, it is clear that MONUSCO’s
role is as important as ever.
For my second point, we commend MONUSCO
on its role in keeping the peace during the transfer
of power in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We urge it to engage in close consultation with the
new Government so as to be able to give it effective
assistance. We are also encouraged to know that armed
groups in three provinces — Kasai, Tanganyika and
Ituri — have shown a willingness to disarm and give
up their weapons through MONUSCO. In our view,
this represents important progress in this aspect of the
Mission’s work. Indonesia takes pride, along with South
Africa, also here in the Chamber, in being one of the
largest troop contributors to MONUSCO, contributing
more than 1,000 peacekeepers — 1,041, to be exact, of
whom 28 are women. Our contribution also includes
an 850-member rapidly deployable battalion (RDB),
requested by the Secretary-General, and we are proud
to learn through the report that in February, through
its close community engagement, the Indonesian RDB
facilitated an armed group’s handover of its rifles,
magazines and uniforms to MONUSCO. Beyond the
protection of civilians, such community engagement is
an important aspect of peacekeeping.
My third point concerns MONUSCO’s operation
and resources. Its approved budget for the period
from 2018 to 2019 was $1.11 billion, which I believe
is the second largest after the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan. However, if we look at the numbers
closely, we can see that the burden borne by individual
peacekeepers in MONUSCO is quite heavy. MONUSCO,
with 17,000 peacekeepers, is currently responsible for
the whole of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which has a population of 84 million people and an
area of 2.34 million square kilometres, which is much
larger than many parts of Europe. That means that on
average, the mandate assigned to a single MONUSCO

S/PV. 8486

peacekeeper involves protecting 4,941 persons across
an area of 137 square kilometres.
I am citing this data in order to bring some
perspective to our discussion of the renewal of the
mandate. Peacekeepers in MONUSCO are still facing
direct threats, and in that connection, I want to pay
tribute to all our fallen peacekeepers. There is no
question that the Mission needs adequate resources in
order to maintain peacekeepers’ safety and ensure that
its mandate is effectively fulfilled. While we support
the plan for an exit strategy and MONUSCO’s eventual
drawdown, we are concerned about the fact that an
important United Nations peacekeeping mission like
MONUSCO is being required to reduce its capabilities
at the height of its work. The situation is still fragile.
We should keep building on the success so far, and as
long as civilians in particular continue to be victims,
MONUSCO will be needed more than ever. The
mandate and the resources should work together. The
Council cannot continue to work in a silo, and we must
engage in discussing the peacekeeping budgets with
the General Assembly if we are to ensure mandates’
smooth operation and fulfilment. And a commitment
to the peacekeeping budget should be followed with
that commitment’s realization. It is high time that we
re-examined the overall guidelines and resolutions
that relate to peacekeeping financing in order to
help the Secretariat fulfil its mandate in support of
peacekeeping operations.
As we are approach MONUSCO’s mandate renewal,
I also want to reiterate the importance of meaningful
consultations with the troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. At the end of the day, the
Government should have ownership when it comes to
securing peace and stability in its country. And I want
to highlight once again that at the end of the day, we are
here to save lives and to protect the weak and needy.
Peace is a luxury that the Congolese people have been
deprived of for far too long. Let us work together with
them and their new Government to ensure lasting peace
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): First of all, like my colleagues before
me, I would like to express my condolences to the
Government and the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in connection with the railway disaster
in Kasai province, as well as to the African States
affected by Cyclone Idai. We also mourn the victims of

19-0755919/25

S/PV.8486

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the horrifying natural disasters in our brother country
of Indonesia. We wish the wounded and injured a
speedy recovery.
We thank Special Representative Zerrougui for
her thorough briefing on the overall situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the work of the
United Nations presence there. We listened carefully to
Ms. Anny Tenga Modi’s report.
We view the presidential elections that took place
after repeated postponements as a milestone event in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s political life.
For the first time in their country’s history, its citizens
were able to achieve a democratic transfer of power
to an unarmed, legally operating opposition. It is
notable that the long-awaited vote was held in a calm
atmosphere unclouded by any serious violations of
public order. We welcome the fact that in the difficult
post-electoral period all the country’s political forces
have competed through exclusively political methods,
and we call on the Congolese people to continue to act
in the interests of peace and to take steps to prevent any
form of violence.
We are worried about the fact that the difficult
military and political situation in the country’s
eastern provinces continues, as have the attacks by
illegal armed groups, including the so-called Allied
Democratic Forces. The situation has also been
exacerbated by escalating intercommunal clashes and
the ongoing Ebola epidemic in the Beni area. We hope
that the fight against the armed groups will produce
the necessary results. There should also be qualitative
progress in the disarmament, demobilization and social
reintegration of former combatants. In that regard,
we note the fact that armed groups in Kasai province
have expressed the desire to lay down their arms and
the advances in the disarmament process in Ituri and
Tanganyika provinces. We join the Secretary-General
in urging that the window of opportunity opening there
not be missed. We also expect the Congolese authorities
to work to curb the illegal exploitation and export of the
country’s mineral resources.
We believe that the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo should continue to support the efforts
of the authorities to normalize the situation in the
country during the post-electoral period. We note the
constructive approach that the new President, Mr. Félix
Tshilombo Tshisekedi, has expressed about cooperating
20/25

18/03/2019

with the Blue Helmets. However, we want to emphasize
that any interference by anyone, whoever they may
be, in the internal affairs of Kinshasa is unacceptable.
For our part, we are ready to work constructively on
the draft resolution extending the Mission’s mandate.
Russia, including as a member of the Friends of the
Great Lakes Region, intends to continue to actively
promote the peace process in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the stabilization of the situation in the
Great Lakes region as a whole.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
I would like to begin by joining previous speakers
in expressing France’s condolences to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the wake of the horrific crash
that occurred in the Kasai region, and to Indonesia
following the natural disasters that have once again
plunged the country into mourning.
I want to warmly thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
Ms. Anny Modi for their very informative interventions.
At a time when the Security Council is preparing to
renew the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO), it is important for us to
have a clear assessment of the situation in the country,
MONUSCO’s implementation of its mandate and the
issues facing the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
the coming months.
In January the Democratic Republic of the Congo
experienced a historic event, the first peaceful change of
a Head of State since the country gained independence.
The Security Council, which has followed the electoral
process very closely, congratulated the Congolese
people on their conduct and sense of civic duty on
the day of the election. Since taking office, President
Tshilombo Tshisekedi has undertaken a number of
important steps aimed at achieving peace and national
reconciliation, opening the political space and ensuring
respect for the law and for human rights in particular.
The release at the end of last week of 700 prisoners
imprisoned for political reasons is the latest example
of that. France welcomes those initial important
decisions and encourages the new authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to continue to fulfil
the commitments made by the President.
19-07559

18/03/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The next steps in the institutional life of the
country must happen very soon and will also be an
opportunity to demonstrate the new directions that the
country is taking, including with the legislative and
provincial elections in the areas where people were
unable to vote in December, the formation of the new
Government and the organization early next year of the
first local elections in the history of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. As Ms. Modi emphasized,
women’s participation in that process can and must still
be improved.
President Tshisekedi has also pledged to work to
end the conflicts afflicting the country, particularly
in the east, and the intercommunal clashes that have
recently affected various regions, with a view to
helping the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s
various communities coexist peacefully. A number of
armed groups have expressed their willingness to lay
down their arms, and several hundred combatants have
already done so since January. This new development
will be hopeful if we work collectively to do what
must be done to ensure that those combatants can be
disarmed and properly reintegrated into civilian life
and their communities.
MONUSCO has an important role to play in all
those aspects, and I want to once again commend the
exemplary commitment of Ms. Zerrougui and her entire
staff and team. The Council has mandated MONUSCO
to protect civilians and support the Government in its
fight against armed groups. We need the determined
involvement of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the countries of the region as part of an approach
that combines military pressure, if necessary, and
dialogue so as to normalize the situation throughout
the country.
There are a number of important challenges that
must still be addressed. Several of the country’s regions
continue to suffer from predatory activity by both
Congolese and foreign armed groups financed by the
illegal exploitation of natural resources. France urges
both the Democratic Republic of the Congo and all of the
countries in the region to act concertedly and resolutely
to end such trafficking and cut off the resources that
enable such groups to continue their abuses.
Certain kinds of community tensions have
sometimes degenerated into extremely serious violence,
as was the case in Yumbi in December, where crimes
against humanity may have been committed. France

S/PV. 8486

calls on the Congolese authorities to do everything to
ensure that the perpetrators of those heinous crimes
are held accountable for their actions. It will also be
crucial to ensure that the new authorities shed light
on the human rights violations committed during the
election period.
Sexual violence against women is still too often
used as a weapon of war, as Ms. Modi mentioned. France
encourages the Congolese authorities to prosecute the
people responsible and to provide the necessary support
to the victims.
The Ebola epidemic continues to rage in the
country’s eastern regions and must be dealt with. I want
to once again commend the exemplary commitment
of the Congolese authorities and humanitarian actors,
coordinated by the World Health Organization, in
combating the epidemic, and the support provided by
MONUSCO. On behalf of France, I once again firmly
condemn attacks targeting humanitarian personnel who
are assisting the sick. They must continue to receive our
full support.
All the changes and challenges that I have
mentioned will require the United Nations to adapt its
engagement in the country and reconfigure its modes
of action in order to give the best possible support to
the restoration of peace and stability throughout the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. That
will mean reconfiguring MONUSCO as well. For that
reason, in the draft resolution that France will submit
early this week to Council members on the renewal
of the Mission’s mandate, we propose conducting a
strategic review of MONUSCO. In the spirit of the
Secretary-General’s initiative on peacekeeping, we
believe it is crucial to ensure that the Council can
rely on a thorough assessment of the situation and the
related needs in order to reconfigure MONUSCO by the
autumn and begin the transition to other forms of longterm support. The reconfiguration should of course be
undertaken in close coordination with the Congolese
authorities, in accordance with President Tshisekedi’s
commitments and priorities.
For the past 20 years the United Nations Observer
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and, subsequently, MONUSCO have supported the
Democratic Republic of the Congo on its path to
recovery and national reunification. January’s peaceful
transfer of power shows that another stage has been
reached. We must now adapt MONUSCO to the

19-0755921/25

S/PV.8486

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

challenges of the years to come so that it can eventually
withdraw and so that the Congolese authorities are fully
capable of providing security and establishing the right
conditions for their people’s development throughout
the country. In support of that transition, it will also be
the Security Council’s job to consider the shape that the
United Nations presence in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo might take.
I would like to conclude by paying tribute to
Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalán, who sacrificed
their lives for peace in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and worked tirelessly to improve the lot of
the Congolese people. We encourage the Congolese
authorities to spare no effort in supporting the United
Nations monitoring mechanism to ensure that the
perpetrators of those crimes be tried and sentenced.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Gata Mavita Wa Lufuta (Democratic
Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of March and to let you know how
pleased my delegation is to see the friendly country
of France leading the Security Council’s deliberations
today. I would like to thank you for organizing
today’s meeting on the situation in my country, the
Democratic Republic of Congo. I would also like to
take this opportunity to congratulate your predecessor,
the Ambassador of Equatorial Guinea, who did an
excellent job in presiding over the Council last month.
And I particularly want to thank Secretary-General
Guterres for his determination and commitment to my
country’s cause and for his report on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2019/218), which
is the subject of our discussions today.
My delegation has taken note of the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), just introduced by Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of MONUSCO, whose presence here today I
welcome. I would now like to explain my Government’s
position on all the issues raised in the report and on the
concerns raised by the members of the Council.
22/25

18/03/2019

After the holding of presidential, legislative and
provincial elections on 30 December, the main focus
of the political situation in my country has been
the establishment of new institutions, as the report
emphasizes. In that context, on 24 January we held
a ceremony to celebrate our country’s historic first
peaceful transfer of power to a new Head of State, from
former President Joseph Kabila Kabange to the newly
elected President of the Republic, Mr Félix Antoine
Tshilombo Tshisekedi, followed by the installation of
Assemblies at both the national and provincial levels.
The political situation has also featured the
preparation of the elections that were postponed in
the Beni and Butembo areas of North Kivu province
in order to prevent the spread of Ebola virus disease,
and in the Yumbi district, in Mai-Ndombe province,
following bloody clashes that had resulted in the loss
of human lives. I need hardly say that those elections
are scheduled for 31 March, in accordance with
the revised timetable of the Commission électorale
nationale indépendante.
In order to emphasize his desire to strengthen goodneighbourly relations, work in harmony and cooperate
with the leaders of the region right from the start of his
term of office, President Tshisekedi undertook a tour
that took him in turn to Angola, Kenya, the Republic
of the Congo, Namibia and then to Nairobi for a second
time. On 10 and 11 February, in Addis Ababa, he also
participated in the thirty-second ordinary Summit of
Heads of State and Government of the African Union,
at which he was elected Second Vice-President of the
African Union by his peers.
With a view to reducing tensions in the political
climate, the President has authorized the return of those
who had been exiled for their political and philosophical
views, as well as the release of political prisoners,
particularly those whose cases were considered
symbolic. Before concluding this part, I should point
out that negotiations on forming a Government are
continuing between the parties concerned. In the
meantime, the President has appointed the members of
his Cabinet and published his programme of priorities
for the first 100 days of his term.
I would like to respond briefly to the Ambassador of
Germany by saying that the issues raised by Ms. Anny
Tenga Modi are important and the Government is
taking them into account. The fact is that gender parity
is enshrined in the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s
19-07559

18/03/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

legislation, and women are therefore an integral part
of all the country’s institutions. The lower numbers of
women in some State institutions has more to do with
their lack of initiative and determination, owing mainly
to the barriers presented by our civic education and
traditional culture, as Ms. Modi herself acknowledged.
We therefore want to point to the Government’s efforts
to establish programmes to encourage such initiatives
and combat our traditional barriers.
The security situation continues to be a concern for
the Government, which is why the President has made
it a priority of his programme, as he stressed in his
inauguration address. It is true that the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo continues to be
a focus for the activities of both domestic and foreign
armed groups, the most deadly of which is currently
the Allied Democratic Forces, as is well known. These
criminals are known for their murderous attacks on
civilian populations in the region of Beni and Butembo
and on positions held by MONUSCO and the Forces
armées de la République Démocratique du Congo
(FARDC). As we have told the Council before, the
modus operandi of this hostile force, whose strongholds
have already been dismantled, however, will force the
FARDC and MONUSCO to review their strategies
and combine their efforts to neutralize it and achieve
sustainable security for the people in this part of the
country and end the suffering they have endured for
many years. The Government remains committed to
continuing the efforts it has already undertaken in this
fight, which is why we have increased the military
strength of five of the 12 regiments operating in the
Sokola 1 operational sector in the Beni region by 2,500
men and appropriate equipment.
The current report also mentions the changes that
have occurred since the President took office, with
members of armed groups surrendering en masse,
particularly in the Kasais, the two Kivus, Ituri and
Haut-Katanga. This trend should be fostered so as to
encourage armed groups that are still active to renounce
their hostile activity and lay down their weapons.
My country urges the international community to
support this process of voluntary disarmament so
that combatants who surrender by laying down their
arms can benefit from the support they need for social
reintegration. In view of that, we advocate including
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration as the
second strategic priority in MONUSCO’s new mandate,
after the protection of civilians.

S/PV. 8486

With regard to the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda (FDLR) and former combatants
of the Mouvement du 23 mars (M23), in order to comply
with the decision of the Heads of State taken at the
eighth High-level Meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the region, held in Brazzaville on 19 October
2017, demanding the simultaneous and unconditional
repatriation of former FDLR and M23 combatants held
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda
and Uganda, my country has closed the transit sites
in Kisangani, Walungu and Kanyobagonga that had
sheltered FDLR elements, who have been repatriated
to Rwanda along with their dependents and with the
assistance of MONUSCO. A similar measure was taken
for some former M23s based in Uganda who have now
been returned to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
With respect to the sad events that occurred in the
Yumbi district on 17 and 18 December, on the President’s
instructions, a tripartite commission, consisting of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Republic of
the Congo and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, has been set up to identify
and deal with our compatriots who took refuge in
Congo-Brazzaville and to facilitate their return home.
Police forces, supported by operational units, have been
deployed in the area. In the next few days the President
will appoint local authorities in order to restore State
authority. He has decided to use military engineers
to rebuild the schools and other basic infrastructure
destroyed during the events.
With regard to the future of MONUSCO, the
President made the following statement in his address
to the diplomatic corps on 15 February.
“[W]e will assist the planned MONUSCO
drawdown process, taking into account the
evolving security situation, by fully participating
in the development of a joint exit strategy and its
gradual transformation within the framework of
the strategic dialogue. During the discussions
of the renewal of its mandate in March, we will
ask for a reconfiguration through a qualitative
reorganization of the troops, which should be
fewer in number but better equipped and more
experienced in dealing with asymmetric warfare
in order to collaborate with the national army in
tracking down armed groups, which are the main
threat to civilians”.

19-0755923/25

S/PV.8486

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

18/03/2019

In the light of the guidelines drawn up by the Head
of State, my Government requests the Security Council
to take the following proposals into account in the draft
resolution that it will adopt in a few days’ time: renew
the mandate of MONUSCO for a period of one year,
until March 2020; qualitatively resize the troops that
must be trained and the number of which should be
reduced — in my Government’s view, that reduction
should not include the Intervention Brigade; and provide
the troops with the appropriate means and equipment
to enhance their operational capabilities to combat
asymmetrical threats on the ground. Priority in that
allocation should be given to the Intervention Brigade.

the consolidation of State authority and the elimination
of the threat posed by armed groups.

Moreover, given that the elections are now behind
us, my Government requests that the mandate be
readjusted and reflect the post-electoral configuration.
In that context, troop deployment should take into
account areas where the threat is known and the
Mission can still play a role. Disengagement should
therefore be considered in areas where the threat is no
longer documented.

To return to the situation of Ebola haemorrhagic
fever, it is important to inform the Council that the
Government’s efforts to control that disease, with the
support of the World Health Organization, the African
Union and other partners, are ongoing. Since the first
outbreak of the epidemic, the cumulative number of
cases as of 15 March is 936, with 871 confirmed cases
and 65 likely cases. Of those cases, the number of
people cured stands at 310.

As I have already mentioned, the priorities of the
mandate should now focus on the protection of civilians.
With that in mind, my Government would therefore
like to see the Council take into account, as one of
the strategic priorities of the mandate, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration so as to enable, as we
have already said with regard to voluntary surrenders,
support for the social reintegration of the combatants
who lay down their arms. The Council should also
include the issue of dealing with the plundering of
natural resources, which is one of the main causes of the
conflict in the eastern part of my country, and take the
regional dimension of the crisis into account in order to
ask the neighbouring countries that are the sources of
the foreign armed groups to engage in political dialogue
with those groups in the context of resolving the crisis.
With regard to the upcoming discussions on the
development of a joint exit strategy within the framework
of the strategic dialogue, my country underscores
the need to start at once the process of transferring
MONUSCO’s tasks to the Government, the United
Nations country team and other relevant stakeholders,
following an explicit and jointly established timeline,
with a view to safeguarding the achievements already
made and a responsible withdrawal of MONUSCO,
thereby ensuring sustainable progress towards the
stabilization of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
24/25

The humanitarian situation in my country is due
mainly to the activity of armed groups and the conflicts
that are also racking neighbouring countries, whose
people seek refuge in our territory. In addition, there
are natural disasters and the resurgence of certain
epidemics, such as cholera and the Ebola virus disease.
My country continues to address that situation with the
means at its disposal. The Government would highly
appreciate any additional assistance that our partners
could provide to the distressed populations.

Members of the Council will agree with us that the
issue of human rights remains an ideal that all States
in the world seek to achieve. My country is firmly
committed to that ideal and will continue to work to
entrench the rule of law, which our young democracy
sorely needs. Мy delegation can therefore reassure
those present that the fight against violations of human
rights and fundamental freedoms is at the very heart
of the action of the President of the Republic, who has
committed to working for the promotion of the rule of
law. With that in mind, he is determined to humanize
the security services, fight abuses and close down
detention centres that do not comply with the law. In the
same vein, he is also committed to tackling impunity
within the ranks of the army and police and improving
the living and working conditions of the troops. He has
also resolved to open access to the public media to all
in order to promote freedom of expression, assembly
and protest.
As report S/2019/218 points out, the recurrent
armed conflicts in my country are at the root of sexual
violence and the use and recruitment of children. The
Government of my country is determined to continue
the efforts undertaken, in cooperation with the United
Nations and other partners to put an end to that situation.
It is true that despite those efforts and the significant
19-07559

18/03/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

progress already made by the Government in that fight,
challenges remain.
Мy delegation believes that to meet those
challenges, we must eradicate the armed groups. To
that end, MONUSCO, in support of the Forces armées
de la République Démocratique du Congo, should first
and foremost carry out the missions entrusted to it by
its mandate, namely, the protection of civilians and the
fight against armed groups; apply the sanctions regime
to armed groups to cut off their financing and supply of
arms and ammunition; oblige all entities involved in the
illicit flow of activities of armed groups — countries of
transit and destination and multinationals — to comply
fully with the sanctions regime; and apply sanctions to
all such entities that will not comply with the existing
sanctions regime.
As for the investigation into the assassination of
the two United Nations experts, the case is still under
investigation before the Kananga garrison military
tribunal, in Kasai Central province. In addition to
the various people who have already been arrested
and charged in the case, the ongoing work on the case
has allowed the tribunal to place in pretrial detention
Colonel Jean de Dieu Mambweni for having put the
experts in contact with the interpreter Betu Tshintela
and suggested that they travel to Kananga-Bukonde to
verify the information concerning a Kamwina Nsapu

S/PV. 8486

militia training camp in the vicinity of the town of
Ngombe, near Bukonde. The hearings, which had been
suspended, will resume during this month.
I cannot conclude my statement without
congratulating Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
MONUSCO, on her reappointment and expressing my
Government’s deep appreciation for the high quality
of the work she has done during her mandate in my
country at a particularly sensitive time. My Government
expresses its deep appreciation to her and assures her
of its full cooperation for the success of her mission.
I must also thank all the troops of MONUSCO, and
especially Force Intervention Brigade, for the ongoing
sacrifices that they make to ensure the restoration of
peace in my country.
Lastly, I would like to express the gratitude of the
Congolese people and their Government to the United
Nations, in particular the members of the Security
Council, for their commitment to and engagement in
the cause of my country.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

19-0755925/25
