VI.

Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
9. Requests the United Nations Institute for Training and Research to organize an international colloquium on the prohibition of apartheid, racism and
racial discrimination and the achievement of selfdetermination in international law, with special attention to the principies of non-discriminati?n and. selfdetermination as imperative norms of mternational
law;
10. Invites the Secretary-General to provide the
necessary staff and resources to ensure the effective
implementation of the Programme for the Decade,
bearing in mind the provisions of the present resolution;
11. Decides to consider at its thirty-fourth session,
as a matter of high priority, the item entitled "lmplementation of the Programme for the Decade for Action
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination".
86th plenary meeting
16 December 1978
33/100.

Results of the World Conference to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973 proclaiming the Decade for Action to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, to which
is annexed the Programme for the Decade,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the World Conference to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination,45 held at Geneva
from 14 to 25 August 1978,
Recalling the im~"rtance of the attainment of the
objectives of the Deca,le with a view to the strengthening of international peace and security,
Taking into account the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations whereby Member States undertake to take action separately and in co-operation with
the United Nations to ensure respect for and universal
observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms for ali without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
Convinced that the Conference, by the adoption of
the Declaration and the Programme of Action, 46 has
made a valuable and constructive contribution to the
achievement of the objectives of the Decade,
Resolved to take all appropriate measures to bring
about the total elimination of racism, racial discrimination and apartheid,
Inspired by the spirit presiding over the observance
of the thirtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and of the International AntiApartheid Year to redouble efforts to put an end to
ali forms of racism and racial discrimination,
l. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the work of the World Conference to
Comtat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
45 A/33/262.
46 Report of the

147

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

World Confercncc to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination, Geneva, 14-25 August 1978 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.XIV.2), chap. II.

2. Endorses the Declaration and the Programme
of Action adopted by the Conference;
3. Proclaims that the elimination of ali forros of
racism and of prejudices and discrimination based on
race is a matter of high priority for the intemational
community and, accordingly, for the United Nations;
4. / nvites all Sta tes, the specialized agencies and
other organizations in the United Nations system, as
well as intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations particularly concerned with action against
racism and racial discrimination, to give priority to
the full implementation of the provisions of the Declaration and the Programme of Action adopted by the
Conference;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary measures to ensure that the maximum publicity
is given to the final documents of the Conference in
view of the need to combar racism, racial discrimination and apartheid;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to take the
following measures in accordance with the Programme
of Action:
(a) To prepare several studies analysing the struggle against all forms of racial discrimination;
(b) To organize during the second half of the
Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination, at the level of each region of the
United Nations, regional seminars on action against
racism and racial discrimination;
(e) To study the possibility of establishing an
international fund on the basis of voluntary contributions with a view to assisting peoples and national
liberation movements in their struggle against racism
and apartheid;
7. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
carry out an evaluation of the activities undertaken
in connexion with the Decade, in accordance with
paragraph 18 of the Programme for the Decade, taking
into account the results of the Conference set out in
the Declaration and the Programme of Action adopted
by the Conference.
86th plenary meeting
16 December 1978
33/101.

Status of the lnternational Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973, 3135 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973,
3225 (XXIX) of 6 November 1974, 3381 (XXX) of
10 November 1975, 31/79 of 13 December 1976 and
32/11 of 7 November 1977,
l. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral47 on the status of the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;48
2. Expresses its satisfaction with the increase in
thc number of States which have ratified the Convention or acceded thereto;
47 A/33/147 and Corr.1.
4 8 Resolution 2106 A (XX),

annex.
