S/PV.8843

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8843rd meeting

Thursday, 26 August 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Tirumurti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Lipand
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Mr. Aougi
Ms. Heimerback
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mr. Bynoe
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills
Mrs. Tra Phuong Nguyen

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-23472 (E)
*2123472*

S/PV.8843

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Ethiopia to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, to whom I now
give the floor.
The Secretary-General: I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting on the situation in Ethiopia — a
matter that is increasingly preoccupying the African
continent and the wider international community.
The military confrontation, which started some
10 months ago in the northern region of Tigray, is
spreading, and the level of human suffering is growing,
with serious political, economic and humanitarian
implications for Ethiopia and the broader region. All
parties must recognize the simple truth — there is no
military solution.
Last week, I issued an appeal for action on three
fronts: first, calling on all parties to immediately
cease hostilities; secondly, ensuring a commitment to
unrestricted humanitarian access everywhere and fully
re-establishing public services; and, thirdly, creating
the conditions for the start of an Ethiopian-led political
dialogue to find a solution to this crisis. Those steps are
essential for two critical reasons.
First, the unity of Ethiopia and the stability of
the region are at stake, and they are very important.
The military front lines in Tigray have now reached
the regions of Amhara and Afar. The declaration of
a unilateral ceasefire by the Government of Ethiopia
on 28 June and the withdrawal of the Ethiopian
National Defence Forces from Mekelle did not lead to
a comprehensive ceasefire. The Tigray region remains
largely under a de-facto humanitarian blockade and
cut off from key public services, such as electricity
and communications. The Tigrayan forces have since
suspended their presence into the neighbouring Amhara
and Afar regions, where fighting has escalated. Other
2/17

26/08/2021

actors in Ethiopia have entered the fight through mass
mobilization and the activation of regional armed
groups. Inflammatory rhetoric and ethnic profiling are
tearing apart the social fabric of the country. The wider
region is already witnessing the political, economic
and social impact of the conflict beyond the borders
of Ethiopia.
Secondly, the human price of this war is mounting
by the day. A humanitarian catastrophe is unfolding
before our eyes. More than 2 million people have
been displaced from their homes, and millions more
are in immediate need of life-saving humanitarian
assistance, including food, water, shelter and health
care. At least 400,000 people are living in famine-like
conditions. Last month, UNICEF warned that
100,000 children faced life-threatening severe acute
malnutrition over the next 12 months. Refugee camps
have been destroyed. Health-care systems have been
decimated, with hospitals and clinics attacked and
looted. That has all been exacerbated by electricity and
communications blackouts.
I am also deeply concerned by reports of horrific
sexual and gender-based violence from survivors,
including women and children. I condemn those
atrocity acts in the strongest possible terms.
That is compounded by other serious allegations of
human rights violations and abuses against civilians,
reportedly perpetrated by all parties to the conflict.
There must be accountability. A joint investigation by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the Ethiopian Human Rights
Commission is concluding.
The United Nations and its humanitarian partners
have mobilized to reach more than 5 million people with
food or other essentials, but their capacity to respond is
severely constrained by insecurity, delays and a host of
restrictions on the work of humanitarian organizations.
Overland access to Tigray now depends on a single
route, through the Afar region, which involves
passing through numerous checkpoints. Humanitarian
organizations require roughly 100 trucks’ worth of
assistance and supplies to reach Mekelle every day. Yet,
since mid-July, an average of fewer than 10 trucks per
day have been able to get through, and no trucks have
arrived for more than a week, while food warehouses
are now empty. Sadly, humanitarian workers have been
arrested and even killed.
21-23472

26/08/2021

Peace and security in Africa

Well beyond Tigray, the conflict in the Afar and
Amhara regions has reportedly displaced 300,000
more people. This is taking place alongside efforts to
maintain broader humanitarian support across Ethiopia,
in response to intercommunal violence, flooding, locust
infestations and other challenges.
The conflict is also taking a heavy economic
toll, illustrating once again the utter folly of war.
The conflict has already drained more than $1 billion
from the country’s coffers. Debt is mounting, and
access to credit is drying up. Inflation is increasing,
and basic food items are running low. Meanwhile,
Ethiopia is suffering from the fifth-highest incidence
of coronavirus disease cases on the continent.
For all those reasons, I repeat my fundamental
call — all parties must immediately end hostilities
without preconditions and seize the opportunity to
negotiate a lasting ceasefire; foreign forces should
leave the country; unrestricted humanitarian access
to all areas in need must be guaranteed; humanitarian
workers must be respected and public services must be
re-established.
I believe that there is an opportunity to address the
conflict peacefully, which the parties must seize in the
interest of Ethiopia, and conditions must be created for
the start of an inclusive national political dialogue in
order to address the underlying causes of the conflict
and ensure that Ethiopian voices direct the pathway
to peace.
On these issues, I have been in contact with Prime
Minister Abiy Ahmed. I also received a letter on this
matter from the president of the Tigray region, as
elected at the time, in response to my appeal, which was
also addressed to the President of the Security Council.
The United Nations is ready to work together with the
African Union and other key partners to support such a
dialogue. In the period ahead, the attention and unity of
the Security Council will be critical.
Allow me to express one final word of profound
regret about the tragic events unfolding in Ethiopia.
Ethiopia is a country full of promise, driven in large
measure by the energy and initiative of its youth. It
is heartbreaking to see many young Ethiopians being
instrumentalized and mobilized in war efforts. Their
energy is being channelled into a path of division and
destruction, instead of one of building a better future
for all Ethiopians. They will be the ultimate casualties
in this needless conflict. In every sense, the future of

S/PV. 8843

Ethiopia is at stake. Let us pledge to do all we can to
advance the path of national cohesion and peace.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to
preface my remarks, if I may, by offering my sincere
condolences to the families of the victims of the horrific
attack today in Kabul.
I want to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting today. I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his insightful, yet — I must admit — deeply
troubling briefing today. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Amde, our colleague; it is critical to have
him with us today.
Over the past nine months, we have witnessed a
severe and deepening political crisis in Tigray, which
is now expanding to neighbouring regions of Ethiopia.
The immediate consequence has been a massive
humanitarian emergency, with more than 5.2 million
people in need of assistance in Tigray alone. We deeply
regret that it has come to this. We were warned months
ago. We spoke of the risks here at this same table.
Sadly now, if the crisis is not urgently addressed, the
longer-term consequences for the unity of Ethiopia
and the stability of the wider region are potentially
catastrophic. That is why Ireland has continually raised
this unfolding crisis as a matter of the deepest concern.
The Secretary-General’s presence and clear messages
today underscore just how serious this situation has
now become.
I strongly echo what the Secretary-General calls
“the simple truth” — that there is no military solution to
this conflict. We agree with him that regional partners
and the African Union in particular have a crucial role
to play in finding the political solution needed to end
the crisis. We have been underlining this message since
we joined the Council, and I was pleased to see today
that former Nigerian President Obasanjo was appointed
by the African Union as the High Representative for the
Horn of Africa. We welcome that appointment.
No one in this Chamber underestimates the
complexity of this crisis. We certainly do not. But that
is not an excuse to stand by and do nothing. Today we
heard from the Secretary-General about where we might
start. Today all Council members have an opportunity

21-234723/17

S/PV.8843

Peace and security in Africa

to support the Secretary-General and those caught in
this crisis by sending three clear and united messages.
First, all parties to the conflict must immediately
cease hostilities and come to the table to negotiate a
lasting ceasefire. Secondly, all parties to the conflict
must ensure full, unimpeded and safe humanitarian
access, as well as the restoration of public services.
Thirdly, conditions must be created to allow for dialogue
in order to find a solution to the conflict in Tigray, and a
broad range of stakeholders must engage in a process of
inclusive dialogue to address the significant challenges
affecting Ethiopia. The international community — that
means us — must stand ready to support this process.
The shocking spectre of famine continues to loom.
We know that millions of people are displaced and
that hundreds of thousands are already starving. There
is absolutely no time to waste. This is not a time for
reflection. On the contrary, it is a time for action. The sad
reality is that without further, immediate and scaled-up
action, the horror of starvation will overwhelm parts of
Ethiopia again, with harrowing echoes of past tragedy.
Too many ordinary men, women and children will
suffer; too many will die as collateral damage in a war
not of their making. As we just heard in clear terms,
their basic humanitarian needs in terms of food and
shelter are not even close to being met. I repeat — this
is a time for action. As humanitarian workers continue
to face violence and unnecessary obstacles in carrying
out their work, we say that it is past time to act.
We call again on the Ethiopian authorities and all
other actors to immediately facilitate full, unimpeded
humanitarian access. We also urge the Government of
Ethiopia to restore basic public services for the people of
Tigray. Access to food, medical services and education
are the very least that the people deserve. The human
dignity and human rights of millions are at stake.
We also call on the Tigrayan forces to immediately
end their military offensive and withdraw from the
Amhara and Afar regions. The longer the conflict
persists, the greater the suffering of all Ethiopian
people. We have taken careful note of the letter
referenced by the Secretary-General that was sent by the
Tigrayan representatives, which may be an important
development. We further call on the Amhara forces to
withdraw from western Tigray. I also echo the call of
our African colleagues for external forces to withdraw
from Ethiopia.
4/17

26/08/2021

We are horrified by the conflict-related sexual
violence and atrocities that have defined this conflict. It
is clear that women and girls have been systematically
raped and abused throughout the conflict and that
communities have been traumatized. All those
responsible for violations of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law must be held
to account. That is true not least because countering
impunity is essential to preventing further violations.
We await the findings of the report by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the Ethiopian Human Rights Commission. We hope
that that work will draw to a conclusion without undue
delay. We also call on all parties to refrain from using
inflammatory rhetoric and dehumanizing language,
which serves only to fuel ethnic and political tensions
across Ethiopia. Such dehumanizing rhetoric is never
acceptable. As history tells us, nothing good can come
of that.
I began today by saying that the Council has
an opportunity and a responsibility to send a clear
and united message. Let me return to that point. We
need a cessation of hostilities and for the parties to
come to the table to negotiate a lasting ceasefire. We
need unimpeded humanitarian access, and we need a
political solution to the crisis in Tigray and an inclusive
national dialogue. Leadership to forge a path towards
peace must be found among the parties to the conflict.
Time is of the essence. The very lives of the Ethiopian
people are at stake. Now is the time for action.
Mr. Lipand (Estonia): I thank Secretary-General
Guterres for being with us today and for the remarks he
made. Estonia welcomes today’s very timely Security
Council meeting and reiterates the need to keep the
situation in Tigray on the Council’s agenda.
We are deeply worried about the escalating
conflict in Tigray, which is aggravating an already dire
humanitarian situation and increasingly threatening the
wider stability of the region. The reports of the growing
number of civilian casualties, especially among
children, are alarming. It is essential that all parties
adhere to international humanitarian law and do their
utmost to protect civilians.
It must be acknowledged by all that there can be no
military solution to the conflict. We join the SecretaryGeneral in calling on the parties to cease hostilities,
as an immediate priority, and start negotiations for a
permanent ceasefire. We call on the Tigray forces to
21-23472

26/08/2021

Peace and security in Africa

stop their offensive, in particular in the neighbouring
Amhara and Afar regions, which has already caused
massive displacement and will only expand the scope
of the devastation and suffering.
At the same time, we call on the Government of
Ethiopia to request the immediate withdrawal of Eritrean
troops from Tigray to ensure unfettered humanitarian
access to the region and restore basic services, including
water, fuel, electricity, communications and banking
in all areas affected by the conflict. We also urge the
Government to facilitate overcoming the challenges
faced on the ground by humanitarian aid organizations
in order for them to be able to assist those in need.
Estonia is increasingly concerned about the
conflict-driven food security crisis, which has been
deteriorating primarily owing to the interruption
of supply lines. Approximately 400,000 people are
already living in famine — the direst level of acute food
insecurity — with 4 million more people approaching
the same situation.
Continued reports about violations and abuses
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, including widespread sexual and
gender-based violence, are deeply worrisome. In that
context, we reiterate the importance of the ongoing joint
investigation by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Ethiopian
Human Rights Commission. The perpetrators must
be held accountable and brought to justice. We are
also worried about reports of arbitrary detentions and
enforced disappearances of ethnic Tigrayans in Addis
Ababa. We call on the Ethiopian authorities to investigate
those possibly unlawful and discriminatory practices.
In conclusion, the people of Tigray have suffered
enough. While the immediate priority must be ending
the hostilities, that should be followed by an inclusive
and credible political process, with the aim of national
reconciliation. The conflict in Tigray can be resolved
only through dialogue.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I join my colleagues in conveying my sympathy
to the family and friends of the victims of the abhorrent
attacks that occurred today in Kabul.
I would like to begin by thanking the SecretaryGeneral for his statement.
I will underscore five points.

S/PV. 8843

While the conflict has been ongoing for nearly
10 months, a principle based on the reality of the
situation must prevail. Our first priority, which is also
the responsibility of the Security Council, is to end the
conflict and safeguard the unity of Ethiopia. We will
succeed in achieving that goal only if all the forces
involved shoulder their respective responsibilities.
As we know, the conflict is being waged by several
parties — the Federal Government, regional militias
and special forces, and their Eritrean allies, on the one
hand, and the Tigrayan forces on the other. Calling
for a cessation of hostilities, humanitarian access and
dialogue does not mean that we are partial to any
one side.
As the Secretary-General made perfectly clear, the
conflict will not be resolved by the use of weapons. All
parties must agree to a ceasefire. We also call for the
definitive withdrawal of Eritrean forces from Ethiopian
territory. We call on the Tigrayan forces to withdraw to
within the regional borders of Tigray in order to avert any
escalation. A compromise must finally be reached with
the Amhara forces on the border dispute between the
two regions within the framework of the Constitution.
Attacks against civilians, extrajudicial executions, the
forced expulsion of populations and sexual violence
based on ethnicity or the supposed political affiliation
of individuals cannot go unpunished regardless of the
identity of the perpetrators.
In that regard, France reiterates its full support for
the joint investigation into human rights violations,
which must irrefutably establish the facts. Its
conclusions must be followed by action. We deeply
regret, moreover, the difficulties encountered in
the collection of evidence and call on all parties to
guarantee access for the investigators.
Achieving a ceasefire is essential to dealing with
the humanitarian emergency. France calls on the
Ethiopian Government to uphold all its commitments
with regard to guaranteeing humanitarian access. It is
imperative to remove obstacles impeding the delivery
of aid by all means, including by road. It is also up to
the authorities to restore electricity, telecommunication
services, the Internet and the banking system. In
addition, France is concerned about attempts to
discredit humanitarian actors. France condemns all
forms of violence or intimidation against humanitarian
and medical personnel.

21-234725/17

S/PV.8843

Peace and security in Africa

Finally, it is urgent to create the conditions
necessary leading to a process of dialogue and
reconciliation. We once again call on all parties to
assume their responsibilities. The Federal Government
must set up a national dialogue with representatives of
all sectors of society in order to find a political solution
to the divisions in Ethiopia and preserve its unity. At
the same time, we call on the Tigrayan representatives
to show that they are open to dialogue.
Lastly, France supports regional efforts to bring
about peace. In that regard, we welcome the appointment
of the former President of Nigeria, Olusegun Obasanjo,
as the African Union High Representative for the Horn
of Africa. We call on the countries of the region to
resolve their differences through genuine dialogue,
particularly with regard to the Al-Fashaga triangle area
and the Renaissance Dam. We call on all parties to
refrain from any action that could inflame tensions and
to respond constructively to the mediation efforts of the
African Union.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): With sadness and
disbelief, we are yet again discussing the prospect of
a man-made famine in Tigray. The expansion of the
armed conflict into the neighbouring regions of Afar
and Amhara will only increase the suffering. The
ramifications for the entire country are grave and
potentially undermine regional peace and security in
the Horn of Africa.
Let me thank the Secretary-General for his frank
briefing. We are grateful for his tireless diplomatic
efforts to end the conflict. We hope to see that his
leadership in preventive diplomacy is replicated by
other key actors such as regional institutions. As we
have been told, the humanitarian consequences of the
conflict in Tigray are massive. In order to end the
catastrophic humanitarian situation in Tigray, several
immediate actions are crucial.
First, the Federal Ethiopian authorities and all other
actors must secure rapid, safe and unimpeded access for
humanitarian aid to the region; secondly, all parties must
do their utmost to facilitate the work of humanitarian
organizations and their personnel; and, thirdly, all
parties must fully respect international humanitarian
law and provide security for humanitarian workers.
Repeated assurances from the Ethiopian authorities
of compliance with humanitarian obligations have
failed to materialize. In reality, Tigray is placed under a
strict closure regime, and the provision of humanitarian
6/17

26/08/2021

aid through land convoys and air access is being
obstructed instead of facilitated. We strongly condemn
the many vilifying comments made in public regarding
humanitarian actors and workers. Such hateful rhetoric
is creating more insecurity and putting the lives of
humanitarians at risk.
It is incumbent on all parties to protect the
human rights of all people. That includes protection
from stigmatization or ethnic profiling. We are
deeply concerned by allegations of serious human
rights violations and abuses in Tigray and other
conflict-affected areas, including against children.
Norway condemns in the strongest possible terms the
reported killings of civilians and the widespread and
systematic use of sexual and gender-based violence.
Additionally, the reported systematic destruction
of vital infrastructure and health centres is equally
unacceptable. They must be rapidly restored.
The alleged atrocities, violations and abuses
of international human rights and international
humanitarian law must be documented and investigated,
and those responsible must be prosecuted. Bringing
perpetrators to justice is critical for prevention and
deterrence. We welcome the joint investigation by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the Ethiopian Human Rights
Commission, as well as the African Commission on
Human and Peoples’ Rights independent commission
of inquiry, into alleged atrocities in Tigray. We expect
all findings to be used to ensure accountability. Norway
will continue to make sure that the fight against
impunity remains high on the Council’s agenda.
Norway urges all actors in the conflict to
immediately end the violence and enter into dialogue.
To facilitate that, Eritrea must fully withdraw from
Ethiopian territory; Tigrayan forces must end their
expansion into neighbouring regions; and Amhara
federal forces and militia must withdraw from
Western Tigray.
Finally, it is vital that States in the region, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the African Union (AU) bring their full weight
to bear in order to end the hostilities in Tigray and
Ethiopia. We recognize the efforts undertaken in that
regard thus far by Prime Minister Hamdok in his
capacity as the Chair of IGAD, and we welcome today’s
appointment of former President Obasanjo as the AU
High Representative for the Horn of Africa.
21-23472

26/08/2021

Peace and security in Africa

Likewise, the Council must lend all possible support
to regional efforts. We should speak with one voice
in calling for the cessation of hostilities, unimpeded
humanitarian access and a peaceful resolution through
dialogue. The Council should receive regular reporting
on humanitarian access to Tigray, including clear
indicators of any gaps in the response and assistance
needed. We cannot allow the humanitarian situation
in Tigray to deteriorate even further into catastrophe,
or the conflict in Ethiopia to destabilize the Horn of
Africa, without pursuing all available avenues towards
a political solution.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me also offer
the United Kingdom’s condolences in connection with
all those who lost their lives in today’s terrorist attack
in Kabul.
I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing. He
described a desperate situation, and it is right that the
Council considers how it can help. I would therefore like
to make three points in response to what we have heard.
First, all parties must cease hostilities, and
unfettered humanitarian access must be provided to
relieve the toll of the conflict on ordinary Ethiopians.
As the Secretary-General told us, more than 400,000
people in Tigray are experiencing famine conditions,
which is more than in the rest of the world combined.
Only a fraction of the 100 trucks of aid required every
day are getting into Tigray. Banking, electricity and
communications services remain suspended, posing
serious obstacles to humanitarian operations. The
spread of fighting into neighbouring Amhara and
Afar states, displacing tens of thousands of civilians,
will only extend the human suffering and prolong
the conflict.
We therefore call on Tigrayan forces to
immediately cease fighting in Amhara and Afar. We
reiterate that Eritrean troops must withdraw completely
from Ethiopia, as the Government of Ethiopia has
requested. We call upon the Ethiopian Government
to fully enable humanitarian access, including by
removing bureaucratic barriers to aid delivery and
allowing sufficient cash and fuel into Tigray to enable
humanitarian operations.
Secondly, I want to emphasize the need for all
parties to ensure the protection of civilians and to
comply with international humanitarian and human
rights law. The Secretary-General’s briefing gave
further weight to the reports we have been receiving of

S/PV. 8843

atrocities committed by all sides. Such atrocities include
brutal and systematic sexual violence, massacres and
the indiscriminate shelling of towns. We have also
witnessed an increase in hate speech and attacks on the
humanitarian community.
The United Kingdom fully supports the joint
investigation by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Ethiopian
Human Rights Commission. It is crucial to prospects
for peace and reconciliation that the investigation be
thorough and robust. The perpetrators of atrocities
must also be held to account.
Thirdly, let me underline the urgency of pursuing
political dialogue to end the crisis. The United Kingdom
is a long-standing friend and partner of Ethiopia.
We have been proud to work alongside Ethiopians to
support their progress in reducing poverty and building
sustainable economic growth. The current conflict is
already reversing that progress. It now threatens the
long-term stability and prosperity of the country, and
the region.
We want to see Ethiopia return to a positive
trajectory. Ten months in, it is clear that there is no
military solution to the conflict. The only way that
Ethiopia can return to peace and prosperity is through
an inclusive political settlement. That requires talks
between the parties, urgently and without preconditions.
We support the efforts by the Secretary-General, UnderSecretary-General Griffiths and the African Union
(AU) to make that possible. We therefore welcome
the announcement today of the appointment of former
President Obasanjo as the AU High Representative for
the Horn of Africa.
It is abundantly clear what the parties need to do now
to end the dreadful toll of human suffering in Ethiopia.
The United Kingdom joins the Secretary-General and
other members of the Council in calling on all parties to
cease hostilities, allow unfettered humanitarian access,
comply with international law and begin a process of
dialogue to resolve the conflict.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): Let me
begin by thanking those that have offered condolences
in connection with the victims of the evil and cruel
terrorist act this morning at Kabul airport. It is
much appreciated.

21-234727/17

S/PV.8843

Peace and security in Africa

I also thank Secretary-General Guterres for his
insightful yet, as my Irish colleague said, disturbing
briefing today.
In our most recent session on Ethiopia and the
situation in Tigray, on 2 July (see S/PV. 8812), the
United States, Ireland and the United Kingdom called
for public discussion in the Council focused on the
protection of civilians. We called then for a negotiated
ceasefire and unfettered humanitarian access. We also
called, more broadly, for a national political dialogue
that would be inclusive of all Ethiopians.
Since then, no progress has been made on any of
those fronts at all. As we have heard from the SecretaryGeneral, the military confrontation has escalated. The
Ethiopian Government has not responded positively to
proposals for negotiations — instead, it has publicly
called for the mobilization of militia. The Tigray People’s
Liberation Front, meanwhile, has expanded its own
military campaign into the Afar and Amhara regions.
Ongoing Tigray People’s Liberation Front military
operations in those regions are displacing hundreds of
thousands of civilians. That, too, must stop immediately.
Eritrean defence forces have re-entered Tigray. Reports
indicate that military alliances among armed groups
in other regions risk sparking a wider war in Ethiopia.
Instead of striving to create space for negotiations and
dialogue, leaders on all sides have used inflammatory
rhetoric that is increasing polarization along ethnic
lines. This is all gravely concerning to all of us. These
developments are eroding the unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Ethiopian State.
The United States is particularly concerned about
reports of ongoing violence in the Tigray region and other
parts of northern Ethiopia, including attacks against
women and children. The Ethiopian Government and
the TPLF, as well as associated regional militias, must
end the fighting now, allow humanitarian access and
move towards a negotiated ceasefire immediately and
without preconditions. Meanwhile, Eritrean Defence
Forces (EDF) must refrain from further increasing or
regionalizing the conflict.
Today, I would like to focus on those three
concerns — the dire humanitarian situation, the need
for immediate negotiations towards a sustainable
ceasefire and the withdrawal of Eritrean forces.
First, contrary to its public commitments, the
Ethiopian Government and regional authorities continue
8/17

26/08/2021

to cut off Tigray, with limited entry of humanitarian
goods or personnel. This withholding of humanitarian
aid, particularly food, is leading to unnecessary death
and untold human suffering. Last week, after repeated
warnings, aid agencies ran out of food stocks in their
warehouses in Tigray. That comes after all of us were
told, over the past three months, about famine conditions
in Tigray. Millions are at high risk of food insecurity in
northern Ethiopia, and, of those, hundreds of thousands
are estimated to be at risk of starvation in Tigray.
The
heroes
trying
to
fend
off
such
starvation — humanitarian workers — are, as we
heard, being targeted and killed simply for providing
aid to those who are in need. Despite a small increase in
the number of convoys and flights entering Tigray, we
estimate that just 7 per cent of the needed humanitarian
supplies were able to reach Tigray over the past month.
That statistic is based on the World Food Programme’s
projection of what is needed and the Ethiopian
Government’s own reporting on how many trucks have
gotten through.
Let us be clear this shortage is not because food
is unavailable. It is because the Ethiopian Government
is still limiting humanitarian aid and personnel,
including land convoys and air access. We are troubled
by disturbing reports that the Ethiopian Government
is intentionally withholding humanitarian assistance
to starving Ethiopians. These impediments to the
movement of humanitarian supplies must be removed
immediately, and trucks must be allowed to enter
and deliver life-saving assistance to Tigray. If these
impediments continue, large numbers of people will
starve to death, and many more will die from disease.
The Council was very clear when it adopted resolution
2417 (2018) in 2018. Denying humanitarian access and
depriving civilians of objects indispensable to their
survival is a violation of international humanitarian
law and can constitute a war crime. That is happening
on our watch.
The impediment to the movement of humanitarian
supplies is not the only humanitarian crisis in the country.
We are also alarmed about reports of reprehensible
attacks against Eritrean refugees. One humanitarian
worker was killed by TPLF forces in Amhara region
last week and humanitarians have observed the looting
of offices and warehouses of non-governmental
organizations by the TPLF, with the supplies being
taken into Tigray. That is utterly unacceptable. The
humanitarians are there to save lives; they must be
21-23472

26/08/2021

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV. 8843

protected. The trajectory of the conflict over the past
10 months demands continued Security Council action.

deserve to live in peace with each other and to lead
healthier, more resilient and prosperous lives.

Secondly, the United States remains deeply
concerned about the role of Eritrea in fuelling the
ongoing crisis. The presence of the Eritrean Defence
Forces in Ethiopia remains a significant barrier to
ceasefire negotiations and to a political resolution of
the conflict. The evidence that Eritrean Defence Forces
engaged in a pattern of serious human rights abuses in
Tigray is overwhelming. Therefore, earlier this week,
the United States sanctioned the EDF’s Chief of Staff
Major General, pursuant to United States Executive
Order 13818, which builds upon and implements the
Global Magnitsky Human Rights Accountability Act.
To avoid additional measures from the United States,
the EDF must immediately and permanently withdraw
from northern Ethiopia. That leads to my final point.

Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would
like to join other colleagues in expressing our deepest
condolences to the families and Governments of
the victims who lost their lives in the recent attacks
in Kabul.

With all the suffering and instability, it is clear
that the fighting and abuses by all parties to the
conflict must cease. Negotiations for a ceasefire and
political discussion on a way forward must commence
immediately. Given the magnitude of unspeakable
suffering, the Security Council has come together, and
I believe that we are making clear to all parties to the
conflict that there is no military solution.
I would like to reiterate the Secretary-General’s
call today for all parties to the conflict to halt
offensives, come to the table without preconditions and
negotiate a lasting ceasefire. Without the commitment
of the Ethiopian Government and the Tigray People’s
Liberation Front to both unimpeded access and a
negotiated ceasefire, the fighting will continue, and
more civilians will die.
The United States welcomes the personal
engagement of the Secretary-General and his
leadership in initiating dialogue towards a resolution of
the conflict. To that end, we encourage the SecretaryGeneral to work closely with the African Union, and
regional and international partners, with the full
backing of the Security Council.
Let me conclude by saying that the United States is
committed to supporting the people of Ethiopia and the
wider region as they work to resolve these challenges
and overcome current divisions. The ties between the
United States and Ethiopia are deep and historic. There
is a reason Ethiopia is the largest recipient of United
States humanitarian and development assistance in
the world. We stand with the Ethiopian people. They

I would like to thank Secretary-General António
Guterres for his insightful briefing. I also welcome the
representative of Ethiopia to our meeting today.
The humanitarian situation in Tigray, especially
its consequences and adverse impact on the daily life
of millions of people, over the past three months, has
been of deep concern for all of us. The situation is made
worse by the lack of constructive dialogue, negotiations
and reconciliation among the parties concerned, while
tensions have increased. The longer the situation lasts,
the more likely it is that a long-term and comprehensive
solution will be out of reach, at the expense of peace
and development in Ethiopia.
Against that background, we would like to
stress the following points. First and foremost, the
humanitarian situation in Tigray should be addressed
in the most urgent manner. We welcome the Ethiopian
Government’s efforts to improve humanitarian access
in the region. That process should be accelerated. We
also welcome the practical activities carried out by
the United Nations, humanitarian organizations and
international and regional partners for tens of thousands
of Ethiopians over the past few months, including
people in Tigray. However, we understand that access
to and distribution of humanitarian assistance remain
far from satisfying the need for urgent assistance in
many parts of Tigray. We call for the safe, effective
and efficient delivery of humanitarian assistance and
expanded access for the provision of much-needed aid
in the Tigray region and bordering areas. We support the
appeal for action on three fronts, as recently mentioned
by the Secretary-General. All those elements are crucial
to finding a way out of the current situation.
Violence, the killing of civilians, including
women, children and humanitarian workers, and the
destruction of infrastructure indispensable to the
civilian population in Tigray must be condemned and
prevented. Perpetrators must be brought to justice. It is
now important that all parties comply with international
law to protect civilians, including women, children and

21-234729/17

S/PV.8843

Peace and security in Africa

thousands of Eritrean refugees currently trapped in
refugee camps in the Tigray region.
The current conflict, which has complex political,
historical and ethnic roots, has had certain impacts
on the region. What needs to be done now is to stop
fighting, start a dialogue and undertake a political
process. We hope that all relevant parties will refrain
from all acts that might send Ethiopia into chaos and
jeopardize peace and security in the country and in the
region.
The Ethiopian authorities and all other concerned
parties should give the highest priority to the
interests of its people, following the basic principles
enshrined in international law and the Charter of
the United Nations. In this process, the international
community, including the Security Council, should
support all efforts aimed at achieving this end, with
full respect for the independence, sovereignty, unity
and territorial integrity of Ethiopia. The principle of
non-interference in the internal affairs of States and the
settlement of disputes by peaceful means should also be
constantly upheld.
Last but not least, we would like to express our
support once again for the constructive engagement
of neighbouring countries, international and regional
organizations, especially the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, for the
process of peace, security, national reconciliation,
national unity and development in Ethiopia.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): At the outset, I cannot but echo the
condolences to all victims and casualties of the terrible
terrorist attacks in Kabul, which were clearly carried
out by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
We thank Secretary-General António Guterres
for his assessments of the developments in northern
Ethiopia. We also welcome the participation in today’s
open briefing by the Permanent Representative of
Ethiopia to the United Nations, Taye Atskeselassie
Amde.
The Russian Federation is closely following the
military and political developments in the region.
We regret that the unilateral humanitarian ceasefire
announced by Addis Ababa at the end of June has
broken down. Units from the Tigray People’s Liberation
Front continue to fight and have taken control of
several regions — not only in Tigray but also in the
10/17

26/08/2021

neighbouring regions of Afar and Amhara, which
had previously not been affected by the conflict. Of
particular concern are the attempts by Tigrayan forces
to cut off humanitarian assistance delivery routes,
including their taking control of the strategic highway
linking Ethiopia and Djibouti, which threatens to
worsen an already complex humanitarian situation and
increase the flow of refugees and internally displaced
persons.
The humanitarian situation in the region indeed
remains difficult. However, the Federal Government
continues to make significant contributions to
alleviating it. We welcome the efforts of the Ethiopian
authorities in recently ensuring the passage of a
humanitarian convoy of the World Food Programme
in Semera. We also welcome the establishment in the
region of an emergency coordination centre, which
we hope will help to implement plans to deliver 100
truckloads of humanitarian assistance every day to
Tigray and to resolve the situation of Eritrean refugees,
who are in a particularly precarious situation.
We are convinced that in order to resolve the
situation, it is necessary first and foremost to depoliticize
the humanitarian file of northern Ethiopia. Providing
humanitarian assistance in the context of the ongoing
political confrontation and a toxic media atmosphere
has little chance of success. Neither can we agree with
the shift in the public focus to the work of humanitarian
agencies in Tigray. It is important to pay attention to
other regions, including Amhara, Oromia and Somali,
which also have significant humanitarian needs owing
to droughts, floods, locust infestations and problems
with crop cultivation. General Assembly resolution
46/182 and the United Nations guiding principles of
humanitarian emergency assistance should continue
to serve as the basis for those efforts. We call on the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
to pay particular attention to establishing trust-based
constructive dialogue with the Federal Government.
We fully support the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral to launch a political dialogue as soon as
possible. We are convinced that this dialogue should
be led by Ethiopians themselves with the support first
and foremost of the African community. Any possible
external assistance must be carried out with scrupulous
respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of the country. The general
elections held in Ethiopia in June this year convincingly
demonstrated the ability of the federal authorities to
21-23472

26/08/2021

Peace and security in Africa

unify Ethiopian society. We are convinced that they
can independently find ways to normalize the situation
and generally put the country back on the right path
for development. African partners and the international
community should simply support the efforts of the
Ethiopian Government. In this regard, we also note
the appointment of Mr. Olusegun Obasanjo, former
President of Nigeria, as High Representative of the
African Union for the Horn of Africa.
It is important to understand that attempts to
undermine the situation and exert pressure on the
democratically elected Government of Ethiopia,
including through the adoption of unilateral sanctions,
will only further escalate the conflict. It is also not
possible to resolve the crisis through discussions in the
Security Council. It would be more effective if each
Council member made its own contribution to resolving
the situation. We believe that emphasis should be placed
on low-key diplomacy and bilateral channels of trustbased communication. The Russian Federation stands
ready to contribute to that end.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing and
welcome the presence of Ambassador Amde, Permanent
Representative of Ethiopia, at this meeting.
At present, Ethiopia is facing many challenges.
Maintaining peace and stability in the country and
ensuring the peaceful coexistence of all ethnic groups
is not only in the common interest of the Ethiopian
people, but also vital to the peace and security of the
Horn of Africa. It is also the goal of the international
community in its joint efforts in that regard. We
hope that all parties in Ethiopia will resolve conflicts
and differences through political dialogue, ease the
tensions and avoid a further escalation of conflict in
order to create conditions for achieving peace and
reconciliation.
The Ethiopian Government has made great efforts
aimed at alleviating the humanitarian situation in
Tigray and neighbouring areas. In the meantime,
affected by conflict, the humanitarian situation in some
Ethiopian states has become increasingly grave, and
humanitarian needs in such states as Amhara and Afar
have increased. We hope that all parties in Ethiopia will
continue to make efforts to expand humanitarian access
and ensure the timely delivery of humanitarian goods
to its people.

S/PV. 8843

China has provided emergency food assistance
to the Tigray region, and it calls on the international
community to step up the provision of humanitarian
assistance. International humanitarian agencies should
uphold the United Nations guiding principles of
humanitarian assistance and respect the sovereignty of
Ethiopia while carrying out their work. China firmly
supports Ethiopia’s efforts to safeguard national
sovereignty and unity and will continue to support
the Ethiopian people in their efforts to achieve peace,
stability, development and prosperity in their country.
We hope the international community will support the
Ethiopian Government in achieving a comprehensive
and lasting ceasefire and effectively promote national
reconciliation.
China opposes interference by external forces in
Ethiopia’s internal affairs in the name of human rights
and humanitarianism. We support the African Union
(AU) and the countries in the region in resolving African
issues in an African way. We welcome the appointment
of Mr. Olusegun Obasanjo, former President of Nigeria,
as the High Representative of the African Union for the
Horn of Africa. We hope that the United Nations and
the AU will strengthen their collaboration and jointly
play a constructive role in promoting reconciliation
among all Ethiopian parties through dialogue.
The unilateral sanctions imposed by a certain
country on Ethiopia and Eritrea are inconsistent with
international law and the basic norms of international
relations. Instead of resolving conflict, they will only
interfere with the political settlement. China believes
that the Ethiopian Government has the ability and the
wisdom to handle its internal affairs well and firmly
believes that the Ethiopian people can overcome the
difficulties and tackle the current challenges. China
stands ready to work with the rest of the international
community to support Ethiopia’s commitment to
ensuring national unity, restoring stability and
achieving development.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Like other colleagues, I would like to start by
expressing Mexico’s deep condolences to the families
of the victims who lost their lives in the recent attack
in Kabul.
Mexico thanks Ireland, the United States of
America, Estonia, France, Norway and the United
Kingdom for having convened this meeting. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his frank yet worrisome

21-2347211/17

S/PV.8843

Peace and security in Africa

briefing, and we appreciate his efforts and dedication
to the situation in Ethiopia. We also welcome the
representative of Ethiopia.
In a few months, it will be a year since the start
of hostilities in Tigray. The conflict has resulted in
thousands of civilian deaths; some 2 million people
have been displaced; hundreds of thousands more
are in famine conditions; and more than 90 per
cent of the population are in need of some kind of
humanitarian assistance.
In that context, of particular concern are reports that
the fighting has spread to the Afar and Amhara regions,
increasing the number of internally displaced persons
and the need for additional assistance. In addition, the
conflict has involved other actors, at both the national
and regional levels. Ethiopia, a friend of Mexico with
which we have historical and fraternal ties, has played
a key role in the stability of the Horn of Africa for
decades. In addition to hosting the African Union, it
is a major contributor to peacekeeping forces. That is
why a prolongation of the conflict not only will have
disastrous consequences for millions of Ethiopians,
but also represents a high risk of destabilization for
the region. Once again, Mexico reiterates its call to
all parties to the conflict for an immediate ceasefire.
We also advocate the withdrawal of all non-Ethiopian
forces from Tigray, as well as the presence of militias
from outside the neighbouring federal States.
We call on the Ethiopian authorities to ensure the
protection of its citizens, regardless of their ethnicity
or political affiliations. Reports of sexual and genderbased violence against women and girls, as well as grave
violations against children, must be investigated and the
perpetrators brought to justice. We look forward to the
results of the ongoing joint investigation by the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the Ethiopian Human Rights Commission.
Mexico welcomes the efforts of the United Nations
and humanitarian actors to bring humanitarian
assistance to Tigray. We regret that humanitarian
activities continue to face challenges and, in particular,
that humanitarian aid cannot reach certain regions.
Communications, fuel and banking disruptions
are affecting the humanitarian community’s ability to
deliver assistance. We stress the need to restore those
services and ensure unimpeded humanitarian access
to prevent the critical situation of the population from
further deteriorating. A lack of access to food can result
12/17

26/08/2021

in mass starvation, as we heard here, while shortages
of basic services and essential medicines and medical
supplies exacerbate the risk of communicable and
preventable diseases.
Moreover, Mexico emphatically calls on all parties
to the conflict to respect the norms of international
humanitarian law and human rights, in particular the
protection of the civilian population and essential
infrastructure, as well as humanitarian workers. We
also reiterate the need to investigate attacks against
civilians and humanitarian workers to prevent impunity.
In conclusion, I would like to say that, if anything
has become clear during this period, it is that there is
no military solution to the conflict in Ethiopia, as we
heard from many representatives. In that regard, we
acknowledge the regional efforts to mediate and find
a political solution. Mexico calls on all parties to the
conflict to put the well-being of millions of people
above their own interests and to immediately begin an
inclusive dialogue, with a view to starting the process of
national reconciliation and reconstruction. We therefore
welcome the appointment of former President of Nigeria
Obasanjo as the African Union High Representative for
the Horn of Africa.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I have the honour to make
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council plus one (A3+1), namely,
Kenya, the Niger and Tunisia, as well as Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines.
I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing on
the latest developments in Ethiopia. We commend his
engagement with the Ethiopian leadership, the African
Union and regional leaders. We believe that his good
offices can play an important role in facilitating a
resolution of the current situation.
We heard the important information, insights and
concerns expressed by our fellow members of the
Security Council. We, indeed, share similar points of
view with many of them.
The violence currently affecting the people and the
country of Ethiopia is the product of conflicting views
of the country’s future. It erupted and has worsened
because the country’s conflict-prevention and resolution
tools have, until now, been inadequate to the task.
The resolution to this crisis requires that we
undertake a mediation of the deep divides as part
of an Ethiopian-owned process, supported by the
21-23472

26/08/2021

Peace and security in Africa

available peace and security architecture and practices,
especially those of the African Union.
As the A3+1, we observe that, on every side of
the conflict, there is a growing perception of ethnic
identity being the basis of conflict. The opposed sides
give short shrift to each other’s grievances and regard
opposition to their own view as illegitimate. Those
opposed constituencies, reflecting the present political
character of Ethiopia, are organized along ethnic
lines. That makes them uniquely dangerous because
they easily conflate political opposition to a struggle
between ethnicities.
We have witnessed with profound concern the
resulting terrible harm that has befallen innocent
civilians. If the present course is not changed, we fear
that it may get far worse.
We condemned, and continue to condemn, the
violence against civilians — the killing of boys and
men not in uniform, the destruction of civilian objects
and the confrontations that have led to the blocking of
humanitarian aid being delivered to desperate families.
In particular, we register our strongest protest against
the horrific human rights violations and acts of sexual
violence perpetrated against girls and women.
Our values as a continent, as captured with such
gravity in the Constitutive Act of the African Union,
demand respect for the sanctity of human life and the
condemnation and rejection of impunity. To put an
end to the violence, our values must inspire and drive
practical action.
In our last statement on 2 July (see S/PV.8812), we
welcomed the democratic aspirations of the Ethiopian
people, as expressed in their last elections. We return
to this important moment for Ethiopia to argue that
democracy, above all, is a mechanism for the resolution
of serious political differences. The democratic
mandate awarded by the millions of voters must include
every Ethiopian citizen, even, and perhaps especially,
in Tigray and other parts of the country where the
vote was not held due to insecurity. The democratic
mandate will only fulfil its potential and fundamental
requirement by helping resolve the greatest differences
in Ethiopia.
It is not easy to move from violent confrontation
to the negotiating table. That is why on 2 July we
recommended use of the mechanisms available in
Africa’s peace and security architecture, underpinned

S/PV. 8843

by our Constitutive Act. Foremost among those
mechanisms and available to Ethiopia immediately is
the right of member States to request intervention from
the Union in order to restore peace and security.
We welcome the appointment by the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission of former President
Olusegun Obasanjo as the High Representative for
the Horn of Africa. His mandate is to promote peace,
security and stability on behalf of the region. We urge all
regional leaders and the broad international community
to lend him every assistance, particularly as he supports
a peace process in Ethiopia. That process must promote
and protect human and peoples’ rights. It must be
clear in ensuring the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and independence of Ethiopia. It should be genuinely
inclusive to promote unity, solidarity, cohesion and
cooperation among the peoples of Ethiopia and the
Ethiopian State.
To allow space for that process, we therefore
urge the Government of Ethiopia to remove all legal,
administrative and security barriers to a political
dialogue. No matter what has come to pass, the
Government needs to acknowledge the existence of
legitimate grievances and to understand that they must
be resolved peacefully.
We must also pronounce our concern and caution
about the rallying of the civilian population to the
conflict. Although it may be intended to marshal
the patriotic spirit of the people, it could lead to an
uncontrollable spiral of violence and bloodshed. There
are those who will take it to be an invitation to acts
of collective punishment against civilians. This is
the time for leadership to urge calm and to inspire
confidence that the country has the ability to overcome
even this greatest of challenges with its growing
democratic instincts.
To the armed actors in Tigray, the Tigray People’s
Liberation Front (TPLF) and the Tigray Defence
Forces, we urge the withdrawal from neighbouring
regions and a halt to the rallying of other armed actors.
The further they advance outside Tigray, the greater
the danger to the people on whose behalf they claim to
be acting. Escalating political tensions in other parts
of the country will not solve the crisis, it will only
widen the divide. The TPLF must leave no lingering
doubt that they will ever play any part in compromising
the political independence and territorial integrity of

21-2347213/17

S/PV.8843

Peace and security in Africa

Ethiopia, which all members of the African Union are
obliged to defend.
In addition, we recommend the spirit of the
following steps to all Ethiopian leaders, understanding
that they are not easy to implement.
First, they must make immediate announcements
to all citizens and all militia and armed units that
the targeting of civilians and women in particular is
unacceptable and must stop now.
Secondly, they must de-conflict military
movements in Tigray, Afar and Amhara in order to
enable unfettered access to humanitarian aid before
famine returns to any part of Ethiopia. It is important
that lines of communication between military leaders
be opened for that purpose.
Thirdly, they must announce a willingness to stop
hostilities and to establish a ceasefire.
Fourthly, we would say to the Parliament just voted
into office that peace cannot be made with a political
movement that has been labelled a terrorist group.
Parliament should prepare to lift that designation so as
to allow for direct contact and negotiation with armed
actors opposing the Government.
Fifthly, we tell the Government that it must tangibly
demonstrate its embrace of the people of Tigray by
resuming the provision of basic services to them.
Sixthly, the leaders must accept the good offices
of the African Union, the region and the SecretaryGeneral as bridges to mediation and peacebuilding.
We also make several recommendations to the
Security Council and the international community. We
call for the Government of Eritrea to withdraw its forces
from Ethiopia and embrace the role of peacebuilding.
We urge wealthy countries and organizations to provide
adequate resources to the humanitarian campaigns in
Ethiopia. We call for the United Nations Development
Programme, the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund and all of Ethiopia’s creditors to deliver
an economic recovery package to be implemented
the moment political mediation is under way. We
urge caution in the use of any unilateral coercive
sanction measures that may bring about Ethiopia’s
economic collapse. Their use will only worsen the
humanitarian crisis.
To the African Union, we call for a re-energizing
of the African Peace and Security Architecture. We
14/17

26/08/2021

have seen that its powerful capabilities contribute to
resolving many conflict situations in the continent, and
we believe that they can be used in Ethiopia.
Allow us to conclude with a final caution. War
is seductive. There are those who today in Ethiopia
call for it to be given a chance. Such an attitude taps
into a deep human desire for the clarity that enmity
appears to offer. It promises simplicity instead of
painful compromise, the annoying need to listen to
the other and the frustration that comes from trying
to appreciate complexity. The Ethiopia of old inspired
and rallied us Africans. It had challenges; it had known
war and subjugation among and between its peoples.
But its successful resistance to colonialism, racism and
fascism rallied our spirits.
As Africans, we are conscious that this is our
historic moment to recover our march to prosperity,
peace and independence from the actors who prefer
us weak and divided. Ethiopia must not tap into its
glorious history solely to grasp the grievances that
lead to anger and hatred. Instead, Ethiopians must find
in their past the prominent lessons of compromise,
unity and peace. We appeal to the leaders and people
of Ethiopia to understand that they cannot break each
other’s spirits and succeed in building a united and
prosperous country.
The President: I would now like to make a
statement in my capacity as the representative of India.
I join others in thanking the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive briefing and insights into the
issue, and I welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representative of Ethiopia in today’s meeting.
Let me begin by strongly condemning the terrorist
attack in Kabul today. We extend our heartfelt
condolences to the families of the victims of that
terrorist attack. Today’s attack reinforced the need for
the world to stand united against terrorism and all those
who provide sanctuaries to terrorists.
Today’s meeting, under the agenda item “Peace
and security in Africa”, was made necessary by the
humanitarian situation in Tigray, northern Ethiopia,
which is witnessing continuing fighting between the
Ethiopian National Defence Forces and the Tigray
People’s Liberation Front (TPLF). In recent weeks, the
conflict has intensified and now been spread by one
side, the TPLF, to the neighbouring regions of Amhara
and Afar. The conflict is having a severe impact on the
21-23472

26/08/2021

Peace and security in Africa

civilian population, particularly women, children and
the elderly, and has resulted in the killing of innocent
civilians, human rights violations and the use of
child soldiers.
The unilateral ceasefire announced by the
Government of Ethiopia in June was an important
step aimed at improving the worsening humanitarian
situation. Unfortunately, the opportunity provided by
the ceasefire seems not to have been grasped, with
the continuing aggression and belligerence of one side
and the spread of fighting beyond the Tigray region.
Unfortunately, the humanitarian cost and suffering due
to the conflict is mounting. This development has the
potential to destabilize the larger Horn of Africa region.
In our view, today’s meeting should strengthen efforts
towards the ceasefire, which is the need of the hour.
In that context, we take note of the efforts of
the Government of Ethiopia and its leadership in
addressing the situation. The Government has been
working with humanitarian partners, including the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), the World Food Programme (WFP) and other
agencies to alleviate the suffering of the people. We
deeply appreciate the efforts of the Secretary-General
in that connection.
Humanitarian access has been improving
progressively, with more convoys reaching the areas in
need. That is demonstrated by the statistics provided by
OCHA and WFP. The communication and coordination
between the Ethiopian authorities and humanitarian
agencies has improved significantly in recent weeks.
We welcomed the establishment of the Regional
Emergency Coordination Centre in Semera, comprising
federal institutions, regional counterparts, the World
Food Programme and the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, to facilitate the movement
of trucks along Afar routes to Tigray and coordinate
emergency assistance to displaced people. We urge
sustained close coordination between humanitarian
agencies and the Ethiopian authorities to bridge the
remaining gaps.
At the same time, there is an urgent need to scale
up efforts consistent with the United Nations guiding
principles for humanitarian assistance. At this juncture,
Ethiopia needs all the support it can get from the
international community. The international community
should come together, treat the emerging situation with
sensitivity and seriousness and extend all possible

S/PV. 8843

humanitarian assistance to Ethiopia. The humanitarian
agencies also need to take measures to prevent the
diversion of humanitarian aid.
The Government has undertaken investigations
into cases of serious human rights violations, including
through joint investigations with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
We strongly denounce and condemn all atrocities
committed by armed groups against civilians, including
children. Those responsible for the human rights
violations and sexual violence perpetrated in Tigray
should be prosecuted.
For decades, Ethiopia has been an engine of
economic growth in the Horn of Africa region.
Today Ethiopia needs support from the international
community, including from the African Union and
the United Nations, to address issues related to the
conflict. The solution to the conflict must be Ethiopianled and within the country’s constitutional framework.
India continues to underscore the importance of mutual
trust, engagement, dialogue and reconciliation for
lasting peace and stability. India reiterates its strong
commitment to the unity, sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Ethiopia.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for allowing my country’s participation in this meeting.
I also thank the Secretary-General, Mr. António
Guterres, for his briefing, and I acknowledge the
presence of Under-Secretary-Genera1 Martin Griffiths.
On World Humanitarian Day last week, the
Secretary-General emphasized the situation in my
country. The Government of Ethiopia appreciates
the Secretary-General’s good-faith engagement. We
appreciate his call for ending the suffering of the
Ethiopian people. The same objective will continue
to drive the efforts of the Government of Ethiopia, as
has been the case in the past nine months following
the treasonous and unforgettable attack against the
northern command of the Ethiopian National Defence
Forces (ENDF) by the Tigray People’s Liberation Front
(TPLF).
In a previous discussion (see S/PV.8812) on the
situation of my country, I tried to give members of
the Security Council a broader perspective on the

21-2347215/17

S/PV.8843

Peace and security in Africa

problem that we are facing. The current state of affairs
in Ethiopia did not transpire overnight. It was in the
making long before the TPLF unleashed its attack on
the ENDF northern command in the dark hours of
4 November.
The genesis of the current conflict dates back
at least three decades. Since 1991, the TPLF has
maintained hegemonic control over the political,
security and economic life of the Ethiopian people.
During that time, the TPLF has faced resistance at
every turn in all corners of Ethiopia. We must recall
that it was the sustained popular protests that dislodged
the TPLF from political power in 2018, ushering in a
period of promise for transition,
The TPLF was dislodged not only from power but
also from the hearts and minds of the Ethiopian people,
owing to the non-evolving and destructive ideology
that it seeks to preserve in the Ethiopian body politic.
The people of Ethiopia transcended those political
elites that stand for division over unity, oligarchy over
equal opportunity and favouritism over merit. When
it lost power, the TPLF retreated to Tigray, taking our
people there hostage. For, as the saying goes: “For those
accustomed to privilege, equality feels like oppression”.
Nevertheless, despite numerous provocations,
the Ethiopian Government had exercised maximum
restraint until the group attacked and looted military
barracks. Over the past nine months, as the Government
had sought to uphold the constitutional order, the TPLF
refused to disarm and surrender to law-enforcement
authorities, doubling down on its destructive agenda.
The unilateral humanitarian ceasefire declared in
June and the subsequent withdrawal of the National
Defence Forces from Tigray were supposed to bring
calm to the region and its people and provide space for
the TPLF leadership to reconsider its ruinous course.
Our plan was to allow for a peaceful farming season
in Tigray. It was supposed to pave the way for the
uninhibited flow of humanitarian assistance for people
in need.
If it had gone according to the plan we envisioned,
the ceasefire would have allowed us to embark on
rebuilding and reconstruction in the region and
repair and reconnect the infrastructure and economic
apparatuses disrupted by the TPLF. In addition,
the children in Tigray would have already begun
preparations for the school year for 2014, according
16/17

26/08/2021

to the Ethiopian Calendar — 2021 in the Gregorian
calendar — which is set to begin in September.
We would have also liked to see the members
of the TPLF, who had signalled their willingness
for peace, successfully advance their position and
convince their peers to abide by the law and follow
the path of peace. The Government’s commitment for
peace was disregarded by the TPLF, which called the
ceasefire a joke, as well as members of the international
community that tolerated, enabled and condoned the
group in following its destructive path.
The repeated plea for a ceasefire was ignored, and
we now have Ethiopian children in Tigray subjected to
forced recruitment to serve as cannon fodder. We are
also seeing the distribution of aid predicated on the
condition that parents give away their children to fight
in war. Not only farmers in the Tigray region but also
others in the adjacent Afar and Amhara regions are
currently unable to farm their land, exposing them to
the indignity of receiving aid to sustain their family.
Hundreds of thousands in the Afar and Amhara regions
have been displaced and have sustained irreparable
damage to their well-being.
With absolute disregard for the well-being of
people and in greedy pursuit of whatever is there
to be acquired by creating mayhem for the very
people it purports to stand for, the TPLF has blocked
humanitarian aid. The group has also engaged in the
formalization of fronts between internal and external
actors bent on destabilizing the great nation of Ethiopia.
In that regard, we see clear coordination between those
internal treasonous elements and external actors, from
near and far, that have opened a multidimensional
offensive aimed at obstructing Ethiopia’s right to use
its natural resources.
As to humanitarian assistance, the Government
of Ethiopia is fully cognizant of its obligation to its
citizens. The sensationalization and politicization of
our situation does not inform our response. We will
continue to deliver on our obligation, using all means
and allocating all available resources.
In that regard, first, the Government of Ethiopia is
committed to hastening the clearance of humanitarian
convoys. In fact, we are committed to reducing the
number of checkpoints and fast-tracking scanning
processes. We are working with partners to introduce
modern scanning technology. Secondly, we will
continue to consider requests for humanitarian flights.
21-23472

26/08/2021

Peace and security in Africa

The World Food Programme and the National Disaster
Risk Management Commission are administering their
humanitarian flights unimpeded. Thirdly, we will
continue to provide cash and manage it in a predictable
and sustainable manner for all humanitarian agencies.
Similarly, the resumption of public services
requires peace and the rule of law in Tigray. Those
essential services cannot be reconnected so long as the
group that to date has killed 33 infrastructure operators
and engineers, looted and diverted aid and confiscated
humanitarian convoys continues to persist on its
destructive path of war.
Our goal is peace. Unfortunately, the Tigray People’s
Liberation Front is standing between Ethiopia and peace.
The Tigray People’s Liberation Front is not the victim,
but the culprit. The people of Ethiopia, especially those
in the Afar, Amhara and Tigray regions, are living
in underserved and insufferable conditions. We are
startled that all those who appeared to call for peace
and pressure on the Government to suspend its lawenforcement operation later on tolerated and ratified,
through their reticence, the expansion of violence and
mayhem by the Tigray People’s Liberation Front.
Our plea to all and our sincere wish is for help to
realize peace, including by putting pressure on that
lawless group to stop its criminal advances, abandon
preparations for combat and abide by the laws of the
country. The group must also irrefutably delink itself
from internal and external sponsors and affiliates. As
for the international community, we ask that it remove
the actual or perceived support emanating from its
side, off of which the group feeds. All it has to do is
comply with the requirements set by the Government
and free the people of Tigray from its egotistical grip.
In the absence of compliance with the country’s laws,
the Government of Ethiopia will apply any means
necessary to ensure law and order.

S/PV. 8843

Regarding some of the unsubstantiated assertions
we heard today, we call upon the members of the
Council to be cautious regarding the so-called facts and
misinformation that have dominated the scene. There
is no discrimination based on any grounds, including
ethnicity, religion or any other reason. We are not
people of fewer morals; we are people of values. We
have survived for centuries through social cohesion.
We built unity while honouring differences. Ethiopian
reform is all about how to strengthen our unity and live
in harmony. The reform is not about learning to die
on the hill of ethnic divisions, as has been professed,
propagated and implemented by the Tigray People’s
Liberation Front for more than 30 years.
I would like to use this opportunity to express our
gratitude to all those who have stood with us in our
times of need. At the same time, we respectfully assert
our sovereign integrity as an ancient, independent
African country that is constantly striving to overcome
its challenges. In that regard, I would like to underscore
how harmful the saviour mentality that seeks to
undermine the sovereign right and responsibility of
States for their own security and the well-being of their
people has proved to be in many instances. We can only
hope that the right lessons are learned.
Evidently, Ethiopia is not a country that allows others
to delegate the shape of its future. As the international
community has witnessed, undue foreign pressure and
interference is not appreciated by a single soul in my
country. After-the-fact regret and the admission of
failure in foreign policy will not help. Therefore, we
call on everyone concerned to work with us. We are
ready to work with all well-intentioned partners.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.35 p.m.

21-2347217/17
