United Nations

S/PV.6173

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6173rd meeting
Wednesday, 29 July 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rugunda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uganda)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Somdah
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Guillermet
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Lacroix
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Quarrey
Mr. Wolff
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia (S/2009/373)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-43003 (E)

*0943003*

S/PV.6173

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Somalia (S/2009/373)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Somalia, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Omaar
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency
Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Omaar, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Somalia.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Lamamra to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and head of the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia.
It is so decided.

2

I invite Mr. Ould Abdallah to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/373, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia.
At this meeting, the Council will hear a briefing
by Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, to whom I now give
the floor.
Mr. Ould Abdallah: I am grateful for this
opportunity to brief the Council.
While the situation remains fragile, there have
been positive developments in Somalia. As I have told
the Council previously, a new paradigm is being
implemented. Despite multiple constraints, the
Government is resisting and repelling multiple
attempts to overthrow it and seize power illegally by
force. It is also overcoming two decades of scepticism
over Somalia.
I believe that, today, we are at a turning point. It
is clear that the population and its traditional leaders
reject violence and those behind it. Therefore, the
support of the international community is even more
crucial at this time.
In that context, I would like to recognize once
again the extraordinary help provided by members of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference, the League
of Arab States, the African Union, the European Union
and Commission, the Contact Group, including the
United States, Norway and many others, especially the
subregional organization the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD). They have
mobilized quickly to provide critical assistance on the
ground, as pledged during the Brussels conference in
April, which was attended by the Secretary-General. To
facilitate this process, the Somali Government has
employed the services of an international accounting
firm to ensure transparency.
The Government has made significant progress in
training, equipping and paying its security forces.
However, more needs to be done, especially in the area
of coordination and organization. At the same time, the
political process is moving forward. The Djibouti

09-43003

S/PV.6173

agreement, signed in August last year, remains open to
those who want to address the Somali situation through
peaceful means. Recently, an important agreement was
signed between the Government and the well-respected
religious group Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a, which has
already shown results. There has also been the
inclusion of some elements from an opposition group,
and one of its leaders has become a deputy minister.
That open-door policy should be continued.
My understanding is that the Government would
welcome members of those currently in the opposition,
be they leaders or simply members of the rank and file
of their groups. Somalis should discuss peace among
themselves in their own country. Those who fail to join
the peace process will miss an opportunity to
contribute to rebuilding the country. My Office stands
ready to assist and help the continued discussion
among Somalis.
The time has come to focus on the needs and
interests of ordinary citizens in Somalia, who are
denied food to alleviate their hunger and protection
against fear. Their suffering should strike at the heart
of all Somali patriots and be the main international
concern. Their country has been taken hostage by a
small group interested only in its own immediate
profit. Insecurity is becoming a source of revenue and
power.
The Somali people have endured too much. They
have seen their loved ones killed and maimed. They
have been forced to flee their homes again and again
and suffered endless abuses of their human rights.
Their suffering must be ended if they are to live normal
lives, as people do in many other African countries.
In this context, I condemn the abduction of all
innocent Somalis and foreigners who are being held for
ransom, and call for their unconditional release. I
appeal to all those, Somalis and non-Somalis alike,
who can help, directly or indirectly, to do so by
telephone, e-mail and every other means of making
contact in order to help free the unfortunate hostages.
It is impossible to see how such inhuman actions could
help Somalis or the image of Somalia in any way.
Likewise, I condemn the looting of United Nations
offices in south-central Somalia, as well as efforts to
silence the media through intimidation, extortion and
the targeted killing of journalists.
The question of justice must be seriously
addressed. Fighting impunity and various abuses

09-43003

against civilians should remain high on the agenda. In
this regard, the international community should help
the Somalis decide the way forward. This is why my
Office is organizing a meeting on that issue towards
the middle of next month. Moreover, the Monitoring
Group based in Nairobi is active in trying to identify
those who might face sanctions.
Before I conclude, allow me to stress that past
failures should not discourage us from taking future
action to promote stability. In the short and medium
term, there are concrete steps that can be taken by this
Council.
First, while the Government has made important
strides, it still requires immediate support, political and
financial, to improve the situation. The authorities in
Puntland and Somaliland also need resources to ensure
that stability endures.
Secondly, immediate and concrete support must
be extended to the African Union Mission in Somalia.
The African Union troops have shown remarkable
courage and dedication, in solidarity with the Somali
people. They deserve the backing of all Council
members.
Thirdly, support for the subregional organization
IGAD and the African Union in their decisions on
Somalia would be most helpful. Given their proximity
to, knowledge of and interest in Somalia, IGAD
member States should be recognized as having a
leading role on Somali issues.
Fourthly, the time has come for the United
Nations to show that it is serious about moving to
Somalia. Our temporary presence in Nairobi has lasted
15 years, which is far too long. We can work
effectively for peace with the Somalis and address
pressing humanitarian needs only if we are close to the
victims of famine, violence and myriad abuses. My
Office and other leading United Nations agencies,
including humanitarian ones, along with concerned
diplomats and non-governmental organizations, should
move to Mogadishu. The establishment of a green
zone, similar to those elsewhere, would facilitate this
process.
Fifthly, we must continue to provide support
against piracy. The international maritime presence has
been a remarkable show of solidarity with Somalis on
the part of a large number of nations, and has been
effective. The maritime presence should continue,

3

S/PV.6173

while support for the establishment of a Somali
coastguard is being provided. At the same time, the
question of addressing the problems on land,
particularly the issue of youth employment, must been
taken up as a matter of urgency.
Somalia is indeed a very difficult case, to say the
least, but challenges always arise and should not be a
reason for inaction. The international community
should never surrender its obligation towards the
people of Somalia. Effective action is needed now
because, if not now, when? If the Council does not act,
then who will? We know all too well that all that is
necessary for the triumph of evil is for good men to do
nothing.
People all over the world strive for peace,
security and dignity. The people of Somalia are no
exception. They have been denied this modest
aspiration for the past 20 years. Last year’s Security
Council visit to Djibouti was a tremendous boost to the
region. If the Council can help to restore stability to
Somalia, that would go a long way towards elevating
further the United Nations reputation in Africa. It
seems to me that now is the time for action.
The President: I thank Mr. Ould Abdallah for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lamamra.
Mr. Lamamra (spoke in French): Allow me at
the outset to thank you, Sir, and the other members of
the Council for this opportunity to report on the
African Union Commission’s assessment of the
situation in and prospects for Somalia. I particularly
appreciate the privilege of participating in the Security
Council’s consideration of this item under your
presidency, Sir. Your personal commitment and
Uganda’s invaluable contribution to peace and
reconciliation in Somalia are recognized and praised
here and everywhere.
The situation in Somalia is difficult and volatile,
but it is neither desperate nor insurmountable. In the
few months since the unity Government, headed by
President Sheikh Sharif Sheik Ahmed, has been in
existence and functioning, we have seen marked
improvements in the country’s governance. These
improvements reflect a drive for transparency,
inclusiveness and responsiveness to the expectations of
a people who have been sorely tried by years without a
State and by fratricidal hostilities.

4

The Transitional Federal Institutions, representing
broad political movements, have undertaken to work in
Somalia to create positive momentum towards a
resolution of the crisis. But anti-peace forces inside
and outside Somalia have redoubled their violent
efforts to destroy the achievements of the peace and
national reconciliation processes, supported by Africa
and the entire international community as a precious
opportunity for Somalia. These forces are working
relentlessly to ensure that Somalia is inescapably
associated with terrorism, piracy, endemic instability
and threats to itself as well as to neighbours near and
far.
The African Union’s governing bodies, the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government and the
Peace and Security Council, have assumed and
reaffirmed action-oriented positions in line with all the
recommendations put forward by the political leaders
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
These positions and recommendations are well known
to the Council and I will not repeat them here. I would,
however, like to articulate three key ideas that I feel
should be seen as essential by the international
community, assuming that failure in Somalia is not an
option and that now more than ever is the time for
boldness and increased commitment.
First, the strategic stakes of the situation, in their
direct impact on international peace and security,
ensure that the Somali conflict cannot be dismissed as
a simple civil war fed by general dissatisfaction with
the distribution of power and wealth in the country.
Somalia has become a source of insecurity at a regional
level and beyond.
Secondly, the increase, since 12 May 2009, in
acts of armed violence against the Transitional Federal
Institutions, the nascent National Security Force and
the Somali police in Mogadishu is aimed not only at
bringing about an unconstitutional change of
Government, but at making Somalia a lasting trouble
spot and a base of operations for extremist activities
that challenge the region and the world as a whole.
Thirdly, the fight waged in legitimate selfdefence by the Somali Government and the forces
supporting President Sheikh Sharif Sheik Ahmed, on
the one hand, and the stabilization work carried out by
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), on
the other, together form a coherent resistance to a
global threat and are helping to defeat it.

09-43003

S/PV.6173

Taking these considerations into account, we feel
that it is in the natural order of things that the
international community, mobilized in solidarity and
faced with the challenges that the anti-peace forces in
Somalia pose to its core values, should decide on and
implement bold and innovative measures. Beyond the
ongoing strengthening of AMISOM and the
expeditious build-up of the Somali National Security
Force, it is important that Somalia’s air space and
territorial waters not be open to the free passage of
weapons, munitions and foreign combatants.
It is equally important that the struggle not be
waged only where the anti-peace forces take the
initiative, in this case the capital, Mogadishu, which is
being increasingly emptied of its civilian population.
The authority of the State and of the Government of
President Ahmed should be gradually extended to other
parts of the country, beginning with those presenting
distinctive characteristics in operational as well as
strategic terms, and indeed in spiritual and symbolic
terms, too.
The African Union and the United Nations are
developing a lasting partnership in Somalia that heralds
a qualitative step forward in the design of peacekeeping
operations whose objective aims determine their form
and composition. The deployment of a sixth battalion,
from Burundi, with Algerian air assets and the
establishment of a United Nations logistics support
module, are further encouraging developments.
The conditions are thus gradually being created to
enable the United Nations to assume directly the large
share of responsibilities that naturally fall to it in
asserting the presence of the international community
in Somalia, including taking over from a fully
operational AMISOM. From this standpoint, upgrading
the level and effectiveness of regional and international
institutions’ representation in Somalia would be a
timely step in the right direction.
The African Union, which welcomes the promising
work it is doing in Somalia with the United Nations
and the team headed by Special Representative Ould
Abdallah, alongside the Department of Field Support,
as well as the valuable assistance of its international
partners, expresses the hope that this struggle for peace
will be crowned with the success it deserves.
The President: I thank Mr. Lamamra for his
statement.

09-43003

I now give the floor to the Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Somalia.
Mr. Omaar (Somalia): First and foremost,
Mr. President, I thank you for this opportunity to
participate in this discussion on Somalia. I also wish to
take this occasion to pay tribute to the SecretaryGeneral and my good friend Ambassador Ould Abdallah
for all the efforts and energy he has brought to bear on
the situation, and for his leadership over the past two
years and more. In the same spirit, I also wish to pay
tribute to and to thank the agencies of the United
Nations and the international community for their
continuing stance, shoulder to shoulder, with the
Somali people.
However, as has been said — and we all agree —
the issues and the problems of Somalia have to be
solved by Somalis. The responsibility lies not only
with the Government but with the people of Somalia,
wherever they are. The international community has
come to our assistance, which we appreciate. I believe
we have now assumed the tasks and responsibility for
the needs of our country.
What is also clear, we believe, is that the Somali
people and the international community have come to a
decision that the continuous reinvention of the wheel in
the repeated conferences that have taken place in the
past has now come to an end. Now is the moment to
rebuild an institutional base and an operational State
that will bring stability to Somalia. I think that is a
very important decision. In partnership, we are now of
like minds that this has to work and be put in place so
that the State can be rebuilt properly and Somalia can
take its place in the international community.
As has been said, our commitment at the political
level to peace and reconciliation is neither temporary
nor in any way limited. We remain open, willing and
ready to incorporate into the Djibouti peace process
any and every party that agrees to the re-establishment
of the rule of law and is willing to sit across the
negotiating table to deliberate on and find a way
forward. I believe, as my good friend Ambassador
Ould Abdallah has said, that proof of that is the recent
agreement with Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a as a new
partner in the reconstruction of Somalia.
Similar efforts are taking place within the country
as well as within the diaspora Somali community
across the world. That dialogue is continuous and will
be maintained and sustained. We are committed to

5

S/PV.6173

peace and reconciliation as an ongoing process that
does not have a time limit.

peace. What happens in Somalia will have an impact
on neighbouring countries.

At the international level, we are very grateful for
the support and the position of the African Union and
the recent summit held in Libya, which fully took on
board the political, diplomatic, military and financial
needs of Somalia. We are also grateful for the
endorsement by the African Union summit of the
proposals that the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and the Somali Government
have put to it. That was followed by an IGAD
ministerial meeting, which again concluded that, aside
from the actions of the Security Council and the United
Nations, we in IGAD need to act on a subregional
basis. IGAD has also now adopted resolutions and
decisions that establish local sanctions on a
subregional basis to confront the issue of individuals
and entities in IGAD countries that are spoilers of the
peace process.

Therefore, the project and partnership that has
been established between the international community
and the Somali Government and people must succeed,
because the impact goes far beyond the borders of
Somalia. I believe that the proof of that is the piracy
that we have experienced in the past few years. We
therefore ask for the Council’s assistance and support.
The crucial issue now is that of external vested
interests that wish to sustain and continue the war in
Somalia. I think Somalis are of the mind that we can
achieve peace and reconciliation if we can overcome
the issue of external interference and external vested
interests that wish to sustain the war. I promise the
Council that the Government can find a peace and
reconciliation process that can be completed among
Somalis, if we are given the opportunity and the
external door can be closed.

But what has become clear is that, on the military
side, the objective of the past two months has been to
overthrow the Government, which was the basis of the
initial attack in April. That project of Al-Shabaab and
Hizbul Islam has now run out of steam. It has now
been concluded, on our side and on their side, that that
project to seize power and overthrow the Government
cannot and will not come to fruition. It will not
succeed as a military operation. That has resulted in a
change of tactics, which we first saw in the hostagetaking that has taken place not only in Mogadishu but
also in the Northern Frontier District of Kenya, as well
as in the impact of the abuse of the institutions and
facilities of the United Nations itself. Over and beyond
that, we expect that an expanded project of suicide
bombings will be undertaken and will come to pass as
another tactic of terrorism seeking to destabilize not
only the Somali Government but also the international
community, which is coming to the aid of Somalia.

The President: I shall now give the floor to the
members of the Security Council who wish to make
statements.

In conclusion, our request to the Council is that it
view Somalia within the subregional context. The
subregion as a whole has been through a 50-year cycle
of war — from the Sudan to Eritrea, Ethiopia and
Somalia. Our people have suffered 50 years of civil
and inter-State wars — in effect, since the 1950s or
early 1960s. We believe that Somalia is a key factor for
the stability of the subregion. The peace that we seek,
and which we believe the Council seeks, is not limited
only to Somalia. The peace that we want is subregional
peace, and stability in Somalia is a cornerstone of that

6

Mr. Quarrey (United Kingdom): We are grateful
to Foreign Minister Omaar, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Ould Abdallah and Commissioner
Lamamra for their briefings this morning.
It is right that the Security Council remain
focused on the situation in Somalia. As we have said
before, instability there poses a clear threat to peace
and security in the region and beyond. The ongoing
violence continues to cause deep and unnecessary
suffering for a people who have, as we have heard from
each of the briefers this morning, suffered too long
already.
Three weeks ago, Ambassador Sawers set out
what the United Kingdom sees as the four priority
areas for action in addressing the situation in Somalia.
The first priority area is to tackle the humanitarian
crisis, helping the more than 3 million people in need
by supporting the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) in delivering basic security, food and health
care. The second priority area is to support the political
process, specifically the TFG’s reconciliation policy,
and to build on the Djibouti peace process. The third
priority area is to achieve an improved security
situation in Mogadishu, working with the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the TFG to
expand the authority of the latter. The fourth priority

09-43003

S/PV.6173

area is to address the ongoing threat from piracy. We
need to continue to work to ensure security on
Somalia’s seas, as well as on land, by tackling both
piracy and its root causes.
What we have heard today from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ould
Abdallah, Commissioner Lamamra, and Minister for
Foreign Affairs Omaar confirms that those are the right
priorities. As they have made clear, the situation
remains extremely fragile.
We are encouraged to hear that progress is being
made by the TFG and President Ahmed. We welcome
the fact that the Joint Security Committee met in
Mogadishu last week for the first time. The Committee
should play a key role in ensuring a properly
coordinated relationship between those involved in
security in Mogadishu.
The long-term solution to Somalia’s security,
however, remains the development of the Somali
security forces. The United Nations Development
Programme has done admirable work in training the
police, but there is still much to be done to strengthen
the joint security forces. Member States must continue
to focus on what support can be delivered in this
sector.
While the security situation remains fragile, the
role of AMISOM in supporting the TFG remains
essential. We pay tribute once again to the
Governments of Uganda and Burundi for their
continuing commitment, and encourage other African
Union member States to play a role.
Improved security should create the space for
development. We must take advantage of stability in
the areas controlled by the TFG to show that it can
deliver essential services and economic benefits to the
Somali people. To this end, we encourage the TFG to
set out its needs and the United Nations and the
international community to respond accordingly.
Finally, we look forward to hearing Ambassador
Heller’s report later this morning on the work of the
sanctions Committee. The Monitoring Group’s report
sets out clear evidence that individuals and entities are
actively supporting and arming opposition groups and
seeking to undermine the TFG. Halting the illegal flow
of weapons and ammunition to rebel groups in Somalia
is an essential part of supporting the TFG and the
peace process. The Council should act quickly and

09-43003

decisively in agreeing measures against those working
against peace in Somalia.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah for his very valuable
briefing and his great efforts to help the Somali people
solve their problems and restore peace in the country. I
would also like to thank Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, the
African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security,
for his comprehensive briefing on the Union’s position
on this issue. I would also like to welcome Mr. Omaar,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia, and thank him
for his statement.
My country is very concerned about the use of
force and violence to overthrow the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG) in Somalia at a time when
the Government has tirelessly sought to reach out to
the armed opposition groups and convince them to
renounce violence and participate in the Government.
It has held consultations with the leaders of tribes,
sheikhs and religious leaders, and made tangible
progress in the transition process. Its actions have been
welcomed by the Somali people.
The international community should step up its
financial and political support for the Government of
President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed so that it can
extend its authority over the entire territory of the
country. We also welcome the commitment of the
Government of the Somali President to establish a
broad-based administration in accordance with the
agreement signed with Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a and
some elements of Hizbul Islam.
We express our concern over reports of the
presence of foreign elements in the armed opposition
groups. These elements are seeking to further their own
objectives and agendas, and their presence will prolong
the conflict in the country.
We call on the international community to
respond to the appeals launched by the African Union
at its meeting in Sirte early this month for the
implementation of the commitments undertaken at the
Doha conference, and by the International Contact
Group at its meetings in Brussels and Rome for support
to the Somali Government. We call on States that are
able to do so to support and promote the African Union
Mission in Somalia through the Trust Fund and to
support African States that are willing to provide

7

S/PV.6173

troops so that the Mission can reach its authorized
strength of 8,000 as quickly as possible.
I must point out here that the Governments of
Uganda and Burundi are to be commended for the
unflagging sacrifices they have made to bring security
and peace to the Somali people. We hope that they will
accelerate the process to transform the African Union
Mission in Somalia into a United Nations Mission in
Somalia.
With respect to piracy off the Somali coast, we
would like to express our gratitude to the States
Members of the United Nations and the regional
organizations that have undertaken to protect ships and
helped the World Food Programme, the United Nations
and humanitarian institutions and agencies to provide
humanitarian assistance to those in need. At the same
time, we believe that addressing the issue of piracy in
the long term will require a comprehensive approach
that seeks to end the conflict, restore stability, support
the ability of the Somali Government to extend its
authority over the entire territory, including its coasts,
and exploit and protect sustainable sources of income,
particularly living marine resources, which for many
years have been exposed to plunder by foreign
companies through illegal fishing in Somali territorial
waters.
At the humanitarian level, we note that
intensifying acts of violence over the past three months
have led to the very serious deterioration of the
humanitarian situation. At least 250 civilians have been
killed, hundreds injured and 204,000 displaced from
the capital, Mogadishu. The number of persons
emigrating to Yemen or otherwise becoming refugees
during the first quarter of this year rose by 30 per cent
compared to the first quarter of last year.
We call on all States to continue to support
humanitarian assistance and reconstruction priority
programmes. In this context, we recall that the World
Food Programme still needs $136 million to feed more
than 3 million individuals in all parts of Somalia. We
hope that the international community will provide the
necessary contributions to that end. In that connection,
we commend the efforts of those providing
humanitarian assistance, who are carrying out their
responsibilities in an environment increasingly fraught
with risk.
Finally, we are very concerned at the information
contained in the report regarding the recruitment of

8

children younger than 18 and their use in armed
confrontations. We call on those responsible to put an
end to that practice and to permit those children to
return to their families as soon as possible.
Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, for
his briefing on the situation in Somalia. While we
understand his hopes for positive developments in that
situation, the overall picture is extremely alarming. We
listened closely to the statements made by African
Union Commissioner Lamamra and Mr. Mohamed
Abdullahi Omaar, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Somalia.
We are gravely concerned at the ongoing
instability in Somalia, including widespread attacks,
killings and other acts of violence, as well as illegal
acts committed against United Nations facilities in the
country. The continuing attacks against the positions of
Government forces and the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) are intended to undermine the
efforts of the Transitional Federal Government to
effectively govern the country. Under these
circumstances, there is a need to mobilize the efforts of
Somalis themselves as well as those of the
international community to strengthen the central
Government’s capacities, particularly in the area of
security.
Unfortunately, as the security situation remains
totally unacceptable and unsatisfactory, it is now
difficult to talk realistically about the possibility of
expanding the United Nations presence on the ground
in Somalia. We must all strive towards that goal, but
the key factor is to ensure appropriate security
conditions.
There is no alternative to sustainable peace and
national reconciliation in Somalia on the basis of the
Djibouti peace process. We continue to support the
efforts of President Ahmed and the Government to that
end. We believe that providing broad support for the
Somali Government by assisting the countries of the
African Union will lay the foundation necessary for the
long-term recovery and rehabilitation in Somalia. We
call on all countries in the region to provide all forms
of assistance to Somalia and not to allow foreign
mercenaries, combatants or weapons to be brought into
the country, in violation of the sanctions regime
established by the Security Council.

09-43003

S/PV.6173

We commend the role played by the African
Union Mission in bringing about stability, strengthening
the security sector and helping to promote the political
process. The Mission’s activities are extremely
important, and we believe that it must have adequate
staffing, equipment and other types of support.
We agree with the concerns expressed by the
Secretary-General regarding the deterioration in the
humanitarian and human rights situation, in particular
with regard to the most vulnerable groups in the
population. Assistance to Somalia must be
comprehensive and must encompass socio-economic
development. Here, the most important tasks are
ensuring sustainable economic recovery and resolving
the problem of unemployment. However, I must
reiterate once again that none of these tasks can be
carried out satisfactorily without a reliable stabilization
of the security situation, which is key to resolving all
the political, socio-economic and humanitarian
problems in Somalia.
We cannot but agree with the assessments made
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/373) and
by Mr. Ould Abdallah with regard to the ongoing
destabilizing factor of piracy off the coast of Somalia.
We note the robust efforts to ensure security off the
coast and to provide assistance to the coastguard.
Another important task is creating the legal
infrastructure necessary for the prosecution of persons
involved in piracy. Here, assistance by legal
institutions in neighbouring countries could play a very
important role. Because the current conditions in
Somalia make it impossible to eradicate this
phenomenon, international cooperation must be
intensified to combat piracy and eradicate its
infrastructure and its sources of financial support.
Russia will continue to take an active part in
international anti-piracy cooperation and in the overall
effort to assist in the long-term stabilization of
Somalia.
Mr. Somdah (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
Permit me at the outset to welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Somalia and to thank him for his
statement. I also thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah,
and African Union Commissioner Lamamra for their
briefings, which provided updated information on the
Djibouti peace process and the difficult security
situation on the ground in Somalia.

09-43003

At the political level, my delegation welcomes
the continuing activities of the Government and the
parliament in Mogadishu despite the difficult security
situation, as well as the Government’s ongoing policy
of openness, demonstrated by the visits made by
President Ahmed. We reaffirm our commitment to the
implementation of the Djibouti agreement, which is the
only framework for a political settlement of the Somali
crisis. We commend the efforts of the Transitional
Federal Government to establish contacts with
opposition groups that are not yet part of the Djibouti
reconciliation process.
In particular, we welcome the signing on 21 June
of a declaration of political, security, humanitarian and
development cooperation with the group Ahlu Sunna
Wal Jama’a. Burkina Faso believes that that is the most
significant success of the policy of inclusive dialogue
pursued by President Ahmed since his election. That is
why we encourage the Government to continue the
consultations begun with influential clan leaders,
elders and clerics in order to expand the base of
support for the stabilization of Somalia.
With respect to security, Burkina Faso once again
firmly condemns targeted killings and attacks against
Government forces by illegal armed groups supported
by foreign elements. These attacks, which began in
early May, have already claimed many civilian victims
and have included the killing of the Minister of the
Interior; they must cease immediately. We call on all
States of the region, without exception, to scrupulously
respect the arms embargo and to refrain from providing
military, logistical or any other kind of support to
illegal armed groups that are active in Somalia, as
required by the relevant resolutions and statements of
the Security Council. Moreover, we are very concerned
by reports that the group Al-Shabaab continues to
enlist young people and children for combat.
Burkina Faso reaffirms its unreserved support for
the Government of President Ahmed as the legitimate
Somali authority. We also reaffirm our support for the
position adopted by the African Union (AU) and the
appeal contained in the AU Peace and Security Council
communiqué of 15 June 2009, which was confirmed in
a decision by the African Union Conference of Heads
of State and Government held from 1 to 3 July 2009. In
particular, we think that the request that a no-fly zone
be imposed around certain airports merits immediate
follow-up.

9

S/PV.6173

My delegation would like to thank the Secretariat
for its support and its ongoing solidarity with the
people and the Government of Somalia and encourages
it to continue its support for development and for
institutional capacity-building in the country. We thank
in particular Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, who
continues in spite of difficulties to show unequalled
determination and commitment.
We would also like to take this opportunity to
welcome the confirmation of a significant portion of
the $213 million pledged during the international
donors conference held in Brussels on 22 and 23 April
2009. The start of training for new Somali police
officers, which was undertaken by the United Nations
Development Programme on the basis of those pledges,
is encouraging. We hope that this activity will be
continued and expanded in accordance with the
programme that has been planned.
However, at this stage, my delegation would like
to reiterate its position that the deployment of a United
Nations peacekeeping operation seems to be the only
option — and that of last resort — for stabilizing
Somalia. Until the Security Council takes a stand on
this option, my delegation encourages the Secretariat to
continue its support for the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), in accordance with resolutions
1863 (2009) and 1872 (2009).
We thank Uganda and Burundi for their
significant ongoing efforts, and, given the seriousness
of this situation, we invite the countries that have
already promised troops for AMISOM to fulfil their
promises as quickly as possible in order to strengthen
the African force. Burkina Faso reaffirms its firm
commitment to the integrity and security of the African
force and thus firmly condemns any attack against
AMISOM.
Finally, Burkina Faso believes in a return to
peace and stability in Somalia and invites the
international community to maintain and to strengthen
its support for that country in accordance with the
recommendations of the African Union and the InterGovernmental Authority on Development.
Mr. Wolff (United States of America): Let me
first thank Special Representative Ould Abdallah for
his informative update on the situation in Somalia and
for his critical work of monitoring and reporting under
often dangerous conditions. Let me also welcome
Foreign Minister Omaar and African Union

10

Commissioner Lamamra back to the Council and thank
them for their informative statements.
The United States condemns in the strongest
terms the continuing military offensives against the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) of Somalia,
which are designed to overthrow the TFG’s legitimate
authority by force. The United States particularly
condemns the 19 July raids by Al-Shabaab on — and
forced closure of — the offices of the United Nations
Development Programme, the Department of Safety
and Security and the United Nations Political Office
for Somalia in Wajid and Baidoa, during which
communications equipment, automobiles and supplies
were looted, as well as its 17 May raid on the UNICEF
compound in Jowhar town; the compound remains
occupied by the militia.
We are very concerned by reports that Al-Shabaab
is recruiting seasoned fighters from abroad and
collaborating with Al-Qaida to remove the TFG.
Al-Shabaab and other extremists have ratcheted up
bomb attacks and targeted assassinations to spread fear
in an attempt to intimidate the Somali people into
submission. There are troublesome reports not only of
recent violence by extremists in Mogadishu but also of
renewed fighting in the central regions of Somalia. And
in its drive to forcibly gain power, Al-Shabaab has
even recruited Somali children to take up arms.
We second the Special Representative’s call to
donors for urgent military and financial support to the
TFG and AMISOM. Supporting AMISOM should be
central to the international community’s strategy of
stabilizing Mogadishu and supporting the Somali peace
process. We thank AMISOM for its brave and critical
work in the face of continuing danger, and my
Government urges donors to fulfil the pledges made at
the April security conference in Brussels to address the
continuing threat to regional stability posed by
extremists.
Currently, AMISOM is four battalions short of its
mandated strength of nine infantry battalions, or a little
over half of its mandated strength of 8,000 troops. The
United States welcomes the pledges made by Sierra
Leone and Malawi to contribute one battalion each to
AMISOM and thanks Uganda and Burundi for their
roles, in particular Burundi for the steps it is taking to
contribute a third battalion to help strengthen
AMISOM’s capacity.

09-43003

S/PV.6173

We are deeply concerned about the worsening
humanitarian situation in Somalia, including that of the
estimated 200,000 people who had recently returned to
Mogadishu only to again be displaced when the
fighting began anew. The violence makes distributing
critical food and other humanitarian assistance to the
3.2 million Somalis who require it more challenging
and sometimes impossible.

Eritrea has provided funding, weapons and training to
armed insurgents in Somalia. Like others here, the
United States has repeatedly stated that we remain
willing to engage the Eritrean Government should it
end its destabilizing activities in the Horn of Africa and
take steps towards improved regional relations.
Unfortunately, Eritrea has thus far refused these offers,
and the window is rapidly closing.

The United States deplores violence against
humanitarian agencies and staff, in particular
Al-Shabaab’s 17 May raid on the UNICEF compound,
which resulted in the destruction of thousands of doses
of vaccines intended for Somali women and children
and nutritional supplements intended for the most
vulnerable women and children.

Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I should first like
to thank Mr. Ould Abdallah, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for his briefing and for his
patient efforts to bring peace and stability to Somalia
under very difficult circumstances. We are also grateful
for the briefing by Commissioner Lamamra and the
important message he brought us from the African
Union Commission. We are further grateful for the
briefing by Mr. Omaar, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Somalia. It is useful and helpful to have him here again
to brief the members of the Council directly.

The United States is committed to addressing the
humanitarian situation and has provided nearly
$149 million in food and non-food emergency assistance
since the start of our current fiscal year. We urge the
international community to contribute to the
consolidated appeal for Somalia, which, as of 30 June,
covers only 40 per cent of the $984 million requested.
In spite of these challenges, the United States is
encouraged by President Sharif’s continuing efforts to
reach out to opposition groups that wish to join the
national reconciliation process, and we welcome the
TFG’s declaration of cooperation with the Ahlu Sunna
Wal Jama’a. We also welcome the TFG’s institutionbuilding efforts and the steps taken to hold
parliamentary and cabinet sessions despite increasing
attacks in Mogadishu.
On piracy, we are concerned by reports from the
International Maritime Bureau of an exponential
increase in activity as well as the reports of the use of
more sophisticated weapons. We must continue to
prosecute suspected pirates, as piracy is without a
question a symptom of, as well as a contributing factor
to, the instability and insecurity in Somalia. Without
stability in Somalia, there can be no durable resolution
of the piracy problem. Nonetheless, my Government
believes that the paying of ransom simply perpetuates
piracy. The United States does not offer concessions to
hostage-takers, whether they are driven by political or
financial motives, and we encourage other States to
take a similar position.
Finally, we remain deeply concerned about
Eritrea’s actions in the region, particularly in Somalia.
The Monitoring Group has noted in its reports that

09-43003

Austria wishes to reiterate its full support for the
Djibouti peace process and the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG). We welcome the continued efforts
to reach out to opposition groups. The Djibouti peace
agreement constitutes the only viable and legitimate
framework for achieving lasting peace in Somalia. We
therefore urge all parties in Somalia to join the
Djibouti process and its structures.
We condemn the attempts of extremists to
overthrow the TFG and the raiding and looting of
United Nations offices in Somalia. We are deeply
worried by reports of support to the insurgents from
outside Somalia, and wish once again to reiterate that,
from our point of view, this is also an issue in which
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) can play an important role.
We note the deep concern expressed by the heads
of State and Government of the African Union during
their recent summit in Sirte concerning arms supplies
to insurgent groups in Somalia. We believe that this is
an issue to which the Council should give careful
consideration.
We believe that three key elements are vital to the
stabilization of the situation in Somalia: support to the
TFG, support to the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and support to the reconciliation process.
Uganda and Burundi, as countries contributing troops
to AMISOM, are a crucial factor in restoring stability
to Somalia. We are also grateful for the pledges that

11

S/PV.6173

have been made by other African countries, including
Sierra Leone and Malawi. It would seem that the
current mandate of AMISOM allows sufficient
flexibility. However, AMISOM needs to reach its
mandated strength, as well as better equipment.

people have fled Mogadishu alone, increasing the
number of IDPs in the country to over 1.2 million. We
commend the United Nations intention to continue its
work in Somalia, notwithstanding the difficulties that it
has faced in very recent days.

In that context, on Monday members of the
European Union, including Austria, agreed at the
ministerial level to further step up the Union’s
engagement in Somalia. The European Union will
increase its support to the TFG and AMISOM, and
explore additional support for the security sector and
regional maritime capabilities. An exploratory mission
will be going to Somalia in the middle of August.

I would ask the Special Representative to convey
our expressions of support and esteem to his staff, to
his partners outside the United Nations system, and to
all those who dedicate their work to achieving stability,
peace and security in Somalia.

Concerning piracy off the coast of Somalia,
Austria would like to underline that the efforts of a
great number of international actors, including the
European Union through its Operation Atalanta, to curb
piracy off the Horn of Africa cannot meet with lasting
success without addressing the root causes and the
issue of accountability. We are very grateful for the
efforts of the Secretariat and Under-Secretary-General
O’Brien to deal with the issue of accountability.
We condemn the widespread violations and abuses
by insurgents, extrajudicial and arbitrary executions,
arrests and torture as practised by Al-Shabaab. We are
particularly worried about reports of the use of
civilians as human shields and of indiscriminate attacks
that have led to numerous civilian casualties. As
pointed out by the Secretary-General, these abuses
might constitute war crimes, and those responsible
must be held to account.
We condemn the recruitment of children by
insurgent groups and demand their immediate release.
In this regard, we would like to recall the conclusions
concerning Somalia reached last year by the Security
Council Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict. Among the recommendations presented in the
conclusions, we would like specifically to highlight the
encouragement to AMISOM and the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia to incorporate child
protection advisers into their staff, and to the TFG to
consider ratifying the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and its Optional Protocol on the involvement of
children in armed conflict.
We are very concerned about the dramatic
humanitarian situation in Somalia. We have seen a
surge in the numbers of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) over the past two months. More than 200,000

12

Mr. Takasu (Japan): I, too, would like to thank
Mr. Ould Abdallah for his very helpful briefing this
morning. I am also grateful to Mr. Lamamra and
Mr. Omaar for their very useful statements.
I should like briefly to discuss four issues. First,
Japan shares the serious concern about the fragile
security situation as a result of continuing attacks
against the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) by
rebel groups, particularly since the Security Council
took up the issue of Somalia earlier this month. A
series of attacks have taken place, including violence
against humanitarian workers, attacks on United
Nations offices and abductions of French personnel.
We strongly condemn these acts of violence and call
for the immediate release of the hostages.
At the same time, we are heartened by the active
efforts of the TFG to maintain security, including by
regaining control over Beledweyne. Every possible
support should be provided to the TFG. The ongoing
efforts of the TFG to promote the political process are
also commendable. We hope that opposition groups
will follow the example of Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a and
join in the Djibouti peace process.
Secondly, the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) plays an indispensable role in support of
the TFG in protecting Mogadishu and assisting the
Government. It is essential to strengthen the activities
of AMISOM. We are grateful to the troop-contributing
countries Burundi and Uganda for their contributions.
We should extend every support to build up AMISOM
to the full troop level of 8,000. We therefore sincerely
hope that the pledges of additional troops by several
countries will materialize as early as possible.
However, it has been a major challenge in the current
security situation to deliver the logistical support
package to AMISOM in a timely fashion. We commend
the untiring efforts of the Secretariat, particularly the

09-43003

S/PV.6173

Department of Field Support, and urge that these good
efforts be continued.
The international community must enhance its
support to the TFG. The instability in Somalia is caused
by internal as well as external factors. It is essential to
cut off external military and economic assistance to the
rebel groups. The countries in the region need to come
together to assist the TFG.
The Somalia sanctions Committee is currently
engaged in appropriate measures to implement
resolution 1844 (2008). It is our belief that the
effectiveness of these measures must be carefully
considered. We are ready to take part in the discussion
in the Committee to determine the most appropriate
course of action.
My third point concerns the capacity-building of
the TFG. Building the capacity of the Somali security
forces and police is critically important, particularly in
the northern and north-eastern regions, where the
security situation is relatively calm. The effort to
define the Somali national security strategy should be
further promoted with the support of the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS).
Japan welcomes international support for the
programme to recruit and train 10,000 Somalia Police
Force personnel by June 2010. The programme needs
to be implemented through strong coordination among
UNPOS, the United Nations Development Programme
and
AMISOM.
Most
importantly,
however,
coordination among donor countries is essential. Japan,
for its part, will disburse $9 million to the Trust Fund
for AMISOM, through which we support the training
of the Somalia Police Force.
My fourth point concerns piracy. Piracy continues
to pose a threat to the stability in the region and to
orderly international commerce. The ongoing concerted
efforts of the international community are absolutely
essential to addressing piracy off the coast of Somalia.
Japan has been actively engaged in such efforts by
providing two destroyers and two P-3C maritime patrol
aircraft. In our Parliament, a new law has been enacted
on the penalization of acts of piracy and measures
against acts of piracy. Through that effort, we can now
protect foreign vessels.
It is Japan’s turn to chair the fourth plenary
meeting of the Contact Group on Somali Piracy on
10 September here at Headquarters. A longer-term

09-43003

solution will require restoring stability and governance
on land in Somalia. Measures on land are therefore
important from that point of view. Japan welcomes the
discussion that is now under way to establish a
working group, within the Contact Group framework,
on land-based issues. The programme of the United
Nations country team and UNPOS to establish a
framework document to improve standards of living
along the coast and in the hinterland of Somalia are
also useful for the purpose of combating piracy. Japan
has provided assistance to those programmes. We hope
that the coordinated efforts of the international
community will also have a positive influence on the
security situation on land.
Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, my delegation would like to thank Mr. Ould
Abdallah, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for his briefing, and Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi
Omaar, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Transitional
Federal Government of Somalia, and Ambassador
Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, for their presentations.
First of all, I would like briefly to comment on
the situation that has been described. As Minister
Omaar pointed out, it is now clear that the radical
groups cannot overthrow the Government militarily,
but that they are continuing their attacks nevertheless
and creating a very detrimental situation of insecurity
and violence.
My delegation notes with concern that, since the
attack of the rebel groups on 7 May, fighting is
continuing in the countryside and in Mogadishu. The
day before yesterday seven civilians were killed in the
capital, Al-Shabaab fired a mortar at a parliament
session, and foreign fighters continue to fight within
the ranks of the fundamentalists. Of course, every day
that the situation continues, the suffering of the
population increases. Over 3 million people now
depend on humanitarian aid, while the attacks launched
by Al-Shabaab on United Nations agencies, which we
strongly condemn, are hampering United Nations
activity. Moreover, more and more people who have
lost hope are trying to reach Yemen across the Gulf of
Aden aboard smugglers’ boats. Since the beginning of
the year, 30,000 people have succeeded and,
unfortunately, 300 have died in that attempt.
In that context, as many speakers before me have
said, the international community has a very important

13

S/PV.6173

role to play in helping the Transitional Federal
Government to change the situation in its favour. The
promises made in April at the Brussels conference must
be kept. I recall that the European Commission is to
provide €60 million to the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and €13 million to the Rule of
Law and Security Programme. We have taken careful
note of the information in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2009/373) on the logistic support package to
AMISOM. It is of course essential that we give the
soldiers our full support and remain mindful of their
needs.
More specifically, my delegation has identified
four tracks for action by the international community.
First, extending concrete support to the Somali
National Security Force is essential. This very
morning, France began to train Somali troops, chosen
by the Transitional Federal Government, in Djibouti.
Djibouti, for its part, is doing the same. The European
Union is considering the possibility of establishing a
security force. At the most recent meeting of their
General Affairs and External Relations Council, the
ministers for foreign affairs of the European Union
decided to send an exploratory mission to the region in
August.
Secondly, it is vital that we maintain and
strengthen our support to AMISOM, and my delegation
pays tribute to the action of Uganda and Burundi in
that regard. For its part, France contributed to
establishing four of the AMISOM contingents that, in a
recent sortie, demonstrated their ability to help the
Transitional Federal Government not only to hold its
positions, but to push back the extremist fighters. We
welcome the prospect of the imminent deployment of a
sixth battalion, provided by Burundi.
Thirdly, my delegation encourages the United
Nations to continue, as it is bravely doing, its
assistance activities, in spite of the dangers. The
European Union has extended Operation Atalanta by a
year. Counter-piracy operations are crucial, particularly
to protect the World Food Programme convoys, and we
would not underestimate the risk that the attacks may
resume in strength once the weather is again favourable
to the pirates. I recall that, at the most recent meeting
of the General Affairs and External Relations Council,
the European Union reiterated its willingness to
develop a comprehensive approach towards Somalia in
which the fight against piracy is an important
component.

14

Lastly, I would like to underscore the importance
of the political dialogue. The Transitional Federal
Government signed a reconciliation agreement with the
Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a group a month ago. I am
delighted by the spirit of openness shown by Minister
Omaar in his statement, and France encourages the
Transitional Federal Government to continue in that
direction.
I would now like to turn briefly to the issue of
sanctions. France has begun to actively engage in the
discussions taking place within the Somali sanctions
committee. We are convinced that, under resolution
1844 (2008), the Security Council can provide a clear,
realistic and effective response to the situation in the
Horn of Africa. However, we must also take fully into
account the border dispute between Djibouti and
Eritrea.
In conclusion, I wish to reassure the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General that we fully
support his efforts and that, in this delicate situation,
his role as coordinator of the activities of the United
Nations and the international community is as
necessary as ever. Naturally, we support the action of
the African Union and welcome the involvement of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I, too, would
like to thank Mr. Ould Abdallah for his briefing. I
welcome the participation in the Council’s meeting
today of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia
and the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, and I thank them for their
presentations.
My delegation is pleased to note the political
progress achieved under the Djibouti agreement, as
reflected in the Secretary-General’s latest report
(S/2009/373). We commend and support the continued
efforts undertaken by President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh
Ahmed to encourage the parties that are still outside
the Djibouti agreement to join the national
reconciliation process to rebuild their war-torn country.
We urge all groups that have yet to lay down their arms
and join the peace and reconciliation process to do so.
Despite those encouraging political developments,
the security situation in Somalia remains deeply
troubling. Attacks by insurgent groups, most notably
Al-Shabaab,
against
the Transitional Federal
Government and the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) in and around Mogadishu have intensified.

09-43003

S/PV.6173

We strongly condemn the attempts by those groups to
overthrow the legally constituted and internationally
recognized Government by force and their recent
attacks against the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Department of Safety
and Security and the United Nations Political Office
for Somalia.
We are particularly concerned about the extremely
alarming humanitarian situation in Somalia, with over
1 million people internally displaced and more than
3 million on the verge of starvation.
As the continued fighting has worsened the
humanitarian crisis, there is an urgent need for
immediate and vigorous international support for the
TFG’s endeavours to repel the onslaught of the
extremist forces that are intent on destroying the
Djibouti peace process and spoiling efforts to bring
peace and stability to Somalia through political
reconciliation.
My delegation supports the Secretary-General’s
call for Member States and regional organizations to
expedite contributions to the United Nations trust funds
as well as the bilateral support pledged at the Brussels
donors conference, in order to provide the TFG with
sufficient assistance to rebuild Somalia’s security
institutions and train its security forces.
We support the strengthening of AMISOM to
enable it to withstand insurgent attacks. We greatly
appreciate the efforts made by the Governments of
Uganda and Burundi in contributing to the maintenance
of security in Mogadishu, and we note with pleasure
that some other African Union countries have pledged
to contribute troops to AMISOM.
Significant progress has been achieved by the
international community in addressing the problem of
piracy off the coast of Somalia. The cooperation and
coordination exhibited by Member States in the fight
against piracy in the region is proving effective.
However, we still believe that, in the long run, the
scourge of piracy and armed robbery at sea off the
coast of Somalia will be resolved thoroughly only
through an integrated approach that addresses the
conflict, the lack of governance and the absence of
sustainable livelihoods on land in Somalia.
Stabilizing Somalia and delivering a negotiated
peace settlement that addresses the root causes of the
conflict requires closer cooperation and a more

09-43003

effective partnership among the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia, the Inter-Governmental
Authority on Development, the African Union and the
League of Arab States in addressing the challenges that
confront Somalia and bringing about lasting peace and
security in the region. We continue to support a strong
role for the United Nations in strengthening this
cooperation and partnership, with a view to assisting
the Government and the people of Somalia in bringing
peace, security and stability to their country. We could
not agree more with what has been said by the Minister
of Foreign Affairs of Somalia: that, ultimately, the
issues facing Somalia will have to be resolved by
Somalis.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by thanking Mr. Ould Abdallah for
his briefing, and I thank the Commissioner for Peace
and Security of the African Union, Mr. Lamamra, for
his statement. I also welcome the statement made by
the Somali Foreign Minister.
This Council has of late been reviewing the
situation in Somalia and the challenges facing the
Transitional Federal Government and the international
community there. We voice our concern at the
resurgence of violence in Somalia and the consequent
worsening of the humanitarian situation, the growing
numbers of refugees and internally displaced persons
and the climate of instability in the region. This urgent
situation demands the strengthening of Somalia’s
security institutions and of the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM), which are essential
components in the stabilization of the country.
The international community must fulfil the
commitments made at the Brussels donors conference
and contribute to the United Nations trust fund set up
for this purpose. Indifference on the part of the
international community will only strengthen the
position of the rebel groups, which, as the report of the
Monitoring Group states, are already benefiting from
arms flows and financial support from other countries,
including countries of the region, which are seeking to
undermine international peace and security.
We understand that the situation in Somalia can
only be improved on the basis of action by the Somalis
themselves. We reaffirm our support for the
Transitional Federal Government and for its efforts to
promote national reconciliation through inclusive
negotiations within the Djibouti peace process. We also

15

S/PV.6173

salute Special Representative Ould Abdallah for his
determined endeavours to move the political process
forward.
We also welcome the recent decision of the
African Union to bring the military and police
components of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) up to the mandated number of personnel.
We acknowledge the contributions of the Governments
of Burundi and Uganda to the Mission and welcome
the pledges of additional battalions from Sierra Leone
and Malawi.
The worsening humanitarian situation in Somalia
is a cause of great concern to my delegation. We
condemn the attacks on civilian populations, as well as
the obstacles placed in the way of free access to
humanitarian assistance for the more than 3 million
people who depend on it. An area of special concern
for Costa Rica is the situation of the thousands of
children who are victims of forcible recruitment by
opposition rebel groups, as well as the killings and acts
of mutilation and sexual and gender-based violence.
The Security Council must remain vigilant with regard
to these atrocious acts against the most defenceless
populations in violation of international humanitarian
law and human rights law.
My delegation has noted the progress made in
combating piracy off the Somali coast, and we
particularly welcome the impact of this progress on
access to humanitarian assistance. We are, however,
concerned by reports that the pirates are using
increasingly sophisticated strategies in their attacks on
vessels. It is therefore essential to work immediately to
resolve problems of logistics and of bringing to justice
the pirates that are still operating, while we work to
strengthen the Somali State and thus to eliminate the
causes that fuel piracy.
Finally, Costa Rica reaffirms its support for the
Secretary-General’s political strategy for Somalia, with
its three-stage approach to attain the goals needed to
achieve security in the country. We look forward to
seeing soon the results of the assistance provided by
the United Nations Political Office for Somalia to the
Transitional Federal Government, especially in the
development of a national security strategy.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the valuable information provided by
Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia. We appreciate his

16

commendable work and commitment in a very complex
situation presenting a major challenge to the
international community. We also welcome the presence
and the message of Mr. Lamamra, Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union. And we
welcome, too, the presence of Mr. Omaar, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Somalia; we listened attentively to
his message.
Mexico recognizes the significant efforts of the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia as it
works to stabilize the country. We also appreciate the
work of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and the commitment shown by the
Governments of Uganda and Burundi in support of
peace and the institutions of governance. We hope that
the reinforcements announced by other members of the
African Union will speedily complete the deployment
of AMISOM, and that the conditions necessary for the
achievement of the political, security and humanitarian
goals of its mandate will be created.
In the face of the resurgence of confrontation in
the capital between forces of the Transitional Federal
Government and insurgent groups, Mexico reiterates
that, in order to lay a foundation for sustainable peace,
there must be simultaneous progress in three mutually
reinforcing areas: the political sphere, security and
development.
We acknowledge the political progress that has
been made, in particular the interest of the Transitional
Federal Government in seeking agreements with more
moderate insurgent groups that remain outside the
Djibouti reconciliation process. The fact that certain
groups have jointed the peace process is a positive
achievement. Another positive development, to which
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
referred, was the recent signing of the joint declaration
with one of those groups to cooperate on security,
development, political and humanitarian issues.
Moreover, we support the steps taken by the
Government of Somalia to develop the country, in
particular the implementation, with the assistance of
the African Union Mission in Somalia and the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia, of the Transition
Plan for Somalia in such areas as the strengthening of
Somalia’s National Security Force and police, as well
as the efforts made with regard to transparency and
accountability.

09-43003

S/PV.6173

Mexico reiterates its great concern over the
deterioration in security conditions for United Nations
staff and humanitarian personnel, which has had a
direct impact on the provision of assistance to the
civilian population. It is unacceptable, that, confronted
by violence, attacks and plundering, some funds,
programmes and agencies, such as the World Food
Programme and UNICEF, have found it necessary to
suspend their work to distribute food and provide
health services.
Mexico believes that it is essential to address the
humanitarian situation and to reiterate the obligation of
States always to observe and ensure respect for
international humanitarian law, including their
fundamental responsibility to take every step necessary
to guarantee the protection of civilians. In that regard,
it is essential to ensure the presence on the ground of
the United Nations and humanitarian organizations. In
the current circumstances, safe access and the delivery
of humanitarian assistance are the only real option for
meeting the most basic needs of the population,
including internally displaced persons, refugees and,
above all, members of the most vulnerable groups,
such as women and children. We also call on the
parties to the conflict to prevent and halt the
recruitment of children.
Given the critical prevailing situation, it is a
matter of priority, as we have learned from the
briefings we have heard today, to establish minimal
security conditions on the ground and to ensure an
environment of sustainable security. Implementing the
gradual approach that we endorsed in resolution 1872
(2009) depends, first and foremost, on safeguarding the
survival of the current Government, the security of its
leading officials and the continued and growing
presence of the United Nations throughout the country.
We are convinced that establishing a security zone on
Somali territory and protecting strategic infrastructure,
such as maritime ports, are essential steps in laying the
foundations for the functioning of national institutions
and the international presence. As the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General has rightly
said, insecurity has now become a source of income
and power.
In addition, we believe it important for the
Security Council to take into account the African
Union’s call to establish a no-fly zone and a blockade
of Somali ports to prevent the entry of foreign
mercenaries and weapons into the country, as well as to

09-43003

consider appropriate measures with regard to Eritrea in
order to address that country’s support for insurgents,
which contributes to Somalia’s ongoing instability.
Acts of piracy have increased during 2009,
including a total of 29 successful hijackings of vessels
through the month of June. Mexico commends the
decision of the Council of the European Union to
expand the mandate of Operation Atalanta. We welcome
the decision of NATO to expand its operations in the
region. We also support the proposals of the SecretaryGeneral to establish an additional working group
within the Contact Group to consider ways to combat
piracy on land, promote coordination of efforts
between States and the Government of Somalia, and
strengthen Somalia’s coastguard capacity and its
judicial system in order to prosecute alleged pirates.
Lastly, in its capacity as Chair of the Somalia
Sanctions Committee, Mexico urges countries of the
region and the entire international community to
cooperate with the Committee’s efforts with regard to
the arms embargo and the political, logistical and
financial support enjoyed by armed groups in Somalia.
In that connection, we ask for resolute support and full
cooperation with the Committee’s monitoring group to
enable it to fulfil its mandated functions. We trust that
timely action by the Committee to implement resolution
1844 (2008) will become a fundamental component of
a coordinated regional approach to creating the
stability that the country so desperately needs.
Mr. Çorman (Turkey): We would like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ould Abdallah, for his comprehensive briefing. We
would also like to thank Foreign Minister of Somalia
Mohamed Omaar and African Union Commissioner
Lamamra for their statements. We also welcome the
report (S/2009/373) of the Secretary-General.
Today’s meeting on Somalia, the second in the
month of July, is a testament to the importance that the
Council attaches to developments in Somalia in
particular, and to peace and stability in the Horn of
Africa in general. Somalia is at a very delicate point.
Developments on the ground have not yet reached the
irreversible stage, insofar as the establishment of the
authority of the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) in and around the capital is concerned.
We welcome the open-door policy pursued by the
TFG vis-à-vis opposition groups. We should insist in
our call to all groups in and outside Somalia that there

17

S/PV.6173

is no military solution to the Somali question and that
the Djibouti peace process is the only road towards a
peaceful future. Turkey fully supports the Transitional
Federal Government as the only legitimate authority in
Somalia. We reiterated that support to President Sheikh
Sharif Sheik Ahmed during his visit to Turkey last
April.
We commend the crucial role played by the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
express our gratitude to the Governments of Uganda
and Burundi for their invaluable contributions to the
Mission. We encourage other African Union member
States to follow suit. Undoubtedly, AMISOM’s
technical capacity should also be bolstered so that it
can effectively implement its mandate. To that end, the
expeditious deployment of the logistics support
package by the United Nations will be vital.
Equally important is the early transfer of funds
pledged to AMISOM at the Brussels donors’
conference in April. I would like to say that Turkey has
already transferred half of its pledge to AMISOM. The
other part of our pledge, for the restructuring of the
transitional security institutions in Somalia, has also
been made available. As we have indicated on various
occasions, Turkey is prepared to train AMISOM
peacekeepers and Somali police officers in Turkey, in
cooperation with the United Nations.
We welcome the recent meeting in Mogadishu of
Somalia’s Joint Security Committee. As Special
Representative Ould Abdallah has said, the revitalization
of the Committee marks an important step towards
reforming and improving security in Somalia.
We are closely following the Secretariat’s work
on the plan for a future United Nations peacekeeping
operation to follow AMISOM, subject to a further
decision of the Security Council. In that regard, we
look forward to the report of the Secretary-General to
be issued in September 2009. We hope that the visit to
Mogadishu by a team from the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations takes place in advance of that
report, as planned.
Turkey fully supports the three-track approach of
the Secretary-General, as endorsed in resolution 1872
(2009).
We are also concerned about the deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in Somalia as a consequence
of intensified fighting. It is alarming to learn from the

18

report of the Secretary-General that some instances
amount to war crimes under international humanitarian
law. Here, the effective implementation of sanctions on
Somalia and the importance of preventing the entry of
foreign fighters into its territory come into the picture.
As for international efforts to combat piracy off
the coast of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden, I am
pleased to report that Turkey’s contribution to those
efforts, with the provision of two frigates, continues.
Moreover, we are actively taking part in the work of
the International Contact Group on Somalia and are
closely cooperating with countries of the region in that
context.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): I too would like to join
others in thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ould Abdallah, for presenting
the most recent report of the Secretary-General on
Somalia (S/2009/373), which we welcome. I would
also like to welcome African Union Commissioner
Lamamra and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Somalia, Mr. Omaar, and to thank them for their
presentations today. My delegation would also like to
express its full appreciation to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia
for his tireless efforts and his valuable contribution in
promoting dialogue and reconciliation in Somalia.
Since we had an opportunity on 9 July to discuss
the situation in Somalia (see S/PV.6158), my
delegation would like to make a couple of brief points.
First, we note and express our concern about the
ongoing dire security situation on the ground. In that
context, we reiterate our full support for the
Transitional Federal Government and President Sheikh
Sharif Sheikh Ahmed. We commend their determination
and their action towards a more inclusive political
process and genuine national reconciliation, and we
welcome recent positive political developments in that
respect, which have already been mentioned today.
We add our voice to the calls for all Somali
stakeholders to opt for dialogue and to join the
Djibouti peace process, which continues to be the best
option for lasting peace in Somalia.
Secondly, we strongly condemn all attempts to
halt the current political momentum, destabilize the
Transitional Federal Institutions and undermine the
Djibouti peace process. We call for an immediate
cessation of hostilities and deplore the toll that

09-43003

S/PV.6173

insurgent attacks have taken on both the civilian
population and the already dire humanitarian situation
in the country. Of particular concern to us was the
extensive recruitment and training of children, as noted
in the report of the Secretary-General. We echo the
Secretary-General’s call for the immediate cessation of
such practices. Also, we urge all parties involved in the
conflict to adhere to international humanitarian law and
to respect human rights.
We also continue to be extremely concerned
about reports of foreign interference with regard to
insurgent attacks taking place in Somalia, as well as
with the destabilizing potential of such actions for the
whole region. We are therefore heartened by today’s
statement by Foreign Minister Omaar that, without
foreign interference, the Transitional Federal
Government would be able to ensure peace and
security on the entire territory of Somalia.
As we have previously stated, we are ready to act
in the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 751 (1992) on the basis of the reports
presented by the Monitoring Group, whose work and
findings we very much value and strongly support.
Thirdly, while appreciating the untiring efforts of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
its troop-contributing countries, we call for the
strengthening of its capacities through fulfilment of
troop-contributing pledges and bilateral aid, as well as
through the Trust Fund for AMISOM. We also
appreciate all efforts and initiatives aimed at improving
the capacity of Somalia’s security sector, in particular
as an accountable and capable security and police
force; this represents the backbone of achieving
stability in the country.
Finally, we strongly support the work done thus
far by all actors to tackle the issue of piracy off the
coast of Somalia. Croatia is pleased to be able to make
its contribution to the anti-piracy efforts and to
participate actively in the European Union naval
operation, Operation Atalanta.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish at the outset to thank Mr. Ould Abdallah, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
for his briefing. We highly appreciate Mr. Ould
Abdallah’s unremitting efforts over the years in
drawing the attention of the international community to
the need to resolve the question of Somalia. We
welcome the statement by African Union Commissioner

09-43003

Lamamra. We also welcome the presence among us of
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia and thank
him for his statement.
We are deeply concerned about the current grave
situation in Somalia. To resolve the question of
Somalia, it is imperative to quickly stabilize the
security situation in that country. For that purpose it is
crucial importance to ensure that the Somali security
forces are sufficiently strong. We welcome the recent
Mogadishu meeting of the Joint Security Committee.
We support the further strengthening of the Somali
security forces and appeal to members of the
international community that are able to provide
support to Somalia to do so within the framework of
the relevant procedures regarding exemptions from the
sanctions.
The African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
is playing a very important role in the Somali peace
process. Some African countries have pledged
reinforcements to AMISOM; we welcome such pledges
and look forward to the prompt and full deployment of
the Mission. The international community must honour
its commitments as soon as possible and provide even
greater support to AMISOM. We support United
Nations efforts to continue to deploy the AMISOM
support package and request the Secretariat to
complete the contingency planning for the deployment
of a United Nations peacekeeping operation.
We support the continuation of national
reconciliation talks among all Somali parties, aimed at
consolidating the Djibouti peace process.
We condemn recent attacks against the
Transitional Federal Government, civilians and
humanitarian aid agencies and urge all Somali parties
to immediately renounce the use of force and resolve
all problems by political means.
The question of Somalia has become a daunting
challenge to the peace and security of the entire Horn
of Africa region. We appeal to countries of the region
to bring all their influence to bear in encouraging
peaceful talks and securing early and substantial
progress in the Somali national peace process.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Uganda.
I thank Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
and Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace

19

S/PV.6173

and Security of the African Union, for their briefings. I
also welcome the participation in this meeting of the
Foreign Minister of Somalia, Mr. Omaar.
Uganda commends the efforts made by the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) of Somalia to
advance the political process in that country. We
condemn attacks on the TFG, the civilian population
and the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
by insurgent groups and foreign elements in an attempt
to undermine the political process and reconciliation
efforts. Any attempt to oust the TFG is totally
unacceptable; it would have a serious impact on peace
and stability within Somalia, in the region and beyond.
We therefore call on all armed groups and all
opposition elements to embrace the Djibouti agreement
as the best way to advance the political process. We
also call upon those, within and outside the region,
who are supporting the insurgents and fuelling
instability in Somalia to stop doing so.
We welcome the launch on 25 July of the Joint
Security Committee, which is one of the institutions
provided for in the Djibouti peace agreement. That is
significant because, once operationalized, the Joint
Security Committee will coordinate efforts in support
of the Somali transitional security sector institutions
and also facilitate the disbursement of pledges made to
that effect during the Brussels conference.
We welcome the support extended to the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and call upon
the United Nations and other partners to continue their
support to ensure that AMISOM can effectively
implement its mandate. We also welcome the
additional pledges of troops for AMISOM, which will
further strengthen its capacity to carry out its mandate.
In addition, we are encouraged that AMISOM has
initiated the deployment of its police component
following the arrival of its Police Commissioner in
Mogadishu on 18 June this year.

20

In order to build upon the achievements
registered so far, it is critical that, at this stage, the rest
of the entities supporting AMISOM, including the
civilian component, the United Nations Political Office
for Somalia and other agencies, relocate to Somalia.
That would not only help to strengthen the
Government, but also send a clear signal to all that the
international community is fully supportive of the
Transitional Federal Government and the people of
Somalia.
Members will recall that, at its meeting held on
9 July this year, the Security Council adopted a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2009/19) in which it
took note of the decision of the African Union summit
in Sirte urging the Council to impose sanctions against
those providing support to groups engaged in
undermining peace and reconciliation in Somalia and
regional stability. Accordingly, the Council expressed
its readiness to expeditiously consider what action to
take against any party undermining the Djibouti peace
process. Uganda will support action by the Council in
that regard.
Finally, we thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah,
and his staff for the good work that they are doing to
support the people of Somalia so that they can live in
peace and security and rebuild their country.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

09-43003
