A/70/775–S/2016/218*

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
7 March 2016
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventieth session
Agenda item 39
The situation in Afghanistan

Security Council
Seventy-first year

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 68/11
and Security Council resolution 2210 (2015), in which I was requested to report
every three months on developments in Afghanistan.
2.
The report provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in
Afghanistan, including significant humanitarian, development and human rights
efforts, since the issuance of my previous report of 10 December 2015 ( A/70/601S/2015/942). It also provides a summary of key political and security developments
and regional and international events related to Afghanistan. The annex contains an
assessment of progress made towards benchmarks and indicators since the issuance
of my report of 10 March 2015 (A/69/801-S/2015/151), in line with Security
Council resolution 1868 (2009).

II. Relevant developments
3.
Deteriorating security and an increasingly vocal political opposition placed
increased pressure on the Government of Afghanistan during the reporting period,
despite steps towards a possible peace process. The Government ’s peace efforts
gained regional momentum though the Quadrilateral Coordination Group on the
Afghan Peace and Reconciliation Process, but the commitment of the Taliban to a
possible peace process remained uncertain. While recommendations for electoral
reform were advanced by the Special Electoral Reform Commission,
implementation stalled, even as the announcement of a date of 15 October 2016 for
parliamentary and district council elections brought renewed demands for reforms.
* Reissued for technical reasons on 11 March 2016.

16-03199* (E)

110316

*1603199*

A/70/775
S/2016/218

During the reporting period, the security situation was increasingly volatile as the
conflict grew in intensity and scope, resulting in high casualties and displacement
among Afghan civilians. The Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
continued to face significant challenges in effectively countering the threats of
insurgent groups across the country. The Government of Afghanistan took steps to
further its economic reform agenda in the context of persistent slow economic
growth and emigration, and began preparations for the ministerial -level
development conference in Brussels.

A.

Political developments
4.
Since the issuance of my previous report, the Government of Afghanistan has
undertaken efforts to reinvigorate the peace process. On 9 December 2015,
Afghanistan agreed with China, Pakistan and the United States of America on a
quadrilateral format for peace talks. The Quadrilateral Coordination Group on the
Afghan Peace and Reconciliation Process met on 11 and 18 January and 6 and
23 February, twice in Islamabad and twice in Kabul. At the 6 February meeting,
Coordination Group member States adopted a road map outlining steps towards a
peace process. At the 23 February meeting, Coordination Group member States
invited all Taliban and other groups to participate in the first round of direct peace
talks with the Government, which were expected to take place by the first week of
March 2016. Pakistan offered to host this round of talks. In addition, Afghanistan
and Pakistan agreed to form a working group to foster cooperation between the
ulema of the two countries with a view to ending violence. In the meantime, the
Pugwash Conferences on Science and World Affairs organized a “track II” dialogue
in Doha on 23 and 24 January, with the participation of Afghan politicians in their
personal capacities and representatives of the Taliban. The Presiden t of Afghanistan,
Ashraf Ghani, has voiced his opposition to track II efforts that facilitate dialogue
outside of the official process. The joint secretariat of the Afghan Peace and
Reintegration Programme reported that in 2015 a total of 1,462 individuals had
joined the Programme, compared with 1,716 in 2014.
5.
Reports of rifts within the Taliban movement increased. In early December
2015, unconfirmed reports suggested that Mullah Mansoor had been injured or
killed near Quetta, Pakistan, as a result of internal fighting. The Taliban denied his
death and, on 5 December, released an audio recording of an individual claiming to
be Mullah Mansoor. Meanwhile, clashes in the Shindand District of Herat Province
between two local commanders affiliated with Mullah Mansoor and Mullah
Mohammed Rasool Akhund, the leader of a faction opposing Mullah Mansoor ’s
leadership, resulted in the reported killing of several dozen Taliban members.
6.
During the reporting period, tensions within the Government continued to
slow progress on key appointments, including with respect to positions essential to
the delivery of the Government’s reform agenda and to addressing challenges in
such areas as security, the rule of law and governance. On 11 December, Massoud
Andarabi was named acting Director of the National Directorate of Security, after
his predecessor, Rahmatullah Nabil, had resigned, citing differences over President
Ghani’s outreach to Pakistan. On 21 February, the Government appointed Pir Sayed
Gailani as the new Chairperson of the High Peace Council. On 24 February, the
Government appointed Mohammad Farid Hamidi to the position of Attorney
General and Taj Mohammad Jahid as Minister of the Interior. The positions of

2/45

16-03199

A/70/775
S/2016/218

Minister of Defence and Director of the National Directorate of Security continued
to be held by persons serving in an acting capacity. The President ’s nominee for the
remaining ninth vacancy in the High Council of the Supreme Court, Abdul Haseeb
Ahadi, was confirmed by the lower house of the National Assembly on
28 December. In early January, the deputy provincial governors of Ghazni and
Helmand provinces were dismissed, owing to their public criticism of the
Government. On 9 February, President Ghani appointed a new governor of Kunduz
Province. Two of the 34 governorships remained filled by persons serving in an
acting capacity, and the number of female governors in the country was reduced
from two to one after the Governor of Ghor Province had been appointed Deputy
Governor of Kabul Province.
7.
The political landscape grew more contentious with the formation of political
opposition groups, a trend continuing since the previous reporting period. On
18 December, former presidential candidate Abdul Rasul Sayyaf announced the
formation of the Afghanistan Protection and Stability Council, comprising mostly
former mujahideen leaders and figures from the Government of former President
Hamid Karzai. The group called for the swift implementation of the 21 September
2014 agreement on the establishment of a national unity Government, in particular
the holding of parliamentary and district council elections and a constitutional loya
jirga. On 14 January, former Minister of Finance Anwar ul -Haq Ahady launched the
New National Front. Its membership included figures from Afghan Millat, one of
Afghanistan’s oldest political parties. The group called for an early presidential
election, to be held simultaneously with parliamentary and district council elections,
and questioned the constitutionality of certain posts established unde r the National
Unity Government, including those of Chief Executive and Special Representative
for Reforms and Good Governance, which the President had accorded
vice-presidential status in October 2015. Despite differing platforms, most of the
opposition groups interpreted the 21 September 2014 agreement as stipulating that
the term of the National Unity Government expired after two years and must be
replaced, either through early presidential elections or through a loya jirga that
would reconsider the structure of the Government.
8.
On 29 December, in the face of calls by political opposition groups and the
National Assembly for decisions on the electoral calendar, President Ghani
announced the Government’s intent to hold the delayed parliamentary and district
council elections in mid- or late 2016. On 18 January, the Independent Election
Commission of Afghanistan announced an election date of 15 October 2016. The
announcement was met with near-unanimous criticism on the part of political
opposition and observer groups and the Office of the Chief Executive, whose
spokesperson stated that the current Commission had “no legitimacy” , that reforms
were a precondition for the elections and that a new independent election
commission should administer the elections.
9.
Although steps were taken in recommending electoral reforms,
implementation stalled. The Special Commission on Electoral Reform presented its
final recommendations to the Government in late December, including proposals
aimed at mitigating electoral fraud, reforming electoral bodies, improving the
dispute resolution mechanism and voter registration, reducing costs and amending
the 2004 Constitution, as well as two options for a different electoral system. The
Government welcomed the recommendations, and the Special Commission
concluded its mandate on 31 December 2015.

16-03199

3/45

A/70/775
S/2016/218

10. On 21 and 26 December, the lower house of the National Assembly rejected
two decrees of President Ghani enacting a number of recommendations of the
Special Commission on Electoral Reform, specifically on the election law and the
law on structures, duties and authorities of the Independent Election Commission
and the Independent Electoral Complaints Commission. The upper house of the
Assembly also rejected the decree on the law on structures. As a result, the legal
basis for the selection committee tasked with nominating a new independent
election commission was called into question, and it suspended its work. On
10 February, the Cabinet approved new amendments to the law on structure s, which
are expected to allow the selection committee to resume its work. The United
Nations continued to provide advice and technical assistance on electoral reforms.
11. On 8 January, President Ghani extended the term of the 34 appointed senators
in the upper house of the National Assembly until after the next parliamentary
election. On 18 January, the lower house of the Assembly approved the national
budget for the 1395 (2016) fiscal year, after rejecting a previous version, citing a
lack of new development projects, an imbalance in provincial allocations and the
fact that no budget had been allocated for the envisaged parliamentary elections.
The Assembly began its winter recess on 21 January and is scheduled to resume
work on 5 March. The recess delayed the deliberations of the lower house on the
President’s proposed amendments to the law on acting ministers, which give the
President authority to maintain the Minister of Defence, the Minister of the Interior
and the Director of the National Directorate of Security in an acting capacity
indefinitely.

B.

Security
12. The security situation deteriorated further in 2015. The United Nations
recorded 22,634 security incidents, representing a 3 per cent increase compared with
2014 and the second-highest number since 2001. Since the issuance of my previous
report, fighting has intensified in Helmand and Baghlan provinces, and Kunduz
Province has remained volatile.
13. Of the security incidents that occurred in 2015, 70 per cent were recorded in
the southern, eastern and south-eastern regions. Ghazni, Helmand, Kandahar, Kunar
and Nangarhar were the most volatile provinces, accounting for 49 per cent of all
security incidents. Armed clashes and improvised explosive devices accounted for
79 per cent of all incidents, representing an increase of 3 per cent compared with
2014 and reflecting the overall higher level of insurgent activities during the year.
Despite the Taliban’s announcement of 24 April 2015 as the start of the spring
offensive, there was no clear change in the incident pattern during the spring, unlike
in previous years, or, for that matter, throughout 2015 as fighting continued
unabated.
14. The Taliban expanded its territorial reach in 2015, temporarily capturing
24 district centres in the north (in Badakhshan, Baghlan, Faryab, Jawzjan, Kunduz,
Sari Pul and Takhar provinces), in the west (in Badghis and Farah provinces), in the
east (in Nuristan Province) and in the south (in Helmand and Kandahar provinces),
in addition to temporarily seizing the provincial capital of Kunduz. This represents a
significant increase compared with 2014, when the Taliban captured only three
centres. Even though most district centres were quickly retaken by pro -government

4/45

16-03199

A/70/775
S/2016/218

forces, several remained under Taliban control for weeks, including in Faryab,
Helmand, Kunduz, Sari Pul and Takhar provinces. Tensions associated with Mullah
Mansoor’s succession as the new Taliban leader after Mullah Omar ’s death did not
slow the insurgency’s anti-government initiatives.
15. Reports indicate a substantial increase in casualties among the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces in 2015, the first year in which the forces
confronted anti-government elements with much-reduced international military
assistance. Critical shortcomings continue to hamper the Forces in effectively
addressing the threat posed by anti-government elements, including insufficient
recruitment, high attrition rates and insufficient logistics and planning and air
support and coordination. Insufficient recruitment and high attrition rates posed
particular challenges to the sustainability of the Forces. In January 2016, the
number of Afghan National Army troops reached 88 per cent and the number of
Afghan National Police personnel 77 per cent of the levels project ed for August
2016. At the current rate, recruitment cannot compensate for the losses generated by
absenteeism and casualties, particularly within the Afghan National Army and the
Afghan National Police.
16. During the reporting period, Taliban activities continued at a rapid pace,
particularly in Helmand Province. In December 2015 and January 2016, the Taliban
concentrated its efforts on attempting to seize strategically important parts of the
Province, including the Garmsir, Khanashin, Marjah, Sangin and Washir districts,
the control of which would facilitate access to opium -smuggling and weapon supply
routes. Following reports of inadequate leadership, low morale and widespread
desertion among the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces, the Governme nt
undertook efforts to rebuild Afghan National Army units in the area. In addition, a
limited number of international military personnel were redeployed to Helmand
Province to support the efforts of the Forces to prevent the Taliban from capturing
the provincial capital, Lashkar Gah. In the second half of February, the Forces
temporarily withdrew from the Musa Qala and Nawzad districts to reinforce
security forces in other priority areas of Helmand Province. On 19 January,
President Ghani appointed a member of the lower house of the National Assembly
representing Helmand Province, Abdul Jabar Qahraman, as special representative
charged with coordinating operations of the Forces in Helmand.
17. The Afghan National Defence and Security Forces also carried out clearance
operations in Baghlan, Kunduz and Nangarhar provinces. Despite those operations,
the security situation remained volatile in the north-eastern region, in particular the
Kunduz area, where anti-government elements maintained their presence in close
proximity to Kunduz city. On 16 February, a United Nations aircraft approaching
Kunduz airfield came under fire and sustained minor damage. In late January, the
Forces started military operations in the Dand -e-Ghori, Pul-i-Khumri and Baghlani
Jadid districts of Baghlan Province, following allegations that the Taliban had
violated a local ceasefire agreed upon between local elders and the Government on
7 September 2015. The United Nations continued to receive reports indicating the
establishment of additional pro-government militia groups, particularly in the
eastern region. Leading political figures in Kabul and at the local level increased
pressure on the Government to endorse their proposals to raise and arm local
militias in support of the Forces.

16-03199

5/45

A/70/775
S/2016/218

18. In addition to the conflict between government forces and anti -government
elements, violence occurred between other armed groups on Afghan territory,
including the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan and the Islamic State of Iraq and the
Levant-Khorasan Province (ISIL-KP). Composed primarily of former Taliban
members, ISIL-KP remained limited in its presence to the Achin, Deh Bala and
Chaparhar districts of Nangarhar Province. Recent operations by the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces, supported by international military air
strikes, as well as attacks from the Taliban, led to the concentration of ISIL -KP in
remote locations near the border with Pakistan.
19. Between 1 December 2015 and 15 February 2016, the United Nations recorded
4,014 security-related incidents across the country. This represents an 8.3 per cent
decrease compared with the same period in 2014 and 2015, although it is noted that
in 2015, January and February recorded the highest totals for those months since
2001. Consistent with previous trends, armed clashes accounted for the majority of
security incidents, at 57.4 per cent, followed by improvised explosive devices, at
19.2 per cent. Targeted killings continued at a high level. From 1 December 2015 to
15 February 2016, 154 assassinations, including failed attempts, were recorded,
representing a 27 per cent decrease compared with the same period in 2014 and
2015. During the reporting period, 20 suicide attacks were reported, compared with
30 in the same period in 2014 and 2015.
20. During the reporting period, 12 of the incidents recorded were either directly
or indirectly against the United Nations. These included three cases of intimidation,
one incident related to an improvised explosive device and eight criminal -related
incidents, and affected mainly national staff members. On 3 February in Bihsud
District, Nangarhar Province, an improvised explosive device detonated against a
United Nations convoy, resulting in the injury of two Afghan national officers in the
Diplomatic Protection Service.

C.

Regional cooperation
21. Afghanistan and Pakistan sought to enhance their relations. On 9 December,
President Ghani and the Prime Minister of Pakistan, Nawaz Sharif, jointly
inaugurated the fifth Heart of Asia Ministerial Conference in Islamabad, which
featured the high-level participation of countries in the region. In the Conference
declaration, participant countries focused on countering security threats, promoting
economic connectivity and strengthening confidence-building measures, urged the
Taliban and armed opposition groups to enter into peace talks with the Government
of Afghanistan and called for a collaborative regional security and counter -terrorism
approach. India agreed to co-chair the 2016 conference. In Islamabad, Afghanistan
and Pakistan committed to increasing cooperation in the areas of border security,
intelligence-sharing and counter-terrorism. This was followed by the respective
visits of the Chief of Army Staff of Pakistan, General Raheel Sharif, and the acting
Director of the National Directorate of Security o f Afghanistan, Masoud Andarabi,
on 27 December and 5 February, to Kabul and Islamabad. They agreed to establish a
military hotline and further discussed intelligence -sharing and counter-terrorism
measures.
22. Afghanistan continued to engage with countries in the region. On
25 December, the Prime Minister of India, Narendra Modi, visited Kabul, where he

6/45

16-03199

A/70/775
S/2016/218

and President Ghani jointly inaugurated a new building for the National Assembly
and discussed the expansion of regional connectivity. Visiting India between
31 January and 4 February, the Chief Executive of Afghanistan, Abdullah Abdullah,
also met with Prime Minister Modi. Between 4 and 6 January, Chief Executive
Abdullah visited the Islamic Republic of Iran, meeting with Supreme Leader Ali
Khamenei and President Hassan Rouhani and travelling to the Port of Chabahar. In a
joint declaration, Afghanistan and Iran (Islamic Republic of) committed to
increasing connectivity, placing emphasis on the Khaf -Herat railway and a planned
trilateral Afghanistan-India-Iran (Islamic Republic of) transit corridor. In the
declaration, Tehran’s support for an Afghan-led peace process was reiterated, as
well as the need to accelerate progress on a bilateral cooperation agreement and to
form a joint working group to study transboundary water issues on the Harirud
River. On 3 February in Berlin, Afghanistan participated in the 17th meeting of the
International Contact Group on Afghanistan, which focused on the security situation
and the need to ensure the sustainability and viability of international support.
23. During the reporting period, Afghanistan and other countries in the region
continued to state their commitment to trade, transport and energy connectivity. On
13 December, Turkmenistan hosted a ground-breaking ceremony for the
Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India (TAPI) pipeline project, attended by
President Ghani. The President visited Azerbaijan on 22 December and Turkey on
23 and 24 December to participate in discussions on transport routes to link
Afghanistan to Europe and bilateral economic cooperation. On 30 December in
Pakistan, construction began on the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor ’s western
route, which is to provide Afghanistan’s Kandahar city with connectivity to the sea.
The meeting of the Council of Heads of Government of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization held in Zhengzhou, China, on 14 and 15 December, which was
attended by Chief Executive Abdullah, discussed increasing regional economic
cooperation as well as counter-terrorism measures. At the meeting of the Council on
Collective Security of the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) held on
21 December in Moscow, member States adopted a declaration that cited the
“growing terrorist threat” from Afghanistan. The Russian Federation underscored
the need to enhance cooperation between CSTO and Afghanistan, echoi ng
Afghanistan’s calls for greater regional counter-terrorism cooperation. On
13 January, Tajikistan formally suspended consular services in Kunduz and
Faizabad cities, citing security concerns.

III. Human rights
24. On 14 February 2016, the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) published its annual report for 2015 on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict in Afghanistan. The report documented 11,002 civilian casualties
(3,545 deaths and 7,457 injured) between 1 January and 3 1 December 2015. This
represents the highest number of civilian casualties recorded by UNAMA since
2009. The Mission attributed 62 per cent of the civilian casualties that had occurred
in 2015 to anti-government elements and 17 per cent to pro-government Forces
(14 per cent to the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces, 2 per cent to
international military forces and 1 per cent to pro -government armed groups). It
documented the United States military airstrike carried out on 3 October on a
Médecins sans frontières hospital in Kunduz city, which had caused 85 casualties

16-03199

7/45

A/70/775
S/2016/218

(42 deaths and 43 injured), including 49 medical personnel. Seventeen per cent of
all civilian casualties had resulted from cross-fire between anti-government
elements and the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces that could not be
attributed to a specific party. Four per cent of civilian casualties had resulted from
unattributed explosive remnants of war. Ground engagements between
pro-government forces and anti-government elements remained the leading cause of
civilian casualties, accounting for 4,137 casualties (1,116 deaths and 3,021 injured),
followed by improvised explosive devices, suicide attacks and targeted and
deliberate killings.
25. A series of high-profile attacks, targeting mainly civilians, occurred during the
period of December 2015 and January 2016. In an attack on 8 and 9 December at
Kandahar airport, the Taliban intentionally targeted civilian areas, killing
38 civilians, including four children, and injuring a further 19. On 11 December, an
attack in the vicinity of the Spanish Embassy in Kabul claimed the lives of three
civilians and injured eight others. On 1 January, the Taliban conducted a complex
attack on a restaurant in Kabul, killing 2 civilians and injur ing 18 others, including
five women and four children. On 3 January, anti-government elements carried out
an attack on the Indian consulate in Mazar-e-Sharif city, Balkh Province, injuring
three civilians. On 4 January, a Taliban suicide attacker detonated a truck full of
explosives against an international military camp located near a residential area in
Kabul. The attack killed 3 civilians and injured 38, including nine children, seven
women and four United Nations staff members. On 13 January, ISIL -KP claimed
responsibility for a complex attack against the Pakistani consulate in Jalalabad city,
Nangarhar Province, which had killed 6 civilians and injured 10 others. On
17 January, a suicide bomber detonated explosives at a gathering of tribal elders in
Jalalabad city, killing 13 civilians and injuring 14 others.
26. In January 2016, anti-government elements carried out two deliberate attacks
on journalists and other employees of media organizations. On 20 January, a Taliban
suicide bomber detonated a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device against a
minibus transporting staff of the Tolo media organization, killing 8 civilians,
including seven Tolo staff members, and injuring 24 others. The attack followed a
specific threat issued by the Taliban in October against Tolo and other named
Afghan news organizations, identifying them as military objectives. On 29 January,
a journalist working for a national radio and television organization in Jalalabad city
was killed by anti-government elements. On 31 January, President Ghani issued a
decree affirming his commitment to freedom of expression of the media and
instructing relevant agencies to investigate and publicly report on cases in which
journalists have been subjected to intimidation or violence.
27. Children continued to suffer disproportionately as a result of the conflict,
accounting for almost one third of all civilian casualties in Afghanistan during the
reporting period. Between 1 November 2015 and 31 January 2016, the country task
force on monitoring and reporting verified 264 incidents that had caused 562 child
casualties (144 children killed and 418 injured). Ground engagements between the
parties to the conflict caused the highest number of child casualties, accounting for
262, with explosive remnants of war causing 158 child casualties, the second highest number. In one incident in Baghlan Province on 1 December, 6 children and
one adult were killed and 11 children injured when an explosive remnant of war
detonated. Complex and suicide attacks were the third-most-frequent cause of child
casualties, resulting in 47, followed by exposure to improvised explosive devices,

8/45

16-03199

A/70/775
S/2016/218

which resulted in 31 child casualties. Reports of the recruitment of children by
anti-government elements were received during the reporting period. In December
2015, the country task force on monitoring and reporting verified that anti government elements in Badakshan Province had recruited 13 children to serve in
their ranks, in two separate child recruitment incidents. This represent s one third of
all child recruitment cases verified in 2015.
28. The Government continued to implement its “road map towards compliance” ,
aimed at expediting the implementation of the action plan to end and prevent the
recruitment of children in the Afghan national security forces, signed with the
United Nations in 2011. On 21 December, the government -led Inter-Ministerial
Steering Committee on Children and Armed Conflict endorsed the national Age
Assessment Guidelines to prevent and respond to child recruitment in the Afghan
national security forces, an important step under the action plan. On 22 December
and 8 February, the Ministry of the Interior opened its fifth and sixth child
protection units in Mazar-e-Sharif and Jalalabad, respectively, the first four having
been established in 2011. Visiting Afghanistan from 13 to 17 February, my Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict met with President Ghani and Chief
Executive Abdullah and advocated the expedited implementation of the 2011 action
plan, as well as the protection of the civilian nature of schools and hospitals.
29. The Government finalized plans to implement, monitor and evaluate the
national action plan for Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), with the aim of
familiarizing implementing agencies at the provincial level with the plan by
mid-June, one of its short-term commitments under the Self-Reliance through
Mutual Accountability Framework. In 2015, the United Nations trained a total of
1,527 people (including 901 women), comprising students, local leaders, provincial
officials and youth group members regarding the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women and Security Council resolution 1325
(2000). On 16 January, a government task force on the Convention, supported by the
United Nations, submitted its interim report to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
concerning steps taken since the issuance of the first periodic report, in July 2013.
30. The Government took steps to strengthen protection services for women. On
31 January, President Ghani launched an emergency fund for the medical treatment
of women victims of violence, which had been developed by the Ministry of
Women’s Affairs. On 18 January, the Government reported that the State budget for
the year 1395 (2016) included funding for six additional violence against women
prosecution units, the establishment of which would bring to 26 the total number of
such units throughout the country. Meanwhile, the United Nations continued to
support service providers and policy dialogue aimed at ending violence and
discrimination against women. On 9 December, the United Nations provided
technical support for a conference on gender-responsive law reform held in Kabul.
As at 31 December, 23 women’s protection centres were operational in Afghanistan,
down from 24 in 2014. At the centres, survivors of domestic violence are provided
with protection, health care, legal aid, mediation and other services. Eleven of the
centres are supported by the United Nations in nine provinces.
31. During the annual 16 Days of Activism against Gender-Based Violence
Campaign, held from 25 November to 10 December, the United Nations supported
outreach activities across the country in cooperation with national institutions and
civil society. Events included radio programmes, workshops and quiz competitions

16-03199

9/45

A/70/775
S/2016/218

aimed at mobilizing village elders, students, government officials and religious
leaders to address violence against women and girls.
32. Following the issuance on 2 September of the presidential legislative decree
on preventive detention, whose provisions contradict the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, to which Afghanistan is party, the United Nations
continued to provide legal analysis regarding the decree and advocate its revision to
include procedural protections required under the Constitution of Afghanistan and
the country’s obligations under international law to prevent the use of inappropriate
information to justify arbitrary detention, allow ongoing appe llate review and
reduce the risk of the torture and ill treatment of detainees. The United Nations
provided technical assistance to the Central Prison Directorate to ensure that prison
and detention staff wardens and staff and medical wardens report injuri es or
physical signs found on prisoners that could reasonably be attributed to torture or
inhumane treatment. The United Nations also supported the development of
standard operating procedures to ensure that the relevant information can be brought
to the attention of detection, investigation and monitoring agencies, in compliance
with the national action plan against torture and the applicable criminal procedure
provisions.

IV. Implementation of the Kabul process and the coordination
of development assistance
33. Economic growth following the security, political and economic transition that
occurred in 2014 remained slow. In January, the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
announced that its growth projection for 2015 had been revised downward for a
second time to 1.5 per cent and highlighted the need for immediate and transparent
reforms to boost economic confidence. The Afghanistan Living Conditions Survey,
released in December 2015 by the Central Statistics Organization, reported that
poverty rates had increased from 36 per cent in 2011 and 2012 to 39.1 per cent in
2013 and 2014, further demonstrating the detrimental effects of the transition on
Afghanistan’s economy. However, steps to mitigate the economic downturn began
with the initial implementation of the stimulus initiative, announced on
17 November by President Ghani. On 17 December in Nairobi, the Ministerial
Conference of the World Trade Organization approved the accession of Afghanistan,
subject to its ratification, by 30 June 2016.
34. Discussions continued between IMF and the Government of Afghanistan on
progress achieved on the current staff-monitored programme, scheduled to end in
February, and future options for engagement of the Fund. All quantitative targets of
the programme are reported to be on track, including domestic revenue -collection
targets, although targets were lowered to reflect revised growth projections and
delays in the implementation of new revenue measures. Discussions between IMF
and the Ministry of Finance continued on the 2016 revenue targets included in the
2016 budget. The Fund reported mixed progress on structural reform benchmarks,
including continuing concerns about the fragility of the banking system, with
significant fiscal risks.
35. On 18 January, the Government released a progress report on the commitments
made in the annex to the Self-Reliance through Mutual Accountability Framework
setting out short-term deliverables by 2016. Government and development partners

10/45

16-03199

A/70/775
S/2016/218

continued discussions on progress on priority reforms in preparation for the
ministerial-level development conference scheduled to be held in Brussels on 4 and
5 October. Discussions also started on the linkages between the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) summit to be held in Warsaw on 8 a nd 9 July and the
Brussels conference, with a focus on the fiscal impact of security sector spending
and the maximization of its contribution to development outcomes. In January, the
Government started to draft a new national development strategy, intended to
supersede the Afghanistan National Development Strategy (2008 -2013).
36. The Government continued its efforts to introduce the practice of community oriented policing among the Afghan National Police. In December 2015, the
Ministry of the Interior established 12 new community policing units in several
provinces, bringing their overall number across the country to 20, with the first
having been established in December 2013. On 28 December 2015, the Ministry
approved a manual for police-community consultations, which was submitted to the
Professional Development Board for integration into the curriculum of the National
Police training centre.
37. The Government continued to strengthen links between central and
subnational authorities to improve coordination between line ministries, on the one
hand, and provincial and district authorities, on the other, to improve service
delivery. President Ghani invited groups of provincial governors to attend special
Cabinet sessions to discuss security, governance and development in their respective
provinces. The third and fourth rounds of the meetings of provincial governors with
the Cabinet and the National Security Council took place on 6 and 27 January,
respectively. Meanwhile, the 2016 budget of the Independent Directorate of Local
Governance increased by 20 per cent compared with 2015, to $39 million, primarily
to support the logistical requirements of provincial authorities and for infrastructure
projects. Progress in other key government initiatives, including t he 100-day plans
adopted by line ministries, remained limited during the year. Civil servants
continued to face access challenges in the light of the deteriorating security situation
in many districts of the country, which had a negative impact on service delivery.
38. During the reporting period, the High Office of Oversight and Anti -corruption
completed the registration of the assets of all high -ranking State officials, in line
with the provisions of the Constitution and the law on overseeing the implementation
of the anti-administrative corruption strategy. The High Office also started the process
of verifying the registered assets of 16 officials. The international members of the
Independent Joint Anti-Corruption Monitoring and Evaluation Committee concluded a
two-week visit to Afghanistan on 26 February, during which Committee members met
with senior government officials, donor partners and civil society representatives to
assess the implementation of anti-corruption measures. In January, Balkh, Herat and
Kandahar provinces established anti-corruption working groups, comprising
provincial government, provincial council and civil society representatives to support
the vulnerability-to-corruption assessments and the Committee’s recommendations
aimed at addressing corruption throughout the country. On 16 February, President
Ghani dismissed a legal adviser who allegedly had been involved in the facilitation of
a real estate deal between the Ministry of Urban Development and an individual
convicted of involvement in the Kabul Bank scandal.
39. The Government reported improvement in the area of revenue collection. On
18 January, it reported that there had been a savings of $132 million in procurement

16-03199

11/45

A/70/775
S/2016/218

contracts since the creation of the National Procurement Commi ssion in February
2015. Reforms in the Afghanistan Customs Department included the introduction of
a new human resources policy and the establishment of a law enforcement unit. In
2015, the United Nations supported the modernization of 15 Customs offices i n
Afghanistan and their cooperation with the Customs services of neighbouring
countries. Those steps helped to increase Afghanistan’s annual Customs revenue
from $750 million in 2014 to $900 million in 2015.
40. A number of initiatives were undertaken to i mprove the transparency of
recruitment and the long-term sustainability of the civil service. On 2 January, the
National Assembly approved a presidential decree transferring the recruitment
authority of senior-level civil servants from the Independent Administrative Reform
and Civil Service Commission to the relevant ministries in order to decentralize and
accelerate recruitment processes. The Commission maintains an oversight role to
prevent violations of rules and procedures. On 4 January, the Cabinet app roved a
new unified salary scale harmonizing budgetary and extrabudgetary technical
assistance. The Government also decided to simplify access to the budgetary
“capacity-building for results” programme for all line ministries and independent
entities to support more comprehensive reforms.

V. Humanitarian assistance
41. The humanitarian situation deteriorated in 2015 as a result of intensified
conflict-induced displacements over a wider geographical area and an increasingly
difficult operating environment for humanitarian actors. In 2015, the national task
force on internally displaced persons, co-chaired by the Ministry of Refugees and
Repatriations and the United Nations, recorded 335,000 persons displaced in
Afghanistan as a result of conflict in 31 of the country’s 34 provinces. One of the
highest internal displacement figures recorded since 2002, it represents a 78 per cent
increase compared with 2014 and brought the estimated number of displaced
persons in Afghanistan to more than 1 million. Between October and December
2015, an estimated 73,400 individuals were newly displaced throughout the country,
particularly in the southern and eastern regions. Similar trends have continued in
2016. The majority of displacements were attributed to insecurity.
42. The rate of return of Afghan refugees through the United Nations voluntary
repatriation programme increased significantly in 2015, with 58,463 individuals
repatriated during the year, primarily from Pakistan. This represents a quadruple
increase compared with 2014, when returns were unusually low owing to
uncertainties associated with the political and security transition. In addition, 119,279
undocumented Afghans, including 100,042 spontaneous returnees and 19,237
deportees, returned from Pakistan, representing a 436 per cent increase compared with
2014. In 2015, 143,154 undocumented Afghans, including a small number of refugee
card holders, were deported from the Islamic Republic of Iran. There were 269,596
spontaneous returnees from the Islamic Republic of Iran as well, nearly all of them
undocumented individuals. While host communities supported many returnees,
obstacles in obtaining documentation and gaining access to services, together with
other issues, adversely affected their reintegration prosp ects. A majority of returnees
preferred to seek livelihood opportunities in urban centres, although they were
unable to do so in conflict-affected districts. To help overcome the main
reintegration challenges faced by returnees, the United Nations supporte d the

12/45

16-03199

A/70/775
S/2016/218

Government in formulating a comprehensive voluntary repatriation
reintegration strategy and establishing a reintegration working group.

and

43. In 2015, Afghanistan continued to host a significant number of refugees from
Pakistan. An estimated 74 per cent of the total number — which is estimated to be
200,000 pending reverification — were registered in Khost Province, with the
remaining refugees registered in Paktika Province. The majority of those refugees
arrived in Afghanistan as a result of military operations in the North Waziristan
Agency of Pakistan. Most are settled in host co mmunities, having been facilitated in
that process by tribal affinities. Humanitarian partners provided emergency
assistance as well as longer-term protection, even though resource limitations
constrained the response.
44. During the reporting period, the Government of Afghanistan and partners
discussed measures to mitigate the flow of Afghans out of the country. In 2015,
213,000 Afghans arrived in Europe by sea, accounting for 21 per cent of the total
number of arrivals and representing the second-largest population group, after
Syrians. An estimated 13 per cent were unaccompanied minors or separated
children, almost double the number registered in 2014. As of mid -February 2016,
the percentage of Afghans arriving in Europe by way of the Mediterranean Sea
increased to 26 per cent of overall new arrivals. In response to the increasing
numbers of Afghans arriving in Europe, several European countries started to deport
rejected Afghan asylum seekers. The Ministry of Refugees and Repatriations
reported the registration of 686 voluntary and 256 forced returns from countries
other than Iran (Islamic Republic of) and Pakistan at the airport in Kabul in 2015.
45. Mine action partners, coordinated by the United Nations, cleared 94 minefields
and 11 battlefields in the fourth quarter of 2015, with the result that 31 communities
in 10 districts were declared mine-free. At the end of the quarter, it was estimated
that 4,305 minefields and battlefields remained in Afghanistan, affecting 1,615
communities across 260 districts. In response to the use of explosive weapons in
northern and north-eastern Afghanistan in 2015, risk education and disposal teams
were deployed to those regions.
46. Humanitarian access constraints continued to be recorded under the United
Nations global monitoring frameworks. In total, 255 incidents against
non-governmental organizations, the United Nations and other international
organizations were registered in 2015, compared with 294 in 2014. Overall, 66 aid
workers were killed and 91 injured, compared with 57 killed and 47 injured during
the previous year. A total of 152 aid workers were abducted during the year. In
2015, Afghanistan reported 20 cases of polio, compared with 28 in 2014. However,
security and access challenges remained a particular concern for the polio
vaccination campaigns. In December 2015, 89,873 children could not be vaccinated;
13,493 children were not vaccinated in Helmand Province as a result of active
fighting; and 72,288 were not vaccinated in districts of Kunar and Nangarha r
provinces, where anti-government elements prevented access. Vaccination
campaigns in Kandahar and Zabul provinces resumed following negotiations held in
January 2016 with anti-government elements.
47. In 2015, the humanitarian strategic response plan was 70 per cent funded.
Overall humanitarian funding reached $425 million in 2015, of which
$292.2 million was designated for activities envisaged in the humanitarian strategic
response plan and $66.6 million was designated for the International Red Cross and

16-03199

13/45

A/70/775
S/2016/218

Red Crescent Movement. A total of $5.8 million from the Central Emergency
Response Fund was approved in mid-December to support humanitarian actors
responding to needs related to the 26 October 2015 earthquake and the post-conflict
environment in north-eastern Afghanistan, including trauma care, emergency food
rations and emergency inputs to restore agriculture and livestock for more than
227,000 people. On 27 January, the Government and the United Nations launched
the 2016 Humanitarian Response Plan appeal for $393 million, aimed at meeting the
critical humanitarian needs of 3.5 million people.

VI. Counter-narcotics
48. On 9 December 2015, the Ministry of Counter-Narcotics, with technical support
from the United Nations, released the Afghanistan Drug Report 2015, providing a
comprehensive analysis of the drug situation in Afghanistan. The report highlighted
substantial reductions in opium cultivation and production, alongside incremental
increases in drug seizures from 119,960 kg in 2013 and 2014 to 128,079 kg in 2014
and 2015. Seizures of hashish increased by 81 per cent, while seizures of heroin,
morphine and opium decreased by 32 per cent, 25 per cent and 14 per cent,
respectively. The report noted that an estimated 1.9 million to 2.4 million adult
Afghans used drugs, equivalent to 12.6 per cent of the adult population and more
than double the global drug use rate. The report also highlighted the limited treatment
capacity in Afghanistan, which has only 123 centres with the capacity to treat 10.7 per
cent of opium and heroin users. The report concluded by recommending measures
including improved coordination between national counter-narcotics agencies,
sustained support for enforcement, eradication, seizure and arrest operations, and
increased treatment capacity for drug users. To increase treatment capacity, in
December 2015 the Ministry of Public Health, in coordination with the Ministry of
Counter-Narcotics and with technical support from the United Nations, opened the
country’s first large drug treatment and rehabilitation centre, in Kabul.
49. Between 15 November 2015 and 9 February 2016, Afghan law enforcement
authorities conducted 571 counter-narcotics operations, resulting in the seizure of
approximately 194,607 kg of narcotics, which included 2,193 kg of heroin, 8,749 kg
of opium, 1,977 kg of morphine, 15.7 kg of methamphetamine and 181,672 kg of
hashish; the seizure of 27,719 kg of solid precursor chemicals and 1,327 litres of
liquid precursor chemicals; and the arrest of 629 suspects and the confiscation of
127 vehicles, 78 weapons and 78 mobile telephones. Three members of the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces were killed and nine wounded in the course
of those operations.
50. On 14 December, the Government of Afghanistan and the United Nations
co-chaired the high-level meeting of partners for Afghanistan and neighbouring
countries in Vienna, at which the Minister of Counter -Narcotics presented the
Afghan national drug action plan to counter the threat of illicit drugs. Meeting
participants expressed readiness to support the action plan as well as the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime country programme for Afghanistan for the
period 2016-2019, which was signed by the Minister of Counter-Narcotics and the
Office on 16 December 2015.

VII. Mission support
14/45

16-03199

A/70/775
S/2016/218

51. On the basis of a security threat analysis, United Nations staff members who
had been temporarily relocated from Faryab Province returned to their duty station
on 7 December. UNAMA started the required work at the new office premises in
Kunduz, following the destruction of the previous premises, to ensure full
compliance with minimum operating security standards. The UNAMA office in
Shebergan, Jowzjan Province, closed on 31 December as scheduled; its activities
were absorbed by the office in Mazar-e-Sharif.

VIII. Observations
52. Afghanistan has completed the first year of the Transformation Decade.
During this period of significant and complex challenges, the Government put
forward a reform agenda, endeavoured to strengthen regional economic integration
and sought to activate a peace process, while confronting an intensifying
insurgency. Those efforts notwithstanding, the impact of simultaneous political,
economic and security transitions has been slow to diminish. Persistently low rates
of economic growth, high unemployment and rising levels of conflict -related
displacement and civilian casualties have exacted a heavy cost on the population
and fuelled an increasingly vocal political opposition. In 2016, there is an urgent
need for the Government to sustain its unity of purpose and keep Afghanistan on the
path towards stability, accountability and greater self-reliance. In this regard, I
encourage the Government to move forward in making key outstanding
appointments.
53. I welcome the agreement reached by Afghanistan with China, Pakistan and the
United States on the establishment of the Quadrilateral Coordination Group on the
Afghan Peace and Reconciliation Process. This has reinvigorated prospects for a
peace process, whose realization is a fundamental component for durable political
and economic progress in Afghanistan. In order to advance, this important
endeavour must see the commencement of direct talks betwe en the Government of
Afghanistan and the Taliban. I welcome the endorsement by the Government of a
road map for this purpose and call on Member States to contribute to the creation of
an enabling environment for fruitful negotiation.
54. The effect of the conflict on the civilian population has continued to worsen.
In 2015, the conflict left more than 3,500 civilians dead, including an unprecedented
number of children, resulting in the highest number of civilian casualties — dead
and injured — recorded since the United Nations began systematic documentation
in 2009. I urge all parties to respect their obligations under international human
rights law and international humanitarian law to prevent attacks against civilians
and civilian infrastructure, and to protect medical and humanitarian workers and
facilities. Beyond public statements of concern, it is time for parties to the conflict
to demonstrate that they are truly committed to minimizing civilian casualties. They
must take demonstrable actions to that end. I commend the resolve and bravery of
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces personnel in the face of rising attacks
and welcome continued international support. Strengthening civilian casualty
mitigation mechanisms and accountability must be a priority in the institutional
development of Afghan security agencies.

16-03199

15/45

A/70/775
S/2016/218

55. I encourage the Government to consider revision of the legislative decree on
preventive detention in accordance with the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, to which Afghanistan is party.
56. Absent a peace agreement, the coming months will likely see an intensification
of the armed conflict. Reporting indicates an increasingly fragmented Taliban
insurgency, which has increased the volatility of the security situation . I am
especially concerned about statements by the Taliban identifying specific Afghan
media outlets and their staffs as military targets, signifying a shift in the conflict to
the information sphere. The murder of seven media professionals in Kabul by th e
Taliban on 20 January was a direct attack on freedom of expression, designed to
have a chilling effect on the circulation of ideas, views and news. I urge all parties
to the conflict to respect the right to freedom of expression and to protect journalist s
and media outlets. The capacity of the Government, humanitarian actors and
communities to respond to crises continues to be affected by the conflict as well. I
am troubled by the deliberate targeting of humanitarian workers and the increase in
the numbers of those killed and injured in 2015. Constraints on humanitarian access
disproportionally affect the most vulnerable members of society and render
assistance more challenging.
57. Electoral issues, including parliamentary and district council elections,
generated close attention during the reporting period. I am encouraged by the
submission of recommendations by the Special Commission on Electoral Reform,
which contributed to the advancement of discussions on this important topic. Broad
agreement by the Government and political stakeholders will be important to ensure
broad support for Afghanistan’s democratization process.
58. The continued decline in the economic growth rate is a cause for serious
concern. While it is encouraging that government measures to increase revenue
mobilization have shown results, fiscal pressures are expected to continue. With the
start of preparations for the NATO summit and the ministerial -level development
conference in Brussels, to be held in July and October, respectively, it will be
important that discussions reflect the fiscal impact of security sector spending on
the Government’s contribution to development outcomes. It is vital that Member
States meet their commitments for financial and security assistance through the
Transformation Decade, and with a view to enabling the implementation by the
Government of Afghanistan of its reform programme. Absent sustained and
predictable levels of donor support over the medium term, the corrosive effects of
conflict, poverty and the illegal drug trade may gain greater momentum and have an
impact on the broader region.
59. The support of countries in the region is crucial for economic growth in
Afghanistan, as well as for addressing common issues of peace and security. The
Islamabad Declaration adopted at the fifth Heart of Asia Ministerial Conference in
Islamabad reflected the commitment to ensuring an environment of mutual trust and
confidence in this regard and made a positive contribution to the advancement of
regional relations. I am encouraged by the quality and tempo of bilateral
engagement by Afghanistan with neighbouring countries and reference to concrete
projects, among them pipelines, ports, road and rail links, and economic corridors.
The countries of the region have much to gain from greater cooperation.
60. I am deeply concerned by the sharp increase in internal displacement figures
in 2015, representing an increase of 78 per cent compared with 2014, as well as by

16/45

16-03199

A/70/775
S/2016/218

the increase in the number of undocumented individuals retur ning from Pakistan.
Both issues underline the vital need to ensure sustainable solutions, including
progress in implementing the national policy on internally displaced persons, as
well as the comprehensive voluntary repatriation and reintegration strategy. An
uncertain future, diminishing economic prospects and security -related fears
persuaded more than 200,000 Afghans in 2015 to leave their country and seek
asylum in Europe in pursuit of new opportunities. This issue must figure in the
engagement between Afghanistan and countries to which its citizens are migrating.
61. Noting the continued importance of supporting political processes in
Afghanistan and monitoring the security situation, I would request the Security
Council to extend the mandate of UNAMA, set to expire on 17 March 2016, for a
further 12 months. In so doing, I reiterate the commitment of the United Nations to
a sustained partnership with Afghanistan, as set forth in the final report of the
Tripartite Review Commission on the United Nations in Afghanistan, submitted to
the Security Council in September 2015. I note the effective manner in which the
existing mandate was utilized throughout 2015, in particular its good offices
functions and engagement on critical human rights issues and donor co herence, as
well as support for the strengthening of national institutions and capacities in
priority areas as requested by the Government. I call upon Member States to
continue to provide the support required in order to maintain our engagement and
activities across the country.
62. I thank all the United Nations personnel in Afghanistan and my Special
Representative, Nicholas Haysom, for their continued dedication, under challenging
conditions, to fulfilling our commitments in support of the people of Afg hanistan.

16-03199

17/45

A/70/775
S/2016/218

Annex
Progress achieved against benchmarks
I. Security
Benchmark: sustainable Afghan security institutions and processes
capable of ensuring peace and stability and protecting the people
of Afghanistan
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Increase in the number of national police and
national army personnel mentored, trained and
operational according to an agreed structure

• As of 15 November 2015, there were 162,694 personnel on
the official Afghan National Army roster and 6,907
personnel on the Afghan Air Force roster, for a total of
169,601 personnel, a figure that is 32,306 below the endstate objective for January 2016. Also as of 15 November,
there were 144,591 personnel serving on the official Afghan
National Police roster, a figure that is 43,409 below the end state objective.
• Since 1 January 2015, the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) Resolute Support Mission has
provided training, advice and assistance to the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces.
• In December 2015, the Ministry of the Interior approved
the manual for police-community consultations, which was
submitted to the Professional Development Board for
integration into the curriculum of the National Training
Centre. A total of 82 women police councils were
established throughout the country to mentor and support
the educational and training needs of women police.

18/45

16-03199

A/70/775
S/2016/218

II. Peace, reintegration and reconciliation
Benchmark: national dialogue and regional engagement towards
pursuing constructive and inclusive processes to foster a political
environment conducive to peace
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Development and implementation of inclusive
national and regional processes to enhance
peace, reintegration and reconciliation efforts

• Since January 2015, a number of unofficial and official talks
have been held to enhance peace and reconciliation. In
February 2015, a delegation of Pakistan to Kabul, led by the
Chief of Army Staff, informed Afghan leaders that the
Taliban appeared willing to meet for peace negotiations.
• On 2 and 3 May, representatives of the political office of the
Taliban in Qatar participated in a “track two” meeting in
Doha, organized by the Pugwash Conference on Science and
World Affairs, an international non-governmental network.
Members of Afghanistan’s High Peace Council, former
Afghan government officials and representatives of former
parties of the mujahideen participated in their personal
capacity in discussions on national dialogue and conflict
resolution in Afghanistan.
• On 7 and 8 July, representatives of the Government of
Afghanistan and the Taliban met in Murree, Pakistan, for
their first formal discussions. The meeting was hosted by
the Government of Pakistan and was also attended by
observers for the United States of America and China. The
follow-up meeting in Murree, scheduled for 31 July, was
cancelled after the announcement on 29 July of the death of
the Taliban leader Mullah Omar.
• On 8 and 9 December, on the margins of the fifth Heart of
Asia Ministerial Conference held in Islamabad, the
President of Afghanistan, Ashraf Ghani, participated in
several meetings aimed at reviving the Afghan peace
process. Heart of Asia partners affirmed their support for
the resumption of the Afghan-owned and Afghan-led peace
process. It was decided that a series of quadrilateral
meetings would be held starting in January 2016 with
representatives of the Governments of Afghanistan, China,
Pakistan and the United States.

Increased ability by the Afghan authorities to
gather and provide substantiated, updated and
accurate information to the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011)

16-03199

• In 2015, the Government continued to provide
substantiated, updated and accurate information to the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011).

19/45

A/70/775
S/2016/218

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• On 27 March 2015, the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) approved the
addition of one individual and two entities to the List of
individuals and entities subject to the assets freeze, travel
ban and arms embargo under paragraph 1 of Security
Council resolution 2160 (2014). On 2 November 2015, the
Committee approved the addition of one individual to the
1988 List, under paragraph 1 of Security Council resolution
2082 (2012).
Increased public support for the peace process
through engagement at the community level and
with civil society

• On 15 June, the Afghanistan Ulema Islamic Appeal
Foundation together with the Kunduz independent ulema,
held a gathering in support of peace and reconciliation in
Afghanistan. About 400 independent ulema took part in the
event. The event was supported by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
• On 28 October, in Kabul, at a peace gathering on the future
of peace talks in Afghanistan, the Acting Head of the High
Peace Council, Abdul Hakim Mujahid, called upon the
Government and the international community to resume
peace talks with the armed opposition groups as soon as
possible.

III. Governance and institution-building
Benchmark: extension of government authority throughout the
country through the establishment of democratic, legitimate,
accountable institutions, down to the local level, with the capacity
to implement policies and to become increasingly capable of
sustaining themselves
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Increased ability of the Afghan authorities and
independent electoral institutions to manage and
conduct genuine and periodic elections, with due
regard to women’s participation and
constitutionally guaranteed quotas

• On 30 August and 21 December 2015, the Special Electoral
Reform Commission, established on 16 July, presented the
Government with two comprehensive packages of
recommendations for reform following broad-based
consultations. The Government welcomed the
recommendations for reform which addressed fundamental
issues related to enhancement of the sustainability,
integrity, inclusiveness and transparency of the electoral
process and institutions. The Commission formally
completed its mandate on 31 December.

20/45

16-03199

A/70/775
S/2016/218

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• On 6 September 2015, the Government approved all except
three of the short-term recommendations of the Commission
contained in the first set and issued two legislative decrees
on amending the electoral legal framework to enable the
incorporation of changes. The legislative decrees, submitted
to the Parliament on 7 October, were rejected by the lower
house in December and referred to the upper house.
• The Commission recommendation that 25 per cent of seats
in provincial and district councils be reserved for women
was approved by Mr. Ghani on 6 September 2015, thereby
reversing changes made in 2013 which had resulted in a
reduction of the quotas to 20 per cent and zero,
respectively.
• Pursuant to short-term recommendations of the Commission,
the process of creating new election commissions was
initiated in December through the establishment of a
selection committee responsible for nominating
commissioners for appointment by the President.
• From June 2015, the running cost of both electoral
management bodies, the Independent Election Commission
and the Independent Electoral Complaints Commission, has
been covered under the national budgetary framework. The
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
continued providing technical support to the electoral
institutions, including to the electoral reform process.
UNDP supported training programmes for the Independent
Election Commission on procurement, human resources and
finance management.
• On 29 December, the Government announced its readiness
to hold delayed parliamentary and district council elections
in the second half of 2016.
Establishment of the Independent Joint Anticorruption Monitoring and Evaluation
Committee and development of anti-corruption
benchmarks

16-03199

• The Government ensured a continuation of the oversight
role of the Independent Joint Anti-corruption Monitoring
and Evaluation Committee, including its monitoring of anti corruption measures in government institutions. In June and
August 2015, the Committee issued three vulnerability-tocorruption assessments covering the payment system for
martyrs and persons disabled by conflict, investigation
processes linked to the law on the elimination of violence
against women, and the registration of official documents
in the judicial system.

21/45

A/70/775
S/2016/218

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• On 17 September 2015, the Monitoring and Evaluation
Committee released its eighth six-month comprehensive
report. The report assessed the level of compliance with all
380 recommendations made since the establishment of the
Committee in 2010, with a sample of more than
30 institutions. The assessment revealed that in 76 cases
(20 per cent), recommendations were not taken into
consideration at all; in 176 cases (46 per cent),
recommendations were only partially implemented; and in
128 cases (42.66 per cent), recommendations were fully
implemented. According to the Committee, the results
clearly show the need for significant improvement in the
Government’s performance in respect of implementation of
the Committee’s recommendations.
• On 21 October, the Monitoring and Evaluation Committee
released a vulnerability-to-corruption-assessment of the
national electronic identification card project, in which
significant concerns were highlighted regarding practices
related to recruitment of personnel and procurement. As
requested by Mr. Ghani, the assessment was conducted in
response to the concerns raised by members of the National
Assembly and civil society.
• On 8 November 2015, the Monitoring and Evaluation
Committee released a review of selected foreign assistance
programmes in Afghanistan. The report examined
14 projects, funded by five different donors and covering
multiple sectors, including road construction, prison
reform, health-care services and humanitarian assistance,
with a view to providing examples of variations in aid
effectiveness.
Empowerment of anti-corruption institutions to
enable them to oversee a whole-of-government
approach to anti-corruption

• UNAMA continued, with donor representatives, to facilitate
the efforts of the Transparency and Accountability Working
Group, through regular monthly meetings, as a means of
supporting the Government in implementing anti-corruption
measures.
• In support of improved anti-corruption activities, the
Government issued an administrative order to eliminate the
duplication of functions among anti-corruption institutions,
including the High Office of Oversight, the Supreme Audit
Office and the Attorney General’s Office, and to separate
policy support functions from monitoring and oversight
responsibilities, with the intention of setting up an
independent anti-corruption commission with prosecutorial
powers. However, as the Government was compelled to
backtrack owing to technical issues, the investigative
authority in corruption cases consequently now lies solely
with the Attorney General. The post of Attorney General
remains vacant.

22/45

16-03199

A/70/775
S/2016/218

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• In 2015, the High Office of Oversight worked on the
amendment of the National Anti-corruption Strategy in
consultation with relevant stakeholders and in line with the
Government’s anti-corruption agenda.
• The Government continued to pursue the development of
extractive industries as an economic opportunity. In
response to the Government’s request of 8 February, the
United Nations provided support in the areas of policy
development, regulatory capacities and public consultations.
At the meeting of the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative held in Brazzaville in April, Afghanistan was
granted an 18-month candidacy extension in respect of
joining the Initiative.
• From 1 to 5 June, the Government met with anti-corruption
experts from two reviewing countries as regards conducting
a mandatory review of Afghanistan’s implementation of the
United Nations Convention against Corruption.
• The Government mainstreamed its anti-corruption efforts.
Five revenue-based ministries (of finance, mines and
petroleum, commerce and industries, transport and civil
aviation, and communication and information technology)
prepared anti-corruption plans. The plans were sent to the
Ministry of Finance in late 2015 and are currently awaiting
approval from the Office of the President. Upon approval of
the plans, quarterly reports are expected once
implementation starts. Other ministries are expected to
present similar plans in the coming year.
Annual publication of the asset declarations of
public officials

16-03199

• In accordance with article 154 of the Afghan Constitution,
on 20 June 2015, the Government distributed asset
registration forms to the President and two Vice-Presidents,
ministers, members of the Supreme Court and the Chief
Executive of the Government and his two deputies. At the
time of preparation of the present report, all senior officials,
with the exception of one, had complied with the request
and registered their assets with the High Office of
Oversight. The verification of assets began in December.
Owing to the mechanism’s complexity, verification of the
assets of the remaining officials will be launched in the
future.

23/45

A/70/775
S/2016/218

Indicators of progress

Metrics

Increased capacity of civil servants at the central,
provincial and district levels to discharge
functions and deliver services

• In 2015, a number of capacity-building training seminars
on five common functions (management, computers,
language, human resources and administration/finance)
were conducted by the Civil Service Institute for the
purpose of improving the quality of service delivery to the
general public. Training was delivered to a total of 4,023
civil servants, of whom 1,118 were female. A total of 2,083
were trained at the central level and 1,940 at subnational
levels. In addition, 702 senior and middle-level civil
servants received training on local governance and public
management in India, Malaysia, the Republic of Korea,
Singapore and Thailand.

Increased transparency and effectiveness of civil
service appointments

• The President issued an administrative decree in September
2015 which revoked the recruitment authority of the
Independent Administrative Reform and Civil Service
Commission. Instead, the decree authorized the ministries to
conduct the recruitment process for senior civil servant
positions. Since the issuance of the decree, recruitment has
been carried out by the relevant ministries, while the
Commission remains a monitor and observer during the
recruitment process and, in case of violations, can raise an
objection to or stop the entire process.
• Efforts to ensure merit-based recruitment of civil servants
at all levels continued in 2015. A further 58 district
governors, 30 directors (grade 2) and 800 civil servants
(grades 1-8) were appointed through that process.
Appointments were made at all levels, including through
the main office of the Independent Directorate of Local
Governance in Kabul and its provincial and district offices.

Strengthened civil service reform supported by a
comprehensive approach to capacity-building
and donor-funded technical assistance

• On 28 June, the President’s Special Representative on
reforms and good governance, Ahmad Zia Massoud,
presented his report on proposed administrative reforms
and offered recommendations on promoting capacitybuilding in the areas of anti-corruption, political
participation and the civil service.
• In November 2015, the Independent Administrative Reform
and Civil Service Commission pushed the Government to
finalize the civil service law, which had been drafted two
years ago and submitted to the Ministry of Justice for
review. As there had been no progress since then, the
President, on 16 December 2015, assigned to the second
Vice-President the task of forming a committee to review
the draft law and take necessary actions for its approval by
the Cabinet and the Parliament. The committee is now
reviewing the law.

24/45

16-03199

A/70/775
S/2016/218

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• The Ministry of Finance developed the new operational
manual of the Capacity-building for results project which
was finalized in December 2015. The purpose of the
development of the new manual is to re-energize the
capacity-building of donor-funded technical assistance and
strengthen the civil service reform agenda of the
Government.
Implementation of the subnational governance
policy and development of subnational
regulatory, financing and budgetary frameworks

• During the reporting period, several meetings of the
Ministries of Justice and Urban Development and the Kabul
municipality were held regarding the municipal law. All
concerned institutions agreed on the division of labour,
roles and responsibilities. The law has been referred back to
the Cabinet for further processing.
• On 4 March, Mr. Ghani issued a decree restoring the
oversight powers of provincial councils over local
government departments. Through that action, a strike was
ended by provincial councils, which had commenced after
the lower house of the National Assembly voted to remove
those oversight powers on 28 January.
• On 5 October 2015, the Cabinet approved the long-awaited
provincial budgeting policy. The policy is intended to
ensure a transparent, predictable and equitable provincial
budgeting process which allows for the consultation of
provincial entities during the national planning and
budgeting process.
• In November 2015, the Independent Directorate of Local
Governance submitted to the National Assembly its
amendments to the Local Administration Law.
• The subnational governance policy, adopted by the
Government in 2010, was reviewed by the new Government
in December 2015. The draft revised policy was then
submitted to the President and the Chief Executive for their
review and approval.

Development and publication of criteria for
administrative boundaries

• National and international institutions continue to use the
2009 internal boundary data set, as stipulated by the
Independent Directorate of Local Governance and the
Geodesy and Cartography Head Office.

Establishment of adequate infrastructure for
functioning government institutions, especially at
the subnational level

• Teleconferencing systems were installed at the Independent
Directorate of Local Governance headquarters and in
12 offices of provincial governors. The Directorate plans to
equip the remaining provinces.

16-03199

25/45

A/70/775
S/2016/218

Indicators of progress

Metrics

Establishment of credible and accessible judicial
and penal systems which respect and uphold the
human rights of all citizens

• The Criminal Law Working Group, chaired by the Ministry
of Justice, continued its regular weekly meetings whose
purpose is to review substantive provisions of the Penal
Code so as to improve clarity and incorporate prevailing
standards of international justice and human rights into
Afghanistan’s substantive criminal law.
• The Criminal Procedure Code Working Group, chaired by
the Ministry of Justice, continued its regular weekly
meetings with a view to completing commentary and
guidance notes in support of the implementation of the
rules of criminal procedure and practice.
• During 2015, the Care and Control Department of the
Supreme Court completed investigations related to
61 corruption cases of attempted bribery or forgery of
judicial documents, which involved six judges, 11 judicial
staff and 44 employees of other institutions. All
61 individuals were arrested and referred to the Attorney
General’s Office for prosecution.
• The number of lawyers registered with the Afghanistan
Independent Bar Association increased from 2,167 in 2014
to 2,645 in 2015.
• The UNAMA report on prison health services completed in
January 2016 established that some progress has been made
in the implementation of the United Nations Standard
Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson
Mandela Rules) as regards delivery of health services to
prisoners in a manner comparable with health services
delivery available to the community at large but that
additional efforts are required to fully implement the
standards, particularly as regards female prisoners.
• In December 2015, the Minister of Justice requested a
comprehensive assessment of existing juvenile
rehabilitation centres to ensure compliance with minimum
rules of treatment and to provide a basis for future reform.

26/45

16-03199

A/70/775
S/2016/218

IV. Human rights
Benchmark: improved respect for human rights of Afghans, in
line with the Afghan Constitution and international law, with
particular emphasis on the protection of civilians, the situation of
women and girls, freedom of expression and accountability based
on the rule of law
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Reduction in the number of incidents of unlawful
use of force and intimidation of civilians,
through compliance of relevant actors with
international law

• In 2015, UNAMA documented 11,002 civilian casualties,
(3,545 deaths and 7,457 injured), representing a 4 per cent
increase in total civilian casualties compared with 2014.
Some 62 per cent of civilian casualties were attributed to
anti-government elements, 17 per cent to pro-government
forces (Afghan National Security Forces (14 per cent),
international military forces (2 per cent) and pro government armed groups (1 per cent)) and 17 per cent to
unattributed crossfire between pro-government forces and
anti-government elements. Unattributed explosive remnants
of war were responsible for the remaining 4 per cent of
casualties, with children, by far, accounting for the largest
number of victims. Ground engagements between antigovernment elements and pro-government forces remained
the leading cause of civilian casualties, accounting for 4,137
civilian casualties (1,116 deaths and 3,021 injured), followed
by improvised explosive devices, accounting for 2,368
civilian casualties (713 deaths and 1,655 injured).
• In 2015, the United Nations-led Country Task Force on
Monitoring and Reporting on Children and Armed Conflict
documented 2,829 child casualties (733 killed and 2,096
injured), representing a 14 per cent increase compared with
2014.
• The Government continued the tracking of civilian
casualties through the civilian casualties tracking cell in the
Tawheed (the former Presidential Information Coordination
Centre) and began to develop a national civilian casualty
prevention and mitigation policy.
• In December 2015, the Interministerial Steering Committee
for the Protection of the Rights of Children endorsed the
national age assessment guidelines. The guidelines reflect
one dimension of the Government’s obligations to
implement the action plan and road map to compliance.
Adoption of these guidelines represents an important step
towards delisting the Afghan National Police, including the
Afghan Local Police, from the annexes of the SecretaryGeneral’s report on children and armed conflict.

16-03199

27/45

A/70/775
S/2016/218

Indicators of progress

Metrics

Improved awareness by Afghans of their rights
and by the Government of its obligations

• Under its National Plan on the Elimination of Torture, the
Government committed to ratifying the Optional Protocol
to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and to
establishing the national preventive mechanism on torture,
as required under the Optional Protocol to the Convention.
The Government also committed to withdrawing its
declaration, pursuant to article 28 of the Convention against
Torture, that it does not recognize the authority of the
Committee against Torture to conduct visits to Afghan
detention facilities and receive complaints from detainees.
The Government has neither ratified the Optional Protocol
nor withdrawn its declaration under article 28 of the
Convention.
• In February, UNAMA issues its third public report on the
treatment of persons whose detention is related to conflict,
which contained a set of recommendations. The
Government welcomed the report, endorsed the
recommendations therein and issued them in the form of a
National Plan on the Elimination of Torture later in
February. The National Plan includes a number of
legislative, preventive, educational and capacity-building
measures designed to promote accountability and to ensure
more effective implementation of Afghanistan’s obligations
to eliminate torture under international and domestic law.
However, the National Plan still lacked benchmarks and
timelines at the time of the preparation of the present
report.
• On 15 October, following the attack on and subsequent
control of Kunduz by the Taliban from 28 September to
13 October, the Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission issued a 20-page report on the violations of
human rights, international humanitarian la w and domestic
law that had occurred in Kunduz during that period. The
Commission also called for further investigations of the
violations committed by all parties. The Taliban rejected the
findings.

28/45

16-03199

A/70/775
S/2016/218

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• A total of 1,527 persons (of whom 901 were female),
comprising university students, local leaders, members of
provincial councils and provincial peace councils and civil
society youth groups, participated in training sessions
offered by the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality
and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), which
utilized the training manual issued by UN-Women on the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000). The 16 training sessions, which
covered the concepts considered in the Convention and
Council resolution 1325 (2000) and in other Council
resolutions, including resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009),
1889 (2009), and 1960 (2010), were held throughout 2015,
in the provinces of Baghlan (5-10 December), Balkh
(24 January-2 February), Daikundi (10-15 October), Ghor
(14-16 and 21-23 October), Kabul (10-19 January),
Kandahar (10-18 January), Kunduz (31 December 201413 January 2015), Samangan (13-22 January) and Takhar
(5-10 December).
• Provincial authorities, civil society representatives and
academic institutions joined the United Nations
“HeForShe” campaign launched by UN-Women in six
provinces (Balkh, Bamyan, Herat, Kabul, Kandahar and
Nangarhar) and five academic institutions (Kabul,
Gawharshad, Dunya, American University and Marefat
High School).
Improved impact of, and support for, legal and
policy measures to combat violence against
women and girls

• The technical support and advocacy provided by UNAMA
and actors enabled the Self-reliance through Mutual
Accountability Framework, adopted in September 2015, to
include solid short- and long-term deliverables and
indicators on women’s rights.
• UNAMA continued to work closely with the Ministry of the
Interior through provision of technical support for the
development of a confidential and comprehensive
complaint mechanism for survivors of sexual violence. The
draft concept was submitted for the Minister ’s approval.

16-03199

29/45

A/70/775
S/2016/218

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• The interministerial mechanism of the Women’s Protection
Centres Coordination Committee, supported by the United
Nations Trust Fund in Support of Actions to Eliminate
Violence against Women, obtained a waiver from the
President’s Office for the issuance of national identity cards
and passports for clients of Women’s Protection Centres
and their children. The provision of such documentation is
subject to the consent of male family members, which is
often not procurable by those clients. The waiver not only
has immediate benefits for the survivors of violence against
women but also sets a groundbreaking precedent in legal
procedures, which may be the basis for transformative
changes as regards the existing restrictions to movement
without a male’s consent and a chaperone.
• With the support of UNAMA, the Government published its
third consecutive report on the status of implementation of
the law on the elimination of violence against women. That
report reiterates the findings of previous reports and
provides an update on actions taken by the Government,
such as the expansion of prosecution units for the
elimination of violence against women (to 20 provinces so
far), awareness-raising with religious leaders and the
development of a proposal for a pilot specialized court for
the elimination of violence against women in Herat.
• In April and June, the Government appointed women to 4
ministerial positions out of a total of 25; and appointed two
women as provincial Governors, one of whom was later
appointed Deputy Governor of Kabul Province. The
proposed female candidate nominated to the Supreme Court
did not win a sufficient number of votes in the Parliament.
• The Government issued a regulation on the prohibition of
harassment in public life in September 2015, which also
provides protection from sexual harassment, constricting
women’s participation in public life. This also constitutes a
commitment made by the Government of Afghanistan under
the Self-reliance through Mutual Accountability
Framework.
• As of 2015, there are 23 operational Women’s Protection
Centres, of which 11 are supported by UN-Women, in the
provinces of Baghlan, Bamyan, Daikundi, Jawzjan, Kabul,
Kandahar, Kunar, Laghman, Nangarhar, Parwan, Samangan
and Takhar. Through these 11 Women’s Protection Centres
and five Family Guidance Centres, more than
3,500 survivors of violence have received protection, health
care, legal aid, mediation and other lifesaving services.

30/45

16-03199

A/70/775
S/2016/218

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• In October 2015, the online database of the National Action
Plan for the Women of Afghanistan was endorsed by the
Ministry of Women’s Affairs as a result of United Nations
advocacy. As one of the commitments of the Government of
Afghanistan under the Self-reliance through Mutual
Accountability Framework, the database enables open
access to data on the number of cases of violence against
women, tracking, and follow-up of those cases.
Improved awareness of, and support for, legal
and policy measures related to combating
impunity and furthering transitional justice

• In 2015, UNAMA continued to support the third phase of
the Afghan People’s Dialogue on Peace initiative. A national
Afghan People’s Dialogue conference, which provided a
forum for civil society activists from all over Afghanistan
who had been involved in the first two phases of the
Dialogue, was held in Kabul on 15 January 2015. The forum
enabled the activists to discuss key findings,
recommendations and provincial road maps towards peace
in the presence of government authorities. The Government
was called upon to support four priority areas, including:
– Promotion of responsive state institutions, human rights
and rule of law, and tackling of the culture of impunity
and widespread corruption;
– Strengthening security institutions and disarming and
disempowering illegal armed groups and other progovernment militias.
• In 2015, 32 provincial civil society committees, with a total
of 362 male members (74 per cent) and 127 female members
(26 per cent), were established to advocate with authorities
on the national road map for peace, the recommendations
contained in the summary report on phase II of the Afghan
People’s Dialogue and the provincial road maps for peace.
• In 2015, provincial advocacy committees held 278 advocacy
meetings in 32 provinces which were aimed at encouraging
provincial authorities, heads of law enforcement institutions,
security officials and public service providers to institute
reforms aimed at promoting respect for human rights and
the rule of law. Thirty-four provincial road maps for peace
were translated into Dari and Pashto for dissemination in
early 2016.

16-03199

31/45

A/70/775
S/2016/218

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• Afghanistan endorsed its National Action Plan on Security
Council Resolution 1325 (2000) in June 2015. Significant
progress had been made in the development of an
implementation plan by December 2015. The National
Action Plan covers areas where significant advancement of
women’s rights could be achieved, including combating
impunity by reinforcing formal accountability mechanisms
and revising prosecutorial policies. If implemented
properly, the Plan could become a tool with which to
promote women’s rights and access to justice.
Government fulfilment of reporting requirements
on international human rights covenants and
conventions and implementation of the
recommendations emanating from the universal
periodic review of Afghanistan under the
auspices of the Human Rights Council

• The Ministry of Justice Human Rights Support Unit
continued its coordination of the implementation of all
universal periodic review recommendations provided to
Afghanistan in 2014 as well as the recommendations of
human rights treaty bodies.
• The Human Rights Support Unit developed a detailed
matrix for all recommendations received and broke them
down into specific actions and progress or achievement
indicators. Advocacy on specific issues, such as access to
health care in detention, has already resulted in significant
improvement of medical services at Pul-i-Charkhi prison.
• From 7 to 11 March 2015, a five-day training session was
offered by an expert from the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights to nine Human
Rights Support Unit specialists, in cooperation with the
UNDP project on Justice and Human Rights in Afghanistan.
The training aimed at building the capacity of Unit staff to
address gaps in its ability to implement recommendations
emanating from the universal periodic review.
• Starting in September 2015, the Human Rights Support
Unit engaged in a process of reviewing and suggesting
amendments to Afghan laws from the perspective of
international human rights norms and standards. The
instruments considered included the Labour Law, the Law
on the Elimination of Violence against Women, the Juvenile
Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure. Further, it
engaged in reviewing indicators measuring implementation
of universal periodic review and United Nations treaty body
recommendations, in particular by the Ministry of Justice,
the Ministry of the Interior, the Attorney General’s Office,
the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission,
the National Security Directorate and the Ministry of
Women’s Affairs.

32/45

16-03199

A/70/775
S/2016/218

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• In compliance with the concluding observations of the
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women on the combined initial and second periodic report
of Afghanistan at its fifty-fifth session in July 2013, a task
force consisting of the Ministries of Foreign Affairs and
Women’s Affairs, the Ministries of Justice and Defence, the
Supreme Court, the Independent Electoral Commission and
the Attorney General’s Office, with the support of UNWomen, drafted an interim report on the steps taken to
implement recommendations 11 and 23. The report was
submitted to the Ministry of Finance on 16 January 2016
for final review prior to final submission to the Committee.
• At the time of the preparation of the present report, the
second national report to be submitted to the Committee
against Torture, due since 1996, was nearing completion by
an interdepartmental committee. The Afghan Independent
Human Rights Commission is expected to submit its own
reports; and civil society is expected to submit its own
parallel reports.
• On 22 December 2015, the Ministry of the Interior
inaugurated its fifth Child Protection Unit in Mazar -iSharif. This is the first Child Protection Unit to have been
established since 2011; the first four were established in
Afghanistan’s western region.
Increased capacity and commitment of the
Government of Afghanistan and the Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission, as the
Afghan national human rights institution, to
respect, protect, fulfil and promote human rights

• An Advocacy Committee on Bacha Bāzī, led by the Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission, jointly with the
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and UNAMA,
drafted legislation in 2015 that prohibits and criminalizes
bacha bāzī, a practice involving the sexual abuse of young
boys. The Committee submitted the draft law to the
Ministry of Justice for final review and endorsement by the
Council of Ministers and the Parliament. The stand -alone
draft was considered for possible inclusion in the broader
revision of the Penal Code.
• On 23 September, the President ordered the establishment of
a committee composed of the Office of the Attorney General,
the Ministry of the Interior and the Afghan Independent
Human Rights Commission to monitor and investigate
allegations of child sexual abuse.

16-03199

33/45

A/70/775
S/2016/218

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• UNAMA continued the sensitizing and training of the
Afghan National Security Forces on the protection of
children in armed conflict, particularly on the action plan
for the prevention of underage recruitment and the
obligations of the Government of Afghanistan with respect
to the 15-point plan contained in the road map to
compliance. Progress included endorsement in December
2015 of the national age assessment guidelines for the
Afghan National Security Forces as part of the
implementation of the law criminalizing underage
recruitment and use.

V. Economic and social development
Benchmark: Government policies, supported by the international
community, that promote sustainable economic growth and
contribute to overall stability
Indicators of progress

Metrics

National priority programmes are designed and
implemented with international support and
endorsement

• In 2015, different ministries under the leadership of the
President of Afghanistan prepared their 100-day plans for
effective, responsive and accountable governance. Plans
were launched through press conferences. This move raised
the expectations of the public and of domestic and
international stakeholders in respect of the Government ’s
efforts to improve governance, accountability and
transparency.
• On 7 April, the President announced an initiative to
establish a social contract between the Government and
citizens of the country, in keeping with the reform agenda
presented at the London Conference on Afghanistan. In the
first meeting of the Cabinet, on 23 April, Mr. Ghani
instructed ministers to formulate strategies for their first
100 days in office. On 26 May, at an extraordinary Cabinet
meeting, Mr. Ghani announced the launch of those plans by
the ministries, which was conducted in August 2015.

34/45

16-03199

A/70/775
S/2016/218

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• The Government is also following up on planned reforms of
development management structures. Six development
councils (on human capital development; construction and
infrastructure; finance and economic management; regional
economic cooperation; governance and justice; and land
and water management) were established by the Cabinet on
2 September to oversee the 12 national priority
programmes. Four of these councils (the High Economic
Council; the Human Capital Development and Employment
Council; the Infrastructure and Construction Council; and
the Regional Cooperation Council) have been convened.
• Further to the draft concept note prepared by the Afghan
Security Council, the Ministry of Justice and the Attorney
General’s Office prior to the 5 September 2015 Senior
Officials Meeting, the Government established in November
a Committee on the National Programme for Justice
Reform, chaired by the Office of Administrative Affairs.
The Committee was tasked to conduct an assessment of
ministries.
• The Government followed up on its London Conference
commitment (under the “Realizing self-realization:
commitments to reform and renewed partnership” agenda)
to consolidating national priority programmes and reducing
their number from 21 to 12. At the 5 September Senior
Officials Meeting, the Government committed to the
embedment of the concept notes of four national priority
programmes (on the citizens’ charter, urban development,
rural development, and women’s economic empowerment)
in a development framework, to be reviewed by the Cabinet
by the first half of 2016.
More equitable distribution of development
assistance and government expenditure
throughout Afghanistan

• The Provincial Budgeting Policy was approved by the
Council of Ministers on 5 October. The policy encourages
the deconcentration of the planning, formulation, execut ion
and monitoring stages of the budget within the confines of
a legal framework in accordance with the constitution and
other applicable laws. The focus of this policy is to utilize
the national budget to empower local governance so as to
enable communities at the provincial level.

Increased revenue collection and sustainable
growth based on Afghan resources

• In updated analyses released shortly before the 2015 Spring
Meetings of the World Bank Group, the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank revised 2014
growth estimates down to 1.3 per cent for 2014. On
5 January 2016, IMF informed donors that it currently
estimates gross domestic product (GDP) growth in 2015 at
1.5 per cent, a drop from earlier projections of 3.5 percent
(which were adjusted to 2 per cent in September 2015).

16-03199

35/45

A/70/775
S/2016/218

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• In January 2016, the Government reported that customs
revenues had increased by 17 per cent since December
2014 and registration of new taxpayers by 24.5 per cent.
IMF informed donors in a briefing that domestic revenue
collection in 2015 had been fairly strong, although targets
were lowered when growth projections were adjusted and
the authorities encountered delays in implementing new
revenue measures. In particular, domestic revenue
collection appears to have met the current target of
114 billion Afghan afghanis (approximately 1.6 billion
United States dollars at current exchange rates), subject to
final confirmation once the December financial reports are
received and reviewed. This is attributable to reforms in
both the Afghanistan Revenue Department and the
Afghanistan Customs Department, new revenue measures
and one-off receipts of tax arrears.
• Public finance management reform is ongoing. Public
Financial Management Road Map II was launched in
December 2015 and directorates are in the process of
submitting five-year roll-out plans.

36/45

16-03199

A/70/775
S/2016/218

VI. Regional cooperation
Benchmark: sustained and effective regional coordination in
support of prosperity, peace and stability
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Improved coordination of regional bodies and
increased regional investments

• On 14 January 2015, Mr. Ghani visited the United Arab
Emirates. An “Enduring strategic partnership agreement” on
security, civil protection and counter-terrorism was signed.
On 21 and 22 January, Mr. Ghani visited Turkmenistan,
where he discussed regional energy and transport
connectivity. Documents signed included a Memorandum of
Understanding on the Further Development of Cooperation
in the Area of Electric Power. On 19 and 20 April,
Mr. Ghani visited the Islamic Republic of Iran. The two
countries agreed on engagement in intelligence and security
cooperation in countering terrorism and drug trafficking. An
agreement was reached on measures to register all Afghans
in the Islamic Republic of Iran. From 27 to 29 April,
Mr. Ghani visited India. Five agreements were signed. On
20 November, Mr. Ghani visited Kazakhstan, where he
discussed bilateral trade, regional security and counter terrorism cooperation. Afghanistan and Kazakhstan signed
two agreements and three Memorandums of Understanding.
On 22 December, Mr. Ghani visited Azerbaijan. The parties
highlighted the potential for increased cooperation,
including a transit route from China through Afghanistan to
Azerbaijan, and signed a Memorandum of Understanding
and an agreement. On 23 and 24 December, Mr. Ghani
visited Turkey. The President of Turkey pledged continued
military, political, economic, commercial and cultural
cooperation with Afghanistan. Three documents were
signed.
• On 26 September, Afghanistan, China and the United States
of America co-chaired a high-level event on Afghanistan on
the margins of the session of the General Assembly in New
York. The Chief Executive of Afghanistan, Abdullah
Abdullah, highlighted the country’s “twin strategy” of
pursuing peace and taking advantage of the region’s
economic potential.
• On 30 November, Mr. Ghani and the Prime Minister of
Pakistan, Nawaz Sharif, meeting on the margins of the
twenty-first session of the Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(the Climate Change Conference), held in Paris, discussed
the Afghan peace process. Pakistan committed to work with
Afghanistan and those who wished to reconcile, and act
against those who reject peace.

16-03199

37/45

A/70/775
S/2016/218

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• On 27 December, the Chief of Army Staff of Pakistan,
Raheel Sharif, visited Afghanistan. The parties agreed to
work towards the peace talks between the Government of
Afghanistan and the Taliban within an AfghanistanPakistan-China-United States quadrilateral framework.
• Under the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, co-chaired by
Afghanistan, participating countries met to advance
confidence-building measures. On 27 February, a meeting
of the Regional Technical Group on Regional Infrastructure
Confidence-building Measures of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul
Process was held in Ashgabat. On 11 March, a meeting of
the Regional Technical Group on Counter-terrorism
Confidence-building Measures of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul
Process was held in Ankara. On 29 April, a meeting of the
Regional Technical Group on Counter-narcotics
Confidence-building Measures of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul
Process, held in Baku, agreed on 12 priority regional
counter-narcotics activities for 2015. On 8 September, at a
meeting of the Regional Technical Group on Disaster
Management Confidence-building Measures of the Heart of
Asia-Istanbul Process, held in Islamabad, agreement was
achieved on the road map for confidence-building
measures. Two meetings of the Regional Technical Group
on Trade, Commerce and Investment Opportunities
Confidence-building Measures were held in Delhi, India, on
1 October and 19 November. On 23 November, a meeting
of the Regional Technical Group on Education Confidence building Measures was held in Tehran.
• On 27 September, a Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process Senior
Officials Meeting was held on the margins of the meeting
of the General Assembly in New York. On 8 December, a
Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process Senior Officials Meeting
was held in Islamabad.
• On 9 December, the fifth Heart of Asia Ministerial
Conference was held in Islamabad. Mr. Ghani inaugurated
the Conference jointly with the Prime Minister of Pakistan.
The 2015 Islamabad Declaration calls upon the Afghan
Taliban and other armed opposition groups to join in peace
talks with the Government of Afghanistan, and stresses the
need for a collaborative regional security and counter terrorism approach. On the margins of the Conference,
Mr. Ghani and Mr. Sharif met bilaterally, and held trilateral
and quadrilateral meetings with the United States and
China, where the parties agreed to work together towards
enabling resumption of the peace talks.

38/45

16-03199

A/70/775
S/2016/218

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• On 11 March, the twenty-fifth meeting of the Tripartite
Commission for the Voluntary Repatriation of Afghan
Refugees from Pakistan was held in Islamabad, with the
participation of the representatives of Afghanistan, Pakistan
and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR). The parties agreed to support the
voluntary repatriation and reintegration of refugees, tak ing
into account Afghanistan’s absorption capacity. Pakistan
agreed to register all undocumented Afghan refugees. A sixmember bilateral committee was established.
• On 9 and 10 April, the working group on the drafting of the
Pakistan-Afghanistan-Tajikistan trilateral transit and trade
agreement finalized discussions on the draft agreement in
Dushanbe. The parties also discussed prospects for a
preferential trade agreement, joint business councils, and
cross-border logistical and administrative cooperation. On
24 April, Afghanistan, Kyrgyzstan, Pakistan and Tajikistan
signed the last documents pending for implementation of
the Central Asia-South Asia Electricity Transmission and
Trade Project. On 9 May, Afghanistan and Uzbekistan
signed a protocol agreement on bilateral cooperation in the
fields of commerce, power engineering, and transport and
transit. On 12 and 13 December, Mr. Ghani attended the
Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India Pipeline project
ground-breaking ceremony in Turkmenistan, together wi th
the President of Turkmenistan, the Prime Minister of
Pakistan and the Vice-President of India.
• On 27 August, the President of Turkmenistan visited Kabul.
Afghanistan and Turkmenistan signed two agreements,
three Memorandums of Understanding, and a joint
statement. Turkmenistan agreed to a fivefold increase in
electricity deliveries to Afghanistan.
• On 3 November, the Vice-President of China visited
Afghanistan. Afghanistan and China signed three
agreements. In the context of China’s increased investment
in regional connectivity, and particularly of the China Pakistan Economic Corridor announced in May, the VicePresident expressed a willingness to support infrastructure
connecting Afghanistan with its neighbours.
• On 4 September, the Sixth Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference for Afghanistan was held in Kabul. In his
speech, Mr. Ghani reiterated Afghanistan’s goal of
becoming a “roundabout” of ideas, people and goods.

16-03199

39/45

A/70/775
S/2016/218

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• On 17 December, the World Trade Organization approved
Afghanistan’s membership in the Organization.
• On 25 December, the Prime Minister of India visited
Afghanistan. India and Afghanistan stressed the importance
of regional connectivity and prospects for trilateral
cooperation with the Islamic Republic of Iran.
• On 23 November, the tenth meeting of the PakistanAfghanistan Joint Economic Commission was held in
Islamabad.
• On 19 May, in Kabul, Afghanistan and the Regional AntiTerrorist Structure of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization signed a protocol of cooperation. On 9 and 10
July, Mr. Ghani participated in the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization Heads of State Council Meeting in the
Russian Federation, where he called for a single regional
strategy to address terrorism and drug trafficking. On 14
and 15 December, Mr. Abdullah attended a Shanghai
Cooperation Organization Heads of Government Council
Meeting in China, at which means of encouraging regional
economic growth and cooperation, including with
Afghanistan and other observer States, were discussed.
Afghanistan applied for full membership in the
Organization.

40/45

16-03199

A/70/775
S/2016/218

VII. Partnership between the Government of Afghanistan and
the international community
Benchmark: coherent support by the international community for
Afghan priorities within an Afghan-led coordination framework
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Increased proportion of aid aligned with the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy and
government priorities

• The Government reviewed three years of annual
Development Cooperation Dialogues in order to finalize its
2012-2014 development cooperation report. The report’s
highlights include identification of the challenges in respect
of the definition of alignment, with reference to differences
in estimates of alignment percentages between donors and
the Government, and the ongoing national priority
programmes consolidation process. Plans were made for the
2016 Development Cooperation Dialogues, which were
expected to take up the topic of the definition of alignment,
in keeping with the recommendation of the 2012-2014
development cooperation report. The Government is
currently undertaking efforts to develop a refreshed
National Development Strategy, which could have an
impact on alignment assessments once it is completed and
adopted.

Improved accountability of procurement and
contracting on behalf of the Government and the
international community

• The National Procurement Commission, foreseen under
“Realising self-reliance” was established in March 2015. An
update on progress in meeting Self-reliance through Mutual
Accountability Framework (SMAF) deliverables, circulated
on 18 January 2016, confirms that the Commission adopted
nine service standards according to the amended
Procurement Law of 2015, in line with Framework
deliverable 4: “The National Procurement Commission
adopts and implements service standards according to the
2009 Procurement Law (as amended) by the second half of
2016.”
• The Government provided several updates on the
achievements of the National Procurement Commission in
2015, quantifying efficiency gains. According to the latest
update in January 2016, an estimated US$ 132 million was
saved thanks to procurement reforms, including the creation
of the Commission. The Government also reported that it had
recently approved 15 contracts for the Ministry of the Interior
for a total of 1.216 billion afghanis (US$ 17.7 million) in one
sitting, thereby saving an estimated 212 million afghanis
(US$ 3 million). In November 2015, the Government
reported that 32 companies had been debarred from February
to November 2015, and another 22 were being considered for
debarment, against 35 companies in the previous 42 months.

16-03199

41/45

A/70/775
S/2016/218

Indicators of progress

Metrics

Strengthening of the Joint Coordination
Monitoring Board in support of the Kabul
process and as a means of facilitating a regular
review of progress on Afghan priorities and
mutual commitments

• In 2015, the role of the Joint Coordination Monitoring
Board was reaffirmed by the Government and donors on
several occasions, including its role in consolidating
consensus ahead of the 2016 Brussels ministerial-level
development conference. The Government indicated its
intention to convene two meetings of the Board in 2016 in
preparation for the two 2016 international conferences on
Afghanistan (the NATO Summit to be held in Warsaw in
July and the Brussels ministerial-level development
conference).
• On 5 September, the Government and its international
partners reaffirmed their development partnership and
refreshed the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework,
now the Self-reliance through Mutual Accountability
Framework. Building upon areas of the Government reform
agenda entitled “Realizing self-reliance”, presented at the
2014 London Conference, the Framework includes an annex
identifying 37 short-term deliverables by the end of 2016.
These deliverables, and progress in reform in general, will
inform the lead-up to the 2016 ministerial-level
development conference in Brussels.
• Throughout 2015, the aid coordination group of heads of
donor agencies continued to meet regularly, alternating
between donor-only meetings hosted by UNAMA and joint
donor-government meetings hosted by the Ministry of
Finance. The regular meetings, accompanied by working
meetings of a subset of major donors, supported the ongoing
review of development progress and government and donor
mutual commitments.
• The Civil Society Joint Working Group has represented
Afghan civil society in high-level development meetings
and conferences since the July 2012 Tokyo Conference on
Afghanistan. Its role in monitoring progress on aid
commitments was reaffirmed at the 5 September Senior
Officials Meeting through the signing off on a “Mutual
Cooperation Mechanism” with the Administrative Office of
the President. The Civil Society Joint Working Group has
since developed a monitoring tool to assess progress against
commitments of the Self-reliance through Mutual
Accountability Framework.

42/45

16-03199

A/70/775
S/2016/218

VIII. Counter-narcotics
Benchmark: sustained trend in the reduction of poppy cultivation,
narcotics production and drug addiction
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Decrease in poppy cultivation, narcotics
production and addiction rates

• Opium poppy cultivation in Afghanistan decreased in 2015,
with the total area under cultivation being estimated at
183,000 hectares, representing a 19 per cent decrease over
the area of 224,000 hectares cultivated in 2014. Opium
production in 2015 was estimated at 3,300 tons,
representing a decrease of 48 per cent over the 6,400 tons
produced in 2014.
In 2015, opium prices increased in all regions of
Afghanistan, possibly the result of a decrease in supply.
However, at US$ 0.57 billion, or the equivalent of roughly
4 per cent of Afghanistan’s estimated GDP, the farm-gate
value of opium production had decreased by 33 per cent in
2015. This is the lowest level that has been observed since
2009 (not adjusted for inflation).
The overall number of poppy-free provinces in Afghanistan
remained almost the same, at 14, with only Balkh losing its
poppy-free status in 2015. Ninety-seven per cent of total
opium cultivation in Afghanistan occurred in the southern,
eastern and western regions of the country, which include
the country’s most insecure provinces. The southern region
accounted for 66 per cent of total cultivation, the western
region for 24 per cent and the eastern region for 7 per cent,
with cultivation concentrated in Kapisa, Kunar, Laghman
and Nangarhar provinces. The remaining regions (northern,
north-eastern and central) together accounted for 3 per cent
of cultivation.
• According to the Afghanistan National Drug Use Survey
2015, which combines urban and rural data, there are an
estimated 2.9 million to 3.5 million male, female and child
drug users in Afghanistan. The national level of adult drug
users is estimated at between 1.9 million and 2.4 million,
which represents 12.6 per cent of the adult population. This
figure is more than double the global drug use rate of
5.6 per cent for the adult population.
• In 2015, in response to the overwhelming drug addiction
situation in the country, the Government of Afghanistan
established 5 new drug treatment centres and upgraded 13,
with technical support from the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and other international organizations.

16-03199

43/45

A/70/775
S/2016/218

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• In 2015, following the Transition Plan, 26 treatment centres
were handed over to the Government by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and other international
organizations. These centres have an annual treatment
capacity of about 33,000. However, this allows only 8 per
cent of the opium and heroin users in the country to access
any form of drug treatment services.
Increase in effective interdiction and countertrafficking efforts

• In 2015, Afghan law enforcement authorities conducted a
total of 2,617 counter-narcotics operations which resulted in
seizures of 5,271 kilograms of heroin, 30,180 kilograms of
opium, 13 kilograms of morphine, 17 kilograms of
methamphetamine, 162,817 kilograms of hashish, 1,699
kilograms of solid precursor chemicals and 3,869 litres of
liquid precursor chemicals. In addition, counter-narcotics
operations led to the dismantling of three heroin
manufacturing laboratories and one methamphetamine
laboratory. Other operations included the seizure of 626
vehicles, 417 weapons and 407 mobile telephones. During
these counter-narcotics operations, 2,939 suspects were
arrested. In the operations, 16 members of the Afghan
National Security Forces were killed and 19 wounded.
• The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Regional
Programme for Afghanistan and Neighbouring Countries
provided comprehensive capacity-building and operational
best-practice support and networking opportunities for
criminal justice actors in the region for the tackling of the
narcotics problem. In 2015, this included supporting the
organization of the Afghanistan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan
ministerial review meeting held in Dushanbe in May. At this
meeting, law enforcement and judicial officials from drug
control agencies, ministries of foreign affairs, general
prosecutor’s offices and financial intelligence units
discussed legal and enforcement cooperation in order to
facilitate the formulation of strategies designed to support
the planning and implementation of operations through to
the prosecution of the suspects. Participants were of the
opinion that it was necessary to bring law enforcement and
judicial authorities together so as to boost the overall impact
of counter-narcotics efforts in the region.

44/45

16-03199

A/70/775
S/2016/218

Indicators of progress

Metrics

Increase in licit agriculture and related private
capital investment in areas previously used for
poppy cultivation

• In addition to a 19 per cent decrease in opium poppy
cultivation and a 48 per cent decrease in opium production,
remarkable progress was noted in the production and
productivity of licit crops. According to the Central
Statistics Organization, during the year 2014/15, increases
of 4.9 per cent, 5.06 per cent and 12 per cent were recorded
in the production of cereals, vegetables and fresh fruits,
respectively, whereas increases of 4 per cent and 10.1 per
cent were reported in the exports of dried fruits and carpets,
respectively, compared with the year 2013/14.
Approximately 40,000 tons of pomegranates, worth over
US$ 10 million, were exported to foreign countries from
southern Kandahar province.
• The Minister for Counter Narcotics attended the second
International Conference on Alternative Development, with
the facilitation of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, in preparation for the special session of the General
Assembly on the world drug problem in 2016. Global policy
makers, experts, development practitioners, and civil society
representatives from 27 countries participated in the event,
for the purpose of examining alternative development in the
context of the global development agenda.

16-03199

45/45
