A/RES/77/317

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
2 August 2023

Seventy-seventh session
Agenda item 68
Promotion and protection of human rights

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 24 July 2023
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/77/L.81)]

77/317.

International Day of Care and Support
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 2 the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, 3 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women, 4 the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Optional Protocols
thereto, 5 the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, 6 the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination 7 and the
International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families, 8 as well as other relevant international conventions and
treaties, which contain provisions relevant to persons providing and receiving care
and support,
Reaffirming the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development 9 and the
commitment therein to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions –
economic, social and environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, as well as
the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing
for Development, 10

__________________

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
Ibid.
4
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
5
Ibid., vols. 1577, 2171, 2173 and 2983, No. 27531.
6
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
7
Ibid., vol. 660, No. 9464.
8
Ibid., vol. 2220, No. 39481.
9
Resolution 70/1.
10
Resolution 69/313, annex.
1
2

23-14926 (E)

070823

*2314926*

A/RES/77/317

International Day of Care and Support

Recalling the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action 11 and the Programme
of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development 12 and the
outcome documents of their review conferences, while recognizing that the
achievement of gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls will
make a crucial contribution to progress across all the Sustainable Development Goals
and targets, including target 5.4, which recognizes and values unpaid care and
domestic work through the provision of public services, infrastructure and social
protection policies and the promotion of shared responsibility within the household
and the family as nationally appropriate,
Recalling also its resolutions 53/199 of 15 December 1998 and 61/185 of
20 December 2006 on the proclamation of international years and Economic and
Social Council resolution 1980/67 of 25 July 1980 on international years and
anniversaries,
Taking note of regional agreements and international, regional and national as
well as multi-stakeholder initiatives related to providing and receiving care and
support, including those that aim to guarantee the recognition, reduction and
redistribution of care work and the reward and representation of care and domestic
workers, to increase commitments toward economic justice and rights for all, and to
promote and effectively protect the human rights of women, children, persons with
disabilities and older persons,
Recognizing that comprehensive care and support policies aimed at reducing,
redistributing and valuing unpaid care and domestic work are conducive to the well being of society and all its members, in particular children, older persons and persons
with disabilities, and the achievement of gender equality and the empowerment of all
women and girls,
Recognizing also that support is an integral part of being able to live
independently and being included in the community, and recognizing further the
importance of increasing the resilience of older persons, persons with disabilities and
persons living with mental health conditions by strengthening legal and social
protection, adopting employment measures, providing better care and support
services and promoting long-term care and support at home and in the community,
with a view to ensuring their empowerment, autonomy and independence,
Recognizing further that unpaid care and domestic work remains invisible,
undervalued and unaccounted for in national statistics, and neglected in eco nomic and
social policymaking, and that women and girls, including adolescent girls, undertake
a disproportionate share of unpaid care and domestic work from one generation to the
next, as well as the need to adopt measures to reduce, redistribute and valu e unpaid
care and domestic work by promoting the equal sharing of responsibilities between
women and men within the household and by prioritizing, inter alia, sustainable
infrastructure, social protection policies and accessible, affordable and quality soc ial
services, including care services, child care and maternity, paternity or parental leave,
Noting that those providing domestic care and support constitute a significant
proportion of the workforce and that, globally, care work is carried out mainly by
women, many of whom are migrants or persons who are particularly vulnerable to
discrimination in respect of conditions of employment and of work,
Acknowledging that women and girls remain disproportionately affected by the
socioeconomic fallout from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and that
__________________

Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
12
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5 –13 September
1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
11

2/4

23-14926

International Day of Care and Support

A/RES/77/317

the disproportionate share of unpaid care and domestic work further exacerbates
gender inequality by limiting women’s agency to decide how to spend their time and
their ability to participate in decision-making processes and occupy leadership
positions, and poses significant constraints on women’s and girls’ education and
training and on women’s economic opportunities and entrepreneurial activities, and
recognizing the need to adopt a comprehensive and interg enerational approach in the
design and implementation of care policies,
Acknowledging also the role of community care and protection, especially
involving Indigenous Peoples, in respecting and protecting their traditional and
ancestral knowledge, in accordance with each corresponding system of cultural
values,
Acknowledging further the accelerated global trend of ageing of the population,
which will require more care work and support, and stressing the need to promote and
strengthen the estimation of the caregiving contribution and other activities of older
persons to the economy, including recognition of unpaid care for family members, in
particular by older women, and to ensure that national statistics in this regard inform
policymaking,
Stressing the need to recognize and value paid care work and care workers as
essential workers and the need to adopt measures that combat gender stereotypes
related to care and support, as well as those related to, inter alia, race, ethnicity, age
and migratory status, to reduce occupational segregation for care work, facilitate the
transition from informal to formal work and decent work, including with regard to
paid care and domestic work, and create quality jobs in the care economy and increase
the rewards and representation of paid domestic workers, including care workers, as
well as the need to realize women’s right to work and rights at work for those with
care responsibilities, including equal pay for work of equal value,
Mindful of the need to invest in the care economy and to create robust, resilient
and gender-responsive, disability-inclusive and age-sensitive care and support
systems with full respect for human rights with a view to recognizing, reducing,
valuing and redistributing unpaid care and domestic work and support,
Recognizing that civil society organizations, in particular those working on the
issue of care and support, including workers’ and employers’ organizations, women’s
and community-based organizations, youth-led organizations, feminist groups, faithbased organizations and other relevant stakeholders and networks, are contributing to
putting the need for care and support of people at the centre of relevant national
policies,
1.
Support;

Decides to proclaim 29 October as the International Day of Care and

2.
Invites all Member States, organizations of the United Nations system and
other global, regional and subregional organizations, as well as other relevant
stakeholders, including civil society, the private sector, academia and individuals, to
observe the International Day of Care and Support on an annual basis in an
appropriate manner in order to raise awareness of the importance of care and support
and its key contribution to the achievement of gender equality and the sustainability
of our societies and economies, as well as of the need to invest in a resilient and
inclusive care economy, including the development of strong and resilient care and
support systems;
3.
Invites the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the International Labour Organization to
facilitate the observance of the International Day of Care and Support, in
23-14926

3/4

A/RES/77/317

International Day of Care and Support

collaboration with other relevant organizations, mindful of the provisions contained
in the annex to Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67;
4.
Stresses that the cost of all activities that may arise from the
implementation of the present resolution should be met from voluntary contributions,
including from the private sector;
5.
Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the
attention of all Member States and organizations of the United Nations system to
encourage them to observe and carry out activities to commemorate, on a voluntary
basis, the International Day of Care and Support.
93rd plenary meeting
24 July 2023

4/4

23-14926
