UNITED

NATIONS

th
MEETING:

14 APRIL 1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2214) , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 10 April 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13885);
Special report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (S/l3888 and Corr.l) , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . , , . . , , . . , . . . . . . . . . .

1

SlPV.2214

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Ofjkial Records O/ the Security Cowwil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of R~~solutiom md
Decisions c~f the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2214th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 14 April 1980, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Porfirio

MUfiOZ

LED0

(Mexico).

Present: The representatives of the folIowing States:
Bangladesh,
China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

Provisional
1. Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2214)

of the agenda

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 10 April 1980 from the Permanent
Representative
of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13885);
Special report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(S/13888 and Corr.1)
The meeting was called to order at 4.15 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 10 April 1980 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13885);
Special report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (S/l3888 and
Corr. 1)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
In accordance with the decisions taken at previous
meetings [2212th and 2213th meetings], I invite the
representative of Lebanon to take a place at the Council table, and I invite the representatives of Israel,
Jordan and the Netherlands and the representative of
the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to take
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tue’ni Webanon) took a place at the Council table and Mr. Blllm
(Israel), Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan), and Mr. van Baaren
(Netherlands)
and Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation
Organization) took the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretatiort from Spanish):
I wish to inform the members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives of
Ireland and Italy in which they request to be invited
to Participate in the discussion of the item on the
agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without
the right to vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr, Mulloy
(Ireland) and Mr. La Rocca (Italy) took the places
reserved for them ut the side of the Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
The first speaker is Mr. Clovis Maksoud, Permanent
Observer of the League of Arab States to the United
Nations, to whom the Council has extended an invitation [2213th meeting] under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
4. Mr. MAKSOUD: The question before the Council today is clear. Until when can the United Nations
allow Israel to flout its resolutions, defy the international consensus and treat its functions, activities and
institutions with contempt? Until when can Israel
literally get away with murder? Until when can Israel
pose as if it is insulated from the world community
and behave as if it is immune from its sanctions and
from the impact of its inevitable condemnation?
5. Israel considers what takes place here to be an
exercise in futility; the veto power of its only ally
and sponsor can invariably paralyse the will of the
Council, If the veto is not forthcoming, then Israel
proceeds to defy the resolutions of the Council in a
manner that gives the impression that the United
Nations is helpless where Israel is concerned and
useless where the Arabs are concerned.
6. Perhaps, Mr. President, under your guidance and
stewardship, a formula can develop that would render
the resolutions of the Council, as they pertain to the
south of Lebanon, fully capable of implementation,
and allow the mandate given to the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
to be interpreted
in such a manner as to deter Israel from the continued
pursuit of its aggression and violation of Lebanon’s
sovereignty.

7. The question before the Council today concerns
a founding member of the League of Arab States.
Lebanon, in modern times, was the anchor of the
intellectual and cultural renaissance and revival of the
Arab nation. Lebanon has repeatedly played the role
of catalyst; a conceptual catalyst inasmuch as people
of diverse religious
affiliations
and ethnic backgrounds can constitute a common national entity, a
common citizenry; an operational catalyst, inasmuch
as the reinforcement
of Arab national
cohesion
required a throbbing awareness of the historical crosscurrents influencing the mind of the modern man; a
humanist catalyst inasmuch as Lebanon transformed
its geographical status as the crossroads of three continents to that of a cross-fertilizer of ideas and ideals
and an experiment in ongoing humanist synthesis.

in the performance of its tasks by the so-called
“de facto forces”. I should like here to make an
observation which, although semantic in nature,
implies major political consequences and connotations. The term “de ,facto forces” as applied to the
Haddad forces gives the impression that these are in
some way forces distinct from the Israeli military
establishment. In the south of Lebanon, they are not
distinct but, to all intents and purposes, an integral
and organic part of the Israeli strike force and an
instrument of Israel to undermine
the full implementation of resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978).
Not only are these forces considered to be composed
of mutineers, renegades and traitors by the legitimate
authority of Lebanon and by the people of Lebanon,
but they are crudely and openly used by the Israeli
strike force against Lebanon. Hence, if the term
“c/e f&to”
has to be applied, it has to mean that these
are the “de facto forces” of the Israeli military
presence and, as such, their existence constitutes a
violation of Lebanon’s sovereignty and of the ability
of the central Government of Lebanon to exercise its
authority, and have to be treated accordingly.

8. The immediate
problem before the Council has
been created by Israel’s entry into Lebanese territory. This is the latest manifestation
of Israel’s ongoing aggression against the south of Lebanon. That
the United States, because of its special relationship
with Israel, has been able to “persuade”
Isarel to withdraw its troops from Lebanon is a very marginal
aspect of the crisis. The United States, it must be
admitted,
has done that frequently
and repeatedly.
Yet, this has been the pattern: Israel dispatches its
armed forces into south Lebanon frequently
and
repeatedly; the United States, in order to minimize
dangers to its over-all policy in the Middle
East,
“asks Israel to pull back its troops”, and this goes
on. What does that mean? It means that Israel arrogates to itself the right and the freedom to transgress
Lebanon’s borders at will and on any pretext. Consequently, the ability of Israel to undertake acts of
military aggression against Lebanon-in
the south of
Lebanon-is
unchecked and the deterrent that would
disable Israel is rendered inoperative.
For that reason,
the Council has found itself, since March 1978 when
its resolution
425 (1978) was adopted unanimously,
lacking the adequate capability
to ensure the full
implementation
of that resolution
pertaining
to the
south of Lebanon.

11. In other words, these forces which have been
attacking UNIFIL
in the last few days are forces of
the Israeli strike force; they are used as a cover under
which Israel cynically defies the international
will.
In its use of them Israel crudely underestimates the
intelligence and the perception of the international
community
and the Security Council. The other
attribute that is usually affixed to these mutineer
elements is that of “Christian
militias”.
That the
usurpation of the word “Christian”
should be so
frequently made in this case implies a travesty of the
Christians of Lebanon, of their national and patriotic
commitments
and of their identification
with the
legitimate central authority of Lebanon.
12. Parenthetically,
Israel’s claim to be a “prolector” of Christians in south Lebanon is not worthy of
comment. But it would have had a semblance of a
chance to acquire temporary credence at least, if the
Christian citizens of northern Israel had been allowed
to return to their homes in Ikrit and Kafr Bar’am
during the last 25 years since they were forcibly evicted
from their homes. So, before claiming “protection”
of Christians in south Lebanon, let Israel protect its
own Christian citizens in the north of Israel and Galilee.

9. Why? The reasons are clear and the problem this
poses has to be dealt with by the Council head on.
It can no longer be dealt with hesitantly,
shyly and
apologetically.
The Council must signal that it not
only sticks to its resolutions pertaining to the south
of Lebanon but that those resolutions must be fully
complied with in so far as their execution is concerned.
Anything
short of full implementation
of resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978) in all their parts and
within a time-frame
that the Council will spell out
now would be construed by Israel, as usual, or as
always, as licence for it to pursue its objectives by
undermining
the authority of UNIFIL
and preventing
tlie full implementation
of the aforementioned
resolutions.

13. We are dealing with a situation in the south of
Lebanon that, if allowed to continue, will constitute
a very serious and imminent threat to peace not only
in the south of Lebanon but also in the region as a
whole. That is so obviQ,us and clear that it does not
warrant any further elaboration.
14. However, the contribution of the League of Arab
States to the Council’s deliberations requires that we
seek to shed some light on the nature of the limited
and long-range objectives of Israel in Lebanon, in
order to explain the causal factors that lie at the roots

10. The report of tbe Secretary-General
[S//38881
clearly shows that UNIFIL
is gradually being disabled
2

U

of Israel’s behaviour in the south of Lebanon and to
explain the level of arrogant cynicism with which
Israel treats the qUeStiOn of its aggression in the south
of Lebanon. What are these objectives’? Let me briefly
outline the principal Israeli objectives in this respect.

!

I
~

17. With respect to the PLO, its relationship with
Lebanon is a relationship between two members of the
Arab League. The PLO is not defined as the Israeli
representative seeks to define it, but as it is perceived
not only by the Palestinian people but by the Arab
Governments, including the Government of Lebanon,
namely as the sole legitimate representative of the
Palestinian people. The Palestinian people regard the
PLO not only as their own spokesman and fighter on
behalf of their rights, but as the framework of the
Palestinian people.

15. First, Israel seeks to discredit UNIFIL in order
to perpetuate Israeli capacity to undermine the
authority of the United Nations, its resolutions and
functions, not only in the south of Lebanon but
throughout the region. In this respect, nothing will
deter Israel from further defiance except the imposition of economic, political and military sanctions.
Hence, after Israel had occupied the south of Lebanon, it complied
nominally
with the injunction
pertaining to withdrawal, while cynically replacing its
forces, or most of them, by its proxies. By doing
so, Israel sought to maintain its military control in
the south of Lebanon while creating conditions that
prevented
further implementation
of the aforementioned Council resolutions. Israel has for many
years sought to discredit the United Nations in order
to forestall its own growing isolation in the world and
render United Nations resolutions inoperative so as to
destabilize
the various peace-keeping forces and
mechanisms of the United Nations in the Middle East.
In its attempt to discredit UNIFIL
and to undermine
its operations and functions Israel gives the task, as
the report of the Secretary-General amply shows, to
the renegade forces in order to contrive an impression
that the challenge to Lebanon’s central authority is
an “internal”
political question rather than a continuation of Israel’s violation of Council resolutions.

18. Secondly, Israel seeks to perpetuate the crisis in
the south of Lebanon as one of its regional bargaining
cards. In this respect, Israel realizes that the United
States, in view of its special relationship with Israel,
can exercise credible leverage on it on any particular
issue at any particular time. Because of the so-called
Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty, Israel has concluded that
the United States wants to show some “results” on the
West Bank-Gaza issue. Therefore, the thrust of United
States potential for pressure has to be diverted and
diffused and can be if another issue on another front
remains open. Let me explain. The United States,
Israel believes, must be able to hand President Sadat
some “progress” on the so-called autonomy negotiations. This is due to the fact that if no “progress”
is made and no tangible results emerge, then President
Sadat’s stature within the Arab world will be further
damaged and rhis, in the United States view, would
further compound his problems within Egypt itself.
That is how Israel reads the American position.
Hence, in order to keep United States pressure
diffused, there must always be another issue on
another front. That is one of the basic reasons for
Israel’s continued aggression in the south of Lebanon.
The Israeli Government believes that if the United
States is faced with the two problematic issues at the
same time, then its potential for pressure will be diluted
and it will have to postpone using its leverage on
Israel, if not remove that leverage altogether. That will
help Israel to buy time to achieve its objectives both
in the West Bank-Gaza area and in the south of
Lebanon.

16. I should like at this point to reply very briefly to
some of the allegations and statements made this
morning by the representative
of Israel [2213rh
meeting]. First, he alleged that at the Arab Summit
Conference held in Tunis the Palestine Liberation
Organization and President Sarkis had differed on the
interpretation
of the resolutions of the Summit, as
reported by Reuters. I should like to state very
categorically that President Sarkis is a signatory of
the resolutions of the Tunis Summit. Lebanon, the PLO
and all the Arab States are committed to the implementation of those resolutions. The signature of the
President of Lebanon is binding and provides a more
credible description of his position than does a Reuters
report, cited by the Israeli representative. My second
correction concerns the statement that the solution of
the problems of Lebanon can be handled by the
removal of “alien forces”. Let me state that what
are called “Syrian forces” in Lebanon are Syrian units
under the umbrella of an Arab League force, called
the Arab Deterrent Force. They are there by virtue of
a resolution of the Arab League and at the invitation
of the Government of Lebanon, to remain until their
functions are deemed terminated
by their own
Commander-in-Chief,
who happens to be the President of Lebanon. Until then they are to be considered
part of Lebanon’s legitimacy. Any attempt to distort
these facts is an attempt to distort the reality of
Lebanon.

19. Thirdly, Israel seeks to achieve ‘in the south of
Lebanon final strategic military hegemony. The south
of Lebanon, in Israel’s view, must be cleared of any
military presence at the moment, whether Lebanese
or United Nations. In this repect, I should like to
welcome the announcement made this morning
[ibiri.] by Mr. Tukni, the representative of Lebanon,
that the Lebanese Army has decided to participate,
within the operational framework of UNIFIL,
in the
implementation
of the role of UNIFIL
under its
mandate. It is hoped that the necessary interpretation
will be given to the mandate of UNIFIL
that will
provide it with deterrent capacity and the ability to
implement the tasks entrusted to it.
20. Israe] has sought to extend its military hegemony
up to the Litani River and that extension, Israel thinks.
3

must be recognized in return for Israel’s acceptance
of a form of administrative presence, perhaps a legal
presence, for the Lebanese authority.
If Israeli
strategic hegemony over the south is acquiesced to and
recognized, then Israel can take it as a precedent to
be applied to other contested borders and other
violated borders, With a demilitarized
Sinai and an
emptied south Lebanon, Israeli claims to strategic
hegemony over the Golan Heights in Syria and to
establish colonial, military settlements in the Jordan
Valley and in the West Bank will not be seriously
challenged by the United States or by those who
refuse Israel’s pax hebraica objectives. Besides, Israel
will then be able to project its “success” in the south
of Lebanon as an application of a three-year-old
suggestion that the legal borders need not be the
“secure borders of Israel”.
21. Fourthly,
in that respect, Israel has another
objective in the south of Lebanon, namely, preparing
the ground for gaining control over the waters of the
Litani River under the pretence of “sharing the
waters”, as it is doing in the West Bank today. It is
evident from the report of the Secretary-General that
the south of Lebanon is viewed by Israel as a variation
on the West Bank. It is true that Israel’s challenge to
Lebanese sovereignty over the south is not so glaring,
but it is quite clear.
22. Fifthly, by challenging Lebanon’s central authority and preventing it from deploying its forces
in the south, Israel seeks to keep Lebanon in a state
of what I should call “manageable turmoil”
so that
Israel itself may become a determining political facto]
in an Arab State. I use the term “manageable”
deliberately,
because an unmanageable turmoil in
Lebanon would be too exacting and perhaps too costly
for Israel. On the other hand, it is Israel’s perception
that turmoil must continue so that Israel may share in
the management. With that view in mind, Israel seeks
to cut off the south of Lebanon from Lebanon itself,
to all intents and purposes, in order to expand the
area of vulnerability so that Israel can, at a later stage,
determine most of the developments in the region.
Israel will then be recognized not only as a State but
as a Power in the area and then its “right to exist”
will become coterminous or synonymous with the
right to dominate.
23. Sixthly, if Israel succeeds in perpetuating the
haemorrhage in southern Lebanon, it then anticipates
the failure of the pluralist experiment in Lebanon.
Israel is planting the seeds of disintegration throughout
the country. Since Zionism was the driving force in
building the usurping racist entity and State of Israel,
zionizing the region by bringing about its disintegration
is intended to impoverish the national will and to
weaken the propensity in the Arab world to build
modern and viable States. In other words, Israel seeks
to impugn Arab national existence through Lebanon’s
continued turmoil and disintegration.

24. That is a broad sketch of Israel’s motives and
objectives in the south Of Lebanon. In other words
Israel seeks, in a Small
geographical area called th$
south of Lebanon, to settle big accounts. It seeks to
keep the United Nations peace-keeping forces aad
other United Nations mechanisms off balance, It
seeks to keep the drive for Lebanon’s national unity
and cohesion off balance. It seeks to keep Arab com.
mitments to a just and comprehensive
peace in the
region off balance. It seeks to keep the Palestinian
ability to achieve what the international
community
recognizes as legitimate national rights off balance,
It seeks to dismember
the Palestinian
people hY
dividing it into a variety of Palestinian constituencies,
In that respect, Israel seeks to generate conditions in
which the Palestinians, wherever they may be, would
consider hopeless their right to have a State in their
homeland and start a quest for a substitute homeland
in the various areas of their transitional residence. That
hopelessness could become the means of fuelling
demographic disruptions and of drying out the demographic potential for a Palestinian State in the Palestinian homeland.
2.5. It is those objectives that render the crisis in the
south of Lebanon much more far-reaching and much
more ominous. That is why the incidents mentioned
in the Secretary-General’s
report cannot be dealt with
in isolation from the overall context of Israel’s
strategic, territorial,
demographic
and ideological
objectives in Lebanon. That is why the League of Arab
States and all the Arab States are committed to seeing
to it that resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978) are fully
implemented or that this Council addressed itself to the
causes and reasons for their not so far having been
fully implemented.
If the reasons for their defective
implementation
show that a redefinition of the mandate
of UNIFIL
is required, then let there be a redefinition. If a new resolution is required that will provide
the mandate of the Council with additional teeth to
enable it fully to implement its will, then let there be
a new resolution.
26. In the mean time, let not the fact that Israeli
troops entered and withdrew, whether partially Or
fully, be an excuse for distracting the Council’s atteation from the urgent need to evolve a credible deterrent
to Israel and its proxies, so that Israel will realize
that its transgressions are costly, that its pampered
arrogance is no longer tolerated and that the exceP
tional treatment it seeks is at an end.
27. That Lebanon should reinforce its national unity,
exercise full authority over all its territories and recover
its creative role after five years of tragedy are not only
a Lebanese necessity, a Palestinian necessity, an Arab
necessity and an international
necessity but also a
human necessity. Lebanon’s resilience will trigger a
speedy recovery in direct proportion to the credible
implementation
of the Council’s will and resolutions,

Y

d
3,
le
:i
It
Y
lie
.n
Y
:,
IY
9.
d”
ir
d
it
It!
II-

!e
h
d
h
‘s
iI
b
‘8
Y
le
n
se
.e
i.e
0
le

Ii
,r
lIt
,e
d
I-

28. The PRESIDENT

(interpretationfiorn

Spa/lish),-

The next speaker is the representative ofJordan, whom
I invite to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
29. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): The last person to be
speaking about terrorism and children is the representative of the Zionist entity, whose terrorist arsenal,
from the air, by sea and on land, has killed and maimed
literally tens of thousands of innocent Palestinian
refugees, including thousands of children. Of course,
they do not appear on the television screens, but still
they have been killed and maimed,
30. NOW, those people, who should never have been
in refugee exile in Lebanon but on their ancestral soil
in Palestine-an
exile of three decades, or is it
32 years?-are the victims of almost daily shelling and
aerial and sea bombardment, in addition to territorial
incursions by Israeli troops or Israel’s notorious
henchman and surrogate, who has gone to the extent,
of proposing that Lebanon’s boundaries be moved up
to the Litani River when he suggested the other day
that the permanent Armistice Agreement personnel
operate near the Litani, and not on Lebanon’s international borders.
31. The Israel army’s reprehensible and aggressive
action against Lebanon during the past week has very
ominous overtones indeed, for more than one reason.
32. For one thing, it is a flagrant violation, with a
total lack of concern, of the inviolability and territorial
integrity of a sovereign independent Member State.
This undercuts the principal tenet of the Charter.
Whether the invading force was a battalion or a division is a peripheral consideration which does not
mitigate or diminish the essential fact of aggression and
invasion. Such acts of aggression must not be allowed
to pass without the most serious repercussions and
punishment, if the integrity of the world organization
is to be preserved. If lawless and aggressive Israel
can commit such aggression with impunity, then you
can only expect repeat operations at the whim and will
of reckless Zionist military commanders, who have
hardly disguised their scorn for the United Nations
and its affiliates and for everything it stands for. The
price, of course, is paid by hundreds of thousands
of constantly roaming Lebanese citizens and Palestinian refugees, and in the ruins of ancient and
historic towns and villages like Sur, Sidon and countless others. They are there for all to see.
33. Moreover, there are the audacious shelling of
UNIFIL’S
headquarters at Naqoura, the shameless
imprisonment and ill-treatment of the personnel of the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization in
Palestine (UNTSO),
and the injuries which that
shelling inflicted upon the United Nations Personnel
and equipment, equipment which must be upgraded to
enable them to defend themselves, at least. Those
lightly-armed
and valiant officers and men, rePre-

senting scores of respected countries and regions,
representing the world, went to the Middle East as an
interim peace-keeping force to separate combatants
but not to assume a combat role. The cowardly attack
against them by the Israeli aggressive forces and the
mercenary on their payroll, Major Haddad, goes a long
way towards exposing the true nature and ugly face of
an entity whose dark history has been stained with
blood, violence and hate long before and since its
inception. And yet it is still a member of a world body
dedicated to eradicating lawlessness and violence.
34. And what is it that prompted those Israeli commanders to commit their outrageous attacks against
Lebanon and the emissaries of the United Nations
-our emissaries? They claim that UNIFIL
and
UNTSO had failed to detect the raiders of an Israeli
colony, Misgav Am. But if the Israeli aggressors had
had any sense of restraint, any sense of proportion,
or respect for the United Nations, they would have
easily recognized that the mission of both UNIFIL
and UNTSO is not to police internal security within
Israel, for if that were their mandate, then Israel
should allow them to be stationed across the Armistice
Line within Israel, to operate as a fourth or fifth
electronic fence against any incursions. And we all
recall that UNIFIL was prevented from taking over the
whole strip of territory along the border between
Lebanon and Israel, and that the Israelis handed over
that territory to their agent, who commands what are
known as the defucto forces. Now, if the pervasive
and extensive security apparatus of the Israelis failed
to detect an incursion, under what formuIa or by what
mathematical computation does one expect a token
force to perform in a fool-proof manner, when the
armed camp-which is Israel-failed to protect itself?
35. Indeed, having seen UNTSO officers at work in
the mid-1950s and before the 1967 Israeli aggression,
I can testify not only to their objectivity and dedication
but also to their highest proficiency. They know a
footprint or the type of sole from a shoe if they find
one. I understand-although
I would welcome correction if my information is incomplete--that
the
UNTSO personnel, who have three decades of
honourable tradition behind them, were unable to
detect any traces of footprints or severed electronic
wires. This clearly suggests that the raid on the Israeli
settlement could have been carried out by resistance
personnel from within, and not by incursion from
without. This perhaps also explains the shameful
manner in which UNTSO
personnel-unarmed
officers and men-were roughed up, taken captive
and immobilized. The Israelis evidently did not wish
those impeccable officers to seek the facts and report
them, as they have always done during the past three
decades, to United Nations Headquarters and the
Security Council. Not only were those valiant officers
taken captive: their observation posts were simultaneously wrecked, their immobility assured.
36, The representative of the Zionist . entity
. .. . in _Palestine has shed crocodile tears over the child whose

40. In conclusion my last remark is that, unless
the Council takes drastic action, including sanctions,
the whole Middle East will inevitably
find itself
plunged into the throes of a devastating conflict that
will pose a most serious threat to world peace and
security.

death we all deeply regret. But who shot that child?
It is clear from all reports that the child was the victim
of precipitate
and incessant attacks by the Israeli
armed forces upon the premises in which the five
resistance youths had taken up positions. The deathtoll included all five youths, as well as Israelis,
among them 16 wounded Israeli soldiers. This was
reported in the press. The encounter lasted for almost
nine hours, and the building was rocked by extensive
gun fire. It is a miracle that the casualty toll within
the premises was not much higher, especially among
hapless children.

41. I take this opportunity
to express our deep
gratitude and appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his persistent and unceasing efforts over the past
week in confronting the perils that Israel’s aggression
had posed to the inviolability
of Lebanese territory,
as well as to both UNIFIL
and UNTSO, whose men
are risking their lives in the line of duty in a valiant
and thankless task. We pay our deepest condolences
to the families of those valiant United Nations officers and men who gallantly gave up their lives, and
we wish a speedy recovery to those who were
wounded.

37. In similar situations which have occurred in
many parts of the world, security forces do not act
with reckless haste but resort to arms after exhausting
all other peaceful options-or
at least some of them.
This is not because the security forces of those countries lack the overwhelming
fire-power to overcome
resistance; it is because all those countries have a
healthy and laudable respect for the lives and dignity
of innocent human beings who are inadvertently
caught up in situations beyond their control. But in
their reckless arrogance and irresponsibility,
the Israeli
troops, forgoing responsible
restraint for bravado,
could not care less who gets killed, and the quicker the
better, even if it assuredly involves some of their
citizens, even the children. Everybody knows that
the five youths who lost their lives were on a oneway journey of no return, so why imperil the children’s
lives by reckless and precipitate military action?

42. The fundamental and unalterable fact is that the
Palestinian refugees should not have to be in Lebanon
in the first place; they should not have to cut through
electrified fences in order to reach their land and
homes in Galilee, a land that is their birthright, as
mandated by the General Assembly in resolution 194
(III) and reconfirmed each year. The usurpers of their
lands are the undoubted culprits.
43. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): The Security
Council has convened this emergency meeting to
consider the new acts of naked aggression on the part
of Israel against the sovereign State of Lebanon.

38. It is the duty of the Council to take effective
measures to ensure that no aggressor shall be permitted
to go berserk. The Council must ensure the total
withdrawal of all Israeli armed forces from Lebanese
soil promptly and unconditionally
in accordance with
its own resolutions. The Israelis are playing cat-andmouse with all of us, and the Secretary-General
informed us this morning [2213rh /nrefing] that he
could not verify that all the Israeli forces had withdrawn from Lebanese soil, Likewise, it is incumbent
upon the Council to safeguard at least the honour and
safety of United Nations emissaries, if not the aggrieved victims
of prolonged
Israeli occupation,
oppression and brutality. We have all seen, but were
hardly surprised by, the Israeli
armed vandals
attacking, killing, maiming and breaking the bones of
innocent Palestinian
students and children in the
occupied territories in various colleges and schools,
even though they had had nothing to do with what
happened in the Israeli colony.

44. On 8 April, regular units of the Israeli army, with
the support of both tanks and aircraft, once again
violated the national boundary of Lebanon and carried
out a mass incursion into Lebanese territory. In this
way, Israel has once again grossly violated the
generally recognized norms of international
law and
overtly violated the numerous resolutions of the
Council whose purpose was to preserve Lebanon’s
sovereignty
and territorial
integrity
from Israeli
encroachments.
45. Israel’s aggressions have not concealed its
intention to establish control over the Lebanese territory by cynically arrogating to themselves the right
to carry out patrols in southern Lebanon, to carry
out engineering works there and so forth. What we are
really talking about is the fact that Israel, while
rendering intensive military and material support to
its agents in Lebanon, namely the anti-Government
forces of Haddad, is also continuing its efforts directly
to assert its military presence in the southern part of
Lebanon and openly to occupy part of Lebanese
territory.

39. But what could we expect from an entity that,
with American financing, technical know-how and sale
of the most sophisticated
engines and equipment
-10 days ago, one of the prime General Electric
engines used for jets was sold to the Israelis-has
become a merchant of death and one of the top
exporters of arms, as we saw with our own eyes on
the CBS television programme
“60 Minutes”
yesterday?

46. Recently the world witnessed the continued
escalation of aggressive action on the part of the Israeli
military and its right-wing Christian henchmen against
6

&l
d
a

u-

unless
ctions,
1 itself
kt that
ce and
r deep
kneral
38 past
ression
rritory,
se men
Valiant
jlences
1s offi.
:s, and
) were
hat the
ebanon
hrough
Id and
ght, as
ion 194
of their
ocialist
ecurity
ting to
he part
In,
y, with
: again
carried
In this
ed the
1w and
of the
janon’s
Israeli
led its
;e terri.
le right
I carry
weare
, while
port to
rnment
1irectlY
part Of
:banese
ntinued
: Israeli
againSt

Lebanon. The Israeli aggressors have systematically
subjected the southern Lebanese towns of Tyre, Sidon
and Nabatiye and numerous villages to artillery and air
attack. Under fire from Israeli artillery and air forces,
peaceful Lebanese citizens and Palestinian refugees
including women, old people and children, have
perished. As a consequence of the massive shelling of
17 March, the premises of the children’s medical centre
in Tyre were razed to the ground. In fleeing from the
shelling and bombing, thousands of peaceful inhabitants have had to leave their homes. Lebanon is
suffering tremendous material damage. At the same
time as the densely populated areas of southern
Lebanon are being shelled, Israeli warships are
threatening the Lebanese coastline and Israeli planes
are carrying out regular overflights over virtually all
the Lebanese territory.
47. With the help of Haddad’s units, Israel has made
it impossible for United Nations troops to establish
control over the Lebanese areas that border Israel.
Armed provocation against United Nations forces in
southern Lebanon has caused casualties among the
military personnel. According to information provided
by the Secretary-General,
the headquarters of the
United Nations forces has been destroyed; and the
information available about the departure of the Israeli
forces essentially does not change the situation. The
dangerous situation that has arisen as a result of Israeli
provocations remains.

’

Israeli sponsors are ready to dictate to the United
Nations where lJNTS0 observers should be located
and where UNIFIL
forces should be deployed.
Haddad’s units have destroyed United Nations forces’
helicopters, deliberately fired upon their positions,
invaded their posts and seized their personnel,
50. This defiant and cynical policy on the part of the
Israeli leadership could not have been pursued had
they not enjoyed virtually unlimited support from their
Powerful Protectors. It is no secret to anyone that the
United States not only gives Israel the broadest
possible and the most generous financial and economic
assistance, not only provides it with the most
sophisticated forms of weaponry, including offensive
weapons, but also prevents the Security Council from
taking any resolutions that would condemn the Israeli
armed provocations and provide for the adoption of
effective measures to put an end to them.
51. War and peace in the Middle East are closely
tied up with the interests of many States and peoples
in that area. Therefore, a comprehensive and just
settlement of the Middle East problem is feasible only
provided that due account is taken of the legitimate
rights of all the parties concerned, including, of course,
the Arab people of Palestine. And for that there is only
one genuine basis, which derives from the relevant
decisions adopted by the United Nations: Israel’s
restoration to the Arabs of all the territories that it
seized in 1967, the granting to the Palestinian Arabs
of the right to self-determination and to create their
own State, and the assurance that all States in the area
will enjoy an independent and secure existence.

48. The aggressive and provocative actions of Israel
committed against Lebanon and the United Nations
troops that are located in Lebanon’s southern region
are part and parcel of the expansionist policy pursued
by the ruling circles of Israel for which military
adventures against neighbouring Arab States have long
been used as a means for realizing far-reaching plans
for annexation. It is also quite obvious that by stepping
up military tension, Israel is endeavouring to distract
the attention of international public opinion from the
ongoing negotiations regarding the so-called administrative autonomy for the Palestinians, the purpose of
which, as has been clearly demonstrated during the
current discussion in the Council of the question of the
exercise of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, is to facilitate Israel’s consolidation of its
annexation of the Arab lands that were occupied in
1967.

52. As has been shown by the entire course of events
in the Middle East over the last year, any attempts to
solve the Middle East problem on the basis of separate
deals will not bring the Middle East any peace or
stability. On the contrary, such deals will simply serve
to increase tension in that area, they will further
increase Israel’s aggressiveness, and they will
encourage its designs of usurpation in the neighbouring
Arab States.
53. Once again I should like to draw the attention
of the members of the Council to the fact that we have
very frequently encountered facts attesting to the gross
and cynical violation by Israel of both the spirit and
the letter of the Charter. Israel has trampled underfoot
the resolutions of the Council, which have been
designed to bring about a normalization of the situation
in southern Lebanon. And once again we are forced
to ask: how long does the Security Council intend to
acquiesce in such conduct by a Member State? After
all, the Council has available to it all the necessary
facilities to bring the usurpers of Tel Aviv to heel.
How long, one wonders, will the representatives of the
United States systematically support Israel in the
Council, thus undermining the prestige and effectiveness of the United Nations?

49. Today no one can any longer harbour any doubt
that the conclusion of the Camp David accords in September 1978 and the signing in March 1979 of a
separate Egyptian-Israeli
treaty have given free rein
to Israel to pursue its increasingly implacable, defiant,
aggressive and expansionist policy against Lebanon
and the Palestinian refugees located in that territory.
This is precisely the reason for the daily increasing
number of armed provocations carried out by Israel
and the separatist Haddad’s units under its control
against Lebanon, against Palestinian camps and against
UNIFIL in southern Lebanon. Today Haddad and his
7

Nations observation posts along the armistice demarcation lines, but also by the so-called Israel Defence
Forces (IDF). I really do not know what those letters
stand for because their whole history is one of aggression and criminal attacks.

54. In conclusion, I should like to stress that the
Soviet delegation believes it essential for the Council,
in the light of recent events in the south of Lebanon,
to adopt a resolution containing clear-cut and unambiguous terms which would not only call for strict
respect of the territorial integrity, sovereignty and
political independence of Lebanon within the confines
of its internationally
recognized boundaries,
but
also provide for the adoption of effective measures
against the Israeli aggressor.

59. In the report presented by the Secretary-General
on 11 April we read:
“On 24 March, IDF personnel at border pilIar
33 fired about 40 rounds of light machine-gun and
small arms over the heads of the observers when
they appeared on the roof of OP Mar.” [S/33888,
para. 8.1

55. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of the Palestine
Liberation Organization. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
56.

Mr. TERZI

(Palestine Liberation

I am sure that it has not escaped the members of the
Council that this constituted obstruction-the
use of
arms against the United Nations in the exercise of its
mandate to establish observation
posts across the
frontiers.

Organization):

At the outset I should like to make it very clear that
the Palestinian presence in Lebanon is not the choice
of the Palestinians. The Palestinians are in Lebanon
as a result of an onslaught, a holocaust, an attempt at
genocide by the Zionist armed gangs which have
driven the Palestinians out of their homes by force.
The Palestinians are in Lebanon in transit until they
return to their homes. It should be made very clear
that the Palestinian, wherever he is, has the inalienable
right to return to his home, that is, Palestine. So there
are no Palestinian “infiltrators”,
there are no Palestinian “terrorists”;
there are Palestinians who are
exercising their inalienable right to return to their
homes. Sometimes violence ensues in that exercise,
but in principle it is a right that they are exercising,
the right to return to their homes. The Palestinians
have no intention whatsoever of taking any other
country to replace their own, and they have no plan
to usurp the land of others and declare it their own
State.

60. From that report and from the SecretaryGeneral’s reports of yesterday and this morning, we
also learn about the acts of the de facto forces. I really
see no difference between def~cro forces and the IDF,
for, as the Secretary-General
has said, the de &to
forces are mainly supported by Israel. So there is one
source-Israel-for
the de facto forces and the IDF.
All these forces, which constitute just one force, are
there to obstruct the work of the Security Council
and of the United Nations. I see no need to state that
since March-as
a matter of fact since the beginning
of 1980-these obstructions have been laid in the way
of implementing Council resolutions.
61. The real issue is the re-manning
of the two
UNTSO
observation
posts established
along the
armistice
demarcation
lines between Israel and
Lebanon on the basis of the General Armistice Agreement of 1949. Well, we all know that these lines are
the internationally
recognized borders between Palestine and Lebanon and I am not aware of any change
in those lines since then,

57. On 14 December 1979, the Secretary-General
presented a report to the Council in which he stated:

“As I mentioned in my last report, an essential
factor in the success of UNIFIL
in the implementation of its mandate is the position of the Israeli
Government, inasmuch as the de fuctcj forces are
supported by Israel.” [S/13691, para. XI.]

62. The Israeli plan is very clear. It is to create
serious incidents designed-and
designed long before
7 April, the date repeatedly mentioned in the course
of this discussion-to
obstruct the work and also
designed for something more serious than that, Two
years ago, when the Council was discussing the Israeli
invasion of south Lebanon, I had the opportunity
]2071st ineeting] to mention the Zionist plan and
designs on south Lebanon as presented in 1919 by the
Zionist Organization. That plan was to include all of
south Lebanon-from
the vicinity
of Sidon and
following the watershed of the foothills of Lebanon
as far as Karaon and thence to El-Bireh-in
the Jewish
homeland promised by Balfour. But some friends of
mine said, “Zehdi, this is going too far back in history:
things change”,

And later in the same document, the Secretary-General
stated:
“It is my earnest hope that, given the clear will
of the Council, and in the interests of peace, all
parties concerned will increasingly
extend to
UNIFIL
the co-operation that it requires.” [bid.,
para. 61.1
58. That report was adopted and accepted by a
resolution of the Council [resolution 459 (1979)] but
what was the result? The result was obstruction and
violent harassment, not only by the so-called de fixto
forces which have sought to prevent the re-manning
by UNTSO
observers of long-established
United

63. Well,
-ex-Moshe

8

things do not change. Moshe Sharrett
Shertok-was
the Prime Minister of

Israel in the 1950s and he wrote in his diaries that, al
a meeting held on 27 February 1954 with Ben-Gurion,
Lavon and Dayan in connection with Israel’s plans
for an invasion of Egypt and Syria, Ben-Gurion mentioned that he had a concrete proposal outlined to
disrupt Israel’s most peaceful neighbour at that time
-as Sharrett says-namely
Lebanon. I shall not
read the minutes of that meeting or the annotations
on them, but permit me to read out the letter that
Ben-Gurion sent to Moshe Sharrett on 27 February
1954. Ben-Gurion wrote:
“Upon
my withdrawal from the Government
I decided in my heart to desist from intervening and
from expressing any opinion on current political
affairs so as not to make things in any way, or under
any aspect, difficult for the Government. And if you
had not called on me-the three of you: yourself,
Lavon and Dalan-I
would not have, of my own
accord, expressed an opinion on what is being done
or what ought to be done. But as you called on me,
I deem it my duty to comply with your wishes and,
especially, with your own wish as Prime Minister.
Therefore, I permit myself to go back to the issue
on which we disagreed and to insist on it: that is,
the issue of Lebanon.
“It is clear that Lebanon is the weakest link in
the Arab League. The other minorities in the Arab
States are all Moslem, except for the Copts. But
Egypt is the most compact and solid of the Arab
States and the majority there consists of one solid
bloc of one race, religion and language, and the
Christian minority does not seriously affect their
political and national unity. Not so the Christians in
Lebanon. They are a majority in the historical
Lebanon, and this majority has a tradition and a
culture different from those of the other components
of the League.
“Also, within the wider borders-this
was the
worst mistake made by France, which amplified the
frontiers of Lebanon-the
Moslems are not free to
do as they wish, even if they are a majority there,
and I do not know if they are indeed a majority,
for fear of the Christians. The creation of a Christian
State is, therefore, a natural need. It has historical
roots and it will find support in wide circles in the
Christian world, both Catholic and Protestant.
“Normally,
this would be almost impossible, first
and foremost because of the lack of initiative and
courage of the Christians”-these
are the words of
Ben-Gurion-“But
at times of Confusion
Or
revolution
or civil war things take on another
aspect, and even the weak declares himself to be a
hero, Perhaps now is the time to bring about the
creation of a Christian State in our neighbourhood.
“Without our initiative and our vigorous aid, this
will not be done. It seems to me that this is the
central duty-or at least one of the central duties-

of our foreign policy. This means that time, energy
and means ought to be invested in it and that we must
act in all possible ways to bring about a radical
change in Lebanon. Sasson and our other Arabists
must be mobilized. If money is necessary, no amount
of dollars”-dollars,
mind you-“should
be spared,
though the money may be spent in vain.
“We must concentrate all our efforts on this issue.
This is a historic opportunity; missing it will be
unpardonable. There is no challenge against the
world Powers in this; everything should be done, in
my opinion, rapidly and at full steam.”
64. This is the letter of Ben-Gurion dated 27 February
1954 and addressed to the Prime Minister. It shows
exactly what the aims of the Zionists are in Lebanon.
65. But Mr. Sharrett notes on 16 May 1954 the
following:
“In a joint meeting of senior officials of the
Defence and Foreign Affairs Ministries, Ben-Gurion
again raises the demand that Israel ‘do something
about Lebanon’. According to Dayan, the only thing
that is necessary is to find an officer, be he just a
major;” -call him Haddad if you want-” we should
either conquer his heart or buy him with money to
make him agree to declare himself the saviour of
the Maronite population. Then the Israeli army will
enter Lebanon, will occupy the necessary territory
and will create a Christian rkgime which will ally
itself with Israel.”
And now he comes to the point: “The territory from
the Litani southward will be torally annexed to Israel”.
These are the aims ofthe Zionists in invading Lebanon,
pretext or no pretext. Again. on 28 May 1954, Sharrett
notes:
“The Chief of Staff continues to insist that we
should hire a Lebanese officer who will accept to
serve as a puppet so that the Israeli Army may
‘respond’ to his appeal to ‘liberate Lebanon from
its Moslem oppressors’.”
66. I do not want to take the lime of the Council
by reading out the entire memoirs of Sharrett and the
aims of the Zionist movement and its plans for annexing
southern Lebanon. What the Council is considering
here is an attack by Israel--call it the defcrcrcl forces,
or call it the IDF-on
the United Nations. What is
the Council really going to do about it’? Should it
sit with its arms folded? A medical centre has been
blown up: there has been an attempt to destroy the
peace effort; helicopters have also been blown UP,
I understand.
67. Some reference has been made to an incident at a
kibbutz. NOW, since January we have been sending a
number of letters to the Secretary-General drawing
his attention to the attacks, almost daily attacks, on

families
martyrs
came.

the refugee camps in Nabatiye, in Aiyshieh, in Rihan.
In February there were attacks on the Tyre region,
with heavy artillery,
that continued for hours and
people were killed. Again in February, there were
more attacks and more artillery fire against our refugee camps, and so on. And there was a really serious
escalation in March, which again occurred long before
7 April. We know that on 21 March there was an
attack by the Israeli artillery, with 130 weapons on
Sidon. Some people were killed, some people were
wounded. I could quote their names as they appear in
the paper. I was in Beirut in March, and Mr. Walcott
was there when we received information
that the
Israelis were using 175mm artillery,

70. In our opinion, the Council should speak out in
the strongest possible terms, not only to condemn,
but also to impose sanctions. The Charter speaks of
sanctions against those who violate it. What more
violation do you want than an attack with heavy
artillery,
destroying
UNIFIL
aircraft, destroying
United Nations medical teams? This is what we hope
that the Council will do: that it will condemn specifically and clearly Israeli violations of the General
Armistice Agreement and of the territorial integrity
of Lebanon,

68. What I am trying to bring to the attention of the
Council is this: we do not have those sophisticated
weapons, those means of destruction; we do not have
aircraft; we do not have 175mm artillery. So, does
the possession of those means of destruction mean
that the world should remain silent regarding the crimes
committed
every day by the Zionists against our
people? We never saw those things in the media; we
never read about them in the press.

71. We trust that, very soon, the Council will be able
‘to tell us that the Israeli forces of invasion have
definitely departed from Lebanese territory, that their
henchmen are no longer there, that UNIFIL
is
stationed on the internationally
recognized borders
of Lebanon and that one step towards peace has been
scored in favour of the Council; and perhaps later on
the Palestinians can go back to their homes and use
the highways instead of having to take the mountain
paths.

69. We are concerned about the way the United
Nations has been treated, about the way that UNIFIL
has been treated. We wish to convey, through you,
Mr. President, our condolences,
not only to the

Litho

in United

Nations.

New

York

but to the States from which the UNIFIL
killed by the Zionists in southern Lebanon

otl300

83761462~-Au~~ust

1986-2.425
