188

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

9.
Requests the Commission on Human Ri~hts _at i_ts
thirty-eighth session thoroughly to examme the situation
El Salvador on the basis of the fmal report of the Special
Representative of the Commission on Human Rights:
I 0. Decides to maintain under consideration, during its
thirty-seventh session, the situation of human rights ~nd
fundamental freedoms in El Salvador, m order to examme
anew this situation in the light of additional elements provided by the Commission on Human Rights and the Economic and Social Council.
IO/st plenar_\' meeting
16 December 19RJ

m

36/156.

Humanitarian assistance to refugees in Djibouti

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 35/ 182 of 15 December 1980 on
humanitarian assistance to refugees in Djibouti,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolutions
1980/11 of 28 April 1980, 1980/44 of 23 July 1980 and
I 981/4 of 4 May I 981 on assistance to the refugees 111
Djibouti,
Having heard the statement of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, 1·' 4
Taking note with satisfaction of the report _of the _Secr~tary-General on humanitarian assistance to refugees m D.11bouti 135 and the report of the High Commissioner annexed
thereto,
Deeply concerned about the persistence of the food shortage in the country, which has been aggravated by the devastating effects of the prolonged drought.
Aware of the determined efforts made by the Government
of Djibouti to cope with the refugee situation, despite the
impact of the devastating effects of the prolonged drought.
Aware also of the consequences of the social and economic burden placed on the Government and people of
Djibouti as a result of the influx of refugees and t_he subsequent impact on the national development and mtrastructure of the country,
Noting with satisfaction the concern and continued efforts
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Children's Fund, the World Health Organization, the World Food Programme and the intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, which have
worked closely with the Government of Djibouti in the relief
and rehabilitation programme for the refugees and droughtstricken population in Djibouti,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on humanitarian assistance to refuge_es
in Djibouti and that of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees annexed thereto:
2. Appreciates the efforts made by the High Commissioner to keep the refugee situation under constant review
and invites him to continue his humanitarian assistance to
the refugees in Djibouti:
3. Requests the High Commissioner to continue to ensure that adequate assistance programmes are organized for
the refugees and to maintain close contact with Member
States and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations concerned to mobilize the necessary assistance to
the Government of Djibouti to cope effectively with the
" 4 Official Records of rhe Gi'lwru/ A 1.1e111h/1. /'hirrr si,rh Session, T/11r,/
Committee. 56th mcetinF, para, I 1
"'A/36/214.

refugee situation aggravated by the debilitating effects of
the drought:
4. Calls upon all Member Stat~s,_ the organ!zations of
the United Nations system. the spec1ahzed agencies ~nd the
intergovernmental and non-governmental orgamzat1ons to
continue to support the efforts made by the Government_ of
Djibouti to cope with the needs of the refugee population
and other victims of the drought:
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operatio~ with_
the High Commis~ioner, to review the present s1tua~1on ot
refugees in Djibouti and to report !o the Economic and
Social Council at its first regular session of 1982 and to the
General Assembly at its thirty-seventh s~ssion <?n t~e pr?gress achieved with regard to the refugee s1tuat1on m
Djibouti.
JO I st plenary meeting
16 December /98/

36/157.

Protection of human rights in Chile

The General Assembly.
Reaffirming its responsibility to promote and encourage
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all.
Underlining the obligation of Governments to pro~e~t_a_nd
promote human rights and to ~arrx out th~ reSJ?Ons1b1ht1es
they have undertaken under vanous mternat1onal instruments,
Determined to remain vigilant with regard to violations
of human rights wherever they occur and to take measures
in order to restore respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms,
Recalling its resolutions 31/124 of 16 December 1976,
32/ l l 8 of 16 December 1977, 33/ 175 of 20 December 1978,
.14/1 79 of I 7 December I 979 and 35/188 of 15 December
1980 on the protection of human rights in Chile, and 33/
173 of 20 December 1978 on disappeared persons,
Recalling also Commission on Human Rights resolution
11 (XXXV) of 6 March I 979u 6 on violations of human
rights in Chile, in which the Commission, !nter_ alia, decided
to appoint a Special Rapporteur on the s1tuat1on of human
rights in Chile, and resolution 9 (XXXVII) of 26 February
1981, i .n in which it decided to extend the mandate of the
Special Rapporteur for another year,
Deploring the fact that the Chilean authorities have consistently refused to co-operate with the Spec_ial Rapport~ur
appointed by the Commissio~ on H_uman _Rights a~d with
other United Nations bodies 111 the field of human nghts,
Deeply concerned about the persistence and, in certain
respects, the deterioration of situat_ions whic~ affect the
enjoyment and exercise of human nghts and tundamental
freedoms in Chile. as stated in the report of the Special
Rapporteur. i ,x
Expressing dCt'p concern that the whereabouts of the numerous persons who have disappeared over the past ~ears
for political reasons are still unknown and that the Chtlean
authorities continue to fail to take urgent and effective measures to investigate and clarify the fate of persons who have
disappeared,
Noting with grave concern that the new Constitution in
force in Chile as from 11 March 1981, which was prepared
with a lack of popular participation, not only fails to guarantee fully. but in certain respects allows interference with,
human rights and fundamental freedoms,
1 0
'
Sec Olfiua/ Re,·ord.1 o( the /c'conomic a11d Social Cou11cil. 1979,
Supplemem No. 6 (E 1979136). chap. XXIV, sect. A.
1
"
/hid., /9/i/ . .fopp!t•111t'11T No. 5 (E/l981125 and Corr. I), chap.
X XVIII. sect. A.
1
"
Sec Ano/594

VJ.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

1. Commends the Special Rapporteur on the situation
of human rights in Chile for his report, prepared in accordance with Commission on Human Rights resolution 9
(XXXVII);
2. Reiterates its grave concern at the persistence and.
in some respects, the deterioration of the human rights situation in Chile, as stated by the Special Rapporteur, and
particularly:
(a) The disruption of the traditional democratic legal
order and its institutions by the maintenance and expansion
of emergency legislation and the promulgation of a constitution that fails to reflect a freely expressed popular will and
clearly hampers the human rights and fundamental freedoms
of the Chilean people and allows interference with such
rights and freedoms;
(b) The intensification of practices such as arbitrary
detention and confinement in secret places, often accompanied by torture and inhuman or degrading treatment
which, on occasion, result in unexplained deaths;
(c) The persecution, intimidation and imprisonment, as
well as the banishment and forced exile, of a number of
persons who participate in trade union, academic and cultural and humanitarian activities;

3. Reiterates also its great concern at the fact that the
remedies of habeas corpus or amparo prove to be not effective owing to the fact that the judiciary in Chile does not
fully exercise its powers in this respect and performs its
functions with utmost restrictions;
4. · Urges the Chilean authorities to respect and promote
human rights in accordance with their obligations under
various international instruments and, in particular, to take
the following concrete steps that could enable the Commission on Human Rights to consider terminating the mandate of the Special Rapporteur:
(a)

To put an end to the state of emergency. under

which continued human rights violations occur, and to restore the democratic institutions and constitutional guarantees formerly enjoyed by the Chilean people:
(b) To put an end to arbitrary detentions. physical or
psychological intimidation and prosecution of persons who
exercise their right to freedom of expression and opinion.
including the right to petition;
(c) To respect the human rights of persons detained for
political reasons and to separate them from those detained
for criminal offences;
(d) To take effective measures to prevent torture and
other forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment resulting, inter alia, in unexplained deaths and to prosecute
and punish those responsible for such practices;
(e) To investigate and clarify the fate of persons who
have disappeared for political reasons. to inform the relatives of those persons of the outcome of the investigation
and to prosecute and punish those responsible for such
disappearances;
(j) To restore fully trade union rights, especially the
freedom to form trade unions which can operate freely without governmental control and can exercise fully the right
to strike;
(g) To guarantee the freedom of assembly and association, and the freedom of Chilean citizens freely to enter
and leave the country, and to end the practice of banishment
applied to nationals, a practice which amounts to forced
exile from the country;
5. Urges once more the Chilean authonttes to cooperate with the Special Rapporteur and to comply with
their obligations under various international human rights
instruments;

189

6. Requests the Commission on Human Rights at its
thirty-eighth session to study thoroughly the report of the
Special Rapporteur;
7. Invites the Commission on Human Rights to extend
the mandate of the Special Rapporteur for another year and
requests the Commission to report on the human rights situation in Chile, through the Economic and Social Council,
to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
JO I st plenary meetinK
16 December /98/

36/158.

Situation of refugees in the Sudan

The General Assembly,
Reca//inK its resolution 35/ I 81 of 15 December 1980 on
the situation of refugees in the Sudan,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution
1981/5 of 4 May 1981.
HavinK heard the statement delivered by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees before the Third
Committee on 16 November 1981, iw
TakinK note of the ever-increasing number of refugees
arriving in the Sudan,
AppreciatinK the measures which the Government of the
Sudan, a least developed country. is taking in order to provide shelter, food and other services to the growing number
of refugees in the Sudan,
RecoKnizing the heavy burden placed on the Government
of the Sudan in caring for the growing number of refugees
and the need for adequate international assistance to continue its efforts to render assistance to the refugees,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General 140
containing the findings of the sectoral follow-up missions
which have so far been completed;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation with
the relevant agencies, to arrange for the completion of the
remaining technical follow-up missions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the donor Government,
intergovernmental organizations, non-governmental organizations, the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees for their valuable assistance
rendered to refugees in the Sudan;
4. Appeals to all Member States, international organizations and voluntary agencies to render the maximum possible financial, material and technical assistance to the
Government of the Sudan in its efforts to provide all necessary service to the refugees;
5 _ Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation with
the High Commissioner. to submit a comprehensive report
to the Economic and Social Council at its first regular session
of 1982 as well as to the General Assembly at its thirtyseventh session on the progress achieved in the implementation of the present resolution.
/0/st plenary meeting
/6 December /98/

36/159.

Social aspects of the development activities of
the United Nations

The General Assemblr,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
l ')81 /24 of 6 May 1981 on the social aspects of the dcvelnpment activities of the United Nations,
1
''' O/licwl R1'cord.1 ofth,, (;,•naal Assem/Jlr, Thirtr-sixth S,·.uion. Third
Commiiiee, 50th rneetin1'!, para., 2-20
'"' A:1hi216 and Add.I.
