S/PV.9357

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9357th meeting

Friday, 23 June 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Nusseibeh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Moretti
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault
Mr. Biang
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Ishikane
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Kumanga
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-18284 (E)
*2318284*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9357

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Czechia, Lithuania, Poland and
Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite His
Excellency Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: As we are all only too aware, the
killing, destruction and suffering continue unabated in
Ukraine. Sixteen months since the beginning of the fullscale Russian invasion, the prospects for peace remain
desperately dim. Indeed, since the last time I briefed
the Council on Ukraine (see S/PV.9243), the war has
escalated and become more fluid and unpredictable.
The impact of the intensifying violence on civilians
remains our gravest concern. Russian missile barrages
and drone attacks across Ukraine nearly tripled in May.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights (OHCHR) has recorded 24,862
civilian casualties to date. The breakdown is as
follows — 9,083 civilians killed, including 530
children, and 15,779 injured, including 1,086 children.
That means that since my previous briefing, 2,131
civilians have been confirmed killed. The actual
figures are likely considerably higher. Since February
2022, OHCHR has also verified a total of 1,036 attacks
affecting educational and medical facilities, of which
649 occurred on territory controlled by the Government
of Ukraine, 301 on territory occupied by the Russian
Federation and 86 on territory that was contested at the
time of the attack. The World Health Organization has
2/23

23/06/2023

verified more than 1,000 cases of attacks on healthcare objects, causing 101 deaths and 139 injuries. Of
those, 898 incidents affected health-care facilities and
273, health supplies. Most of the attacks involved the
use of heavy weapons. Additionally, UNESCO has
verified damage to 260 sites since February 2022,
including 112 religious sites, 22 museums, 94 buildings
of historic significance, 19 monuments, 12 libraries and
one archive.
The most significant destruction of civilian
infrastructure to date took place on 6 June, when
the Kakhovka dam was damaged. While the exact
circumstances remain unclear, it is a catastrophe that
will have massive adverse consequences. Some 80
communities along the Dnipro River were reportedly
flooded, with tens of thousands of people directly
affected. Dozens have lost their lives. The Kakhovka
reservoir — one of Europe’s largest, and a source of
drinking water for at least 700,000 people — has lost
70 per cent of its capacity, according to Ukrainian
authorities. Concerns continue to mount about the
possibility that the floodwaters could shift landmines
into previously cleared areas, further endangering
lives. Damaged sewer systems and a lack of clean water
heighten the risk of waterborne diseases. Inundated
farmland is a further blow to the already beleaguered
agriculture and food-production sector. The United
Nations is already engaged in assessing the extent
of the environmental and ecological needs resulting
from this human-made catastrophe. As reported by the
International Atomic Energy Agency, the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant is planning to resume pumping
water that remains accessible, despite a major loss of
volume in the Kakhovka reservoir. However, the safety
and security situation at the plant is extremely fragile.
Any threat to the plant or other sensitive infrastructure
is dangerous and unacceptable.
As part of its immediate response to the incident,
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners have
rushed to deliver supplies and evacuation support for
hundreds of thousands in the affected area. The United
Nations country team has been fully mobilized in that
vital effort, in close cooperation with the Ukrainian
authorities and local partners. We are deeply disturbed
by reports that evacuating civilians and emergency
personnel have been shelled. There are still people we
are unable to reach, especially in low-lying communities
under Russian control. The Russian Federation has so far
declined our request to go into those areas. The United
23-18284

23/06/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Nations will continue to seek the necessary access. We
urge the Russian authorities to act in accordance with
their obligations under international humanitarian law
and to ensure safe and unfettered access to all areas in
need. Aid cannot be denied to people who need it.
We are also concerned about the reported damage
to the Togliatti-Odesa pipeline, the world’s largest
ammonia conduit, in Ukraine’s Kharkiv region. The
circumstances of the incident remain unclear. Let me say
it again. Attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure
are prohibited under international law. All such attacks
must stop immediately, whether they are on Ukrainian,
Russian or Russian-controlled territory.
The United Nations continues to monitor and report
on human rights violations and to support efforts toward
accountability. To date, OHCHR has documented 158
cases of conflict-related sexual violence, with the
majority committed by members of Russia’s armed
forces or its penitentiary system personnel. We remain
deeply concerned about the cases of forcible transfers
of protected persons, including children, to areas of
Ukraine under Russian control, and their consequent
deportation to Russia. That critical issue, which is
affecting the most vulnerable, needs to be addressed
urgently, prioritizing the reunification of families.
Separately, we welcome the continued efforts by the
parties to enable the return of prisoners of war and
urge both sides to fulfil their obligations regarding
the treatment of prisoners of war and other detainees.
Accountability for all violations of international law,
international humanitarian law and human rights law
remains of paramount importance.
Since its signing in July last year, the Black Sea
Grain Initiative has enabled the safe transportation of
more than 32 million metric tons of foodstuffs, helping
to drive down global food prices. More than half of what
has been exported has gone to developing countries. We
are, however, disappointed by the slowing pace of the
implementation of the Initiative. Food exports through
the maritime humanitarian corridor have dropped from
a peak of 4.2 million metric tons in October 2022 to
1.3 million metric tonnes in May, the lowest since the
Initiative began. We urge that all obstacles be removed
to ensure the continuation of the agreement. The United
Nations is also fully committed to supporting the
implementation of the memorandum of understanding
on Russian food and fertilizer exports.

S/PV.9357

Before war began, we consistently warned about
the impact of a major conflict in Ukraine and the
effect it could have on the region and beyond. The
recent developments are not assuring in that regard.
The announced deployment of Russian tactical nuclear
weapons in Belarus, for example, and the accompanying
rhetoric, have further increased regional tensions. We
urge all involved to act responsibly and in accordance
with international obligations. We reiterate that any
threat to use nuclear weapons is unacceptable.
As the conflict has intensified, there have also been
increased diplomatic efforts and initiatives by Member
States seeking de-escalation and calling for a peaceful
settlement. The United Nations stands ready to support
all meaningful efforts to bring a just and sustainable
peace to Ukraine. We are guided in that by the Charter
of the United Nations, international law and the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly, as the SecretaryGeneral emphasized during his visit to Ukraine in
March and as I reiterated last week in Moscow.
This war has created a humanitarian and human
rights catastrophe, traumatized a generation of children
and accelerated the global food and energy crises. It has
weakened the international collective security system
that we have all pledged to uphold. We cannot discount
further dangerous knock-on effects. An end to the war,
founded on international law and the Charter, is the
surest way to ensure that the tremendous suffering of
the past 16 months will cease.
The President: I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for her in-depth and, as always,
professional briefing on the current developments
in Ukraine.
Today is day 485 of the special — brutal — military
aggression in Ukraine. The devastating consequences
of that unprovoked and unjustified war need no further
explanation. Ms. DiCarlo just provided an updated list.
Civilian casualties are added on a daily basis. Millions
of people are still refugees in neighbouring countries,
and many others are internally displaced. War crimes
and crimes against humanity, including conflict-related
sexual violence, have been meticulously documented.
Residential areas and critical civilian infrastructure
continue to be under constant attack. Kyiv, the capital,

23-182843/23

S/PV.9357

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

has been under continued and increased attacks by
missiles and illegal Iranian drones — acquired in clear
violation of resolution 2231 (2015) — including when
foreign dignitaries have been visiting. It happened when
the Secretary-General was in Kyiv, and again last week
when African leaders were making a case for peace.
We have raised the subject of the tragic situation
of children in Ukraine, including their deportation,
more than once in our meetings, and it has always
been denied. Now, the annual United Nations report on
children and armed conflict, just released, has included
the Russian military forces and proxy armed groups
on its list of shame over the killing and maiming of
hundreds of children in Russia’s war against Ukraine. It
presents shockingly high numbers of attacks on schools
and hospitals and protected personnel, and of children
killed, abducted, recruited or sexually abused by the
Russian forces and affiliated armed groups. No one
should be surprised. It is just one of the chapters of the
dark reality of this horrible war.
We have called constantly for the war to stop, for
reason to prevail and for a return to diplomacy and
dialogue. Our calls have been ignored. We see no signs
from the Kremlin of any desire to change course. It
remains defiant, including by infusing a great deal of
noisy talk about the possible use of nuclear weapons
into various Russian media and talk shows while it has
started to deploy tactical nuclear weapons in Belarus.
But there is worse. The Russian Parliament’s lower
house, the State Duma, recently approved legislation
that would pardon convicted criminals who volunteer
to join Russian forces fighting in Ukraine. The practice
of recruiting prisoners and criminals and throwing
them into the war in Ukraine as cannon fodder was
first adopted by the Wagner Group. It was shocking,
but that was Wagner — a mercenary force. Now it is
the turn of the Russian army to do the same. In the
early days of the aggression last year, we were lectured
about the virtues of the Russian armed forces, who it
was said would never commit sexual crimes. Much has
happened since then. The United Nations and human
rights groups have unquestionably documented terrible
crimes, including rape, committed by the Russian forces
in Ukraine. But putting criminals, killers and rapists
in regular uniform — people who had been removed
from the streets as a danger to the society — and giving
them weapons and a licence to kill represents more
than mere danger. It indicates that the Russian army
is being Wagnerized. Given the terrible record of the
4/23

23/06/2023

Wagner Group in Ukraine and many other parts of the
world, the reputation of the Russian army will hardly be
improved. The war is changing many things, including
Russia itself, but not for the better.
Two days ago, at the Ukraine Recovery Conference
held in London, the international community renewed
its commitment to full support for Ukraine and its
people. The World Bank has estimated that more than
$400 billion is needed today to rebuild Ukraine. Had
there been no war, those billions would have been
used elsewhere, for other purposes — to mitigate
climate-change effects or to feed more of the people
who are in dire need everywhere, including primarily
in the Global South. But the reality is that Russia has
destroyed or damaged 1,500 hospitals and health-care
facilities. It has destroyed or damaged 10 per cent of
Ukraine’s education institutions and 50 per cent of its
power-generation infrastructure. Close to 2.5 million
people need new homes and 30 per cent of Ukraine’s
territory has been contaminated by landmines and
shells. All of that is going on right now, making the scale
of destruction unlike anything seen in Europe since the
Second World War. That is why the madness that has
lasted far too long must stop. From a political, moral
and legal perspective, Russia will be held accountable
for its war of choice and should pay for the human
and physical damage caused to the Ukrainian people.
In that respect, we welcome the establishment of the
International Centre for the Prosecution of the Crime of
Aggression against Ukraine at Eurojust, the European
Union Agency for Criminal Justice Cooperation in
The Hague.
A few days ago, Russia announced its intention to
hold elections in September in the temporarily occupied
territories of Ukraine. We reiterate our position whereby
we do not recognize any territories acquired by force
or their attempted annexation. Donetsk, Luhansk,
Zaporizhzhya, Kherson, the Autonomous Republic of
Crimea and the city of Sevastopol belong to Ukraine. A
permanent member of the Security Council knows that
any attempt to legitimize illegal control of the territory
of another country is a clear violation of sovereignty,
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
Let me conclude with a very bizarre and
unfortunately true fact. Last week a statue of Slobodan
Milošević, known as the butcher of the Balkans,
was unveiled in Moscow’s Europe Square by people
close to the Kremlin. Those who hope to perpetuate
Milošević’s memory for posterity should know that
23-18284

23/06/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

he was responsible for the bloody break-up of the
former Yugoslavia — the last war in Europe before
Russia took up the baton. He was directly responsible
for killing hundreds of thousands of Bosnians, Croats
and Kosovo Albanians, and for the ethnic cleansing of
more than 3 million people. He was surrendered to the
International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia — a
tribunal created by the Security Council — and indicted
for war crimes and crimes against humanity. He died
alone, in prison. A few kilogrammes of bronze will not
turn Milošević into a hero, but it is sad to think that
from now on, whoever wants to honour and glorify a
war criminal can make a pilgrimage to Moscow.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
for her briefing today.
Moments ago, I stood with Ukraine, France, the
United Kingdom and Albania to call out Russia and
Iran’s flagrant violations of resolution 2231 (2015).
We know that the Kremlin has procured hundreds of
uncrewed aerial vehicles (UAVs) and is now working
with Iran to produce those weapons inside Russia. And
we know that in recent weeks, the Kremlin has used
those UAVs to destroy Ukrainian infrastructure and to
kill and terrorize civilians. The United Nations must
implement resolution 2231 (2015). We still have no
explanation as to why experts from the 2231 team have
not been dispatched to Ukraine to review evidence of
the origins of those weapons and the destruction they
have caused. The United Nations must act with urgency.
It is a matter of life and death for the Ukrainian people.
Russia’s cruel and relentless attacks have left
millions of homes in Ukraine without light, heat
or water, and recent strikes in Kherson have killed
civilians, including aid workers delivering assistance
to those fleeing the floods created by the destruction of
the Kakhovka dam. As we speak, Russia is blocking the
United Nations from getting aid to people in the flooded
areas. That is unacceptable. Russia must immediately
allow the United Nations to deliver desperately needed
humanitarian assistance to occupied areas of Ukraine.
Humanitarian workers must have safe passage as they
deliver aid and assistance to those in need — full stop.
Moscow publicly feigns deep concern about attacks
on critical infrastructure and has called Security
Council meetings to try to convince us of that. But
Russia’s hypocrisy is on full display as we watch
Russian missiles and drones reduce entire Ukrainian

S/PV.9357

cities to rubble. And for what? President Putin is hellbent on beating a foreign country into submission, but
the Ukrainian people will never, ever give up their
sovereignty, democracy or freedom. President Putin
thought his forces would march into Ukraine with little
or no resistance, but he was wrong. The Ukrainian
people have demonstrated remarkable bravery and grit.
President Putin thought he would face no consequences
from the international community. After that, he hoped
the international community would tire of his war and
simply move on. But there too he was wrong.
More than 140 countries have repeatedly voted to
condemn Russia’s war of choice and more than 140
voted to support a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in Ukraine, based on United Nations principles.
To that end, all efforts to broker peace must be rooted
in the fundamental principles of sovereignty, territorial
integrity and the inherent right to self-defence enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations. All of us here
would insist on the same if we were in Ukraine’s place,
and of course peace requires good-faith efforts on the
part of all parties. Let us not forget that on the very day
that President Zelenskyy presented his peace formula
to the Group of 20 last year, Russia unleashed missile
strikes across Ukraine. Let us not forget that Russia
carried out an air strike on Kyiv when the SecretaryGeneral was visiting Ukraine in April. And as we heard
just last week, when a delegation of African leaders
travelled to Kyiv in pursuit of peace, they were greeted
by a barrage of Russian missiles. Let us therefore not
“both-sides” this issue. Russia has demonstrated no
meaningful interest in negotiating for peace.
There must be a sustained, united clarion call for
President Putin to end his brutal war of aggression,
because the longer the war goes on, the more the
Ukrainian people will suffer and the more the world will
suffer. After all, the effects of this war are now being
felt around the world. Why? It is because President
Putin has used food as a weapon of war, and in doing
so has exacerbated global food insecurity. For a long
time, Russia blocked Ukrainian grain from leaving
the Black Sea — grain that helps feed so much of the
world, especially in Africa and the Middle East. That
is what makes the Black Sea Grain Initiative such a
critical arrangement, and one that we must extend next
month for the benefit of all. And that is why it is deeply
troubling that Russia is once again the only country
threatening to withdraw from the Initiative. As the new

23-182845/23

S/PV.9357

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

harvest begins in Ukraine and Russia, the arrangement
becomes even more important.
We must urge Russia to stay in the Black Sea
Initiative. We must shine a bright light on Member
States that violate Security Council resolutions,
including through the timely investigation of those
violations. We must continue to hold Russia accountable
for its crimes against the Ukrainian people, and to call
on Russia to silence its guns and embrace diplomacy.
Until it does, the United States will continue to support
Ukraine in its principled self-defence against Russia’s
savage attacks. Caving into Moscow’s aggression
would endanger every single country — big and small,
new and old — all of us. We must never let war become
a viable path for redrawing international borders. We
must uphold the Charter and international peace and
security, and we must continue to stand in solidarity
with the Ukrainian people.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for her briefing.
Today marks a year and four months since the start
of Russia’s aggression against Ukraine. The Ukrainian
people have been fighting ever since for their sovereignty
and territorial integrity, which are protected under the
Charter of the United Nations. But more importantly,
they have been fighting for their own lives, family,
friends and peace, all of which were suddenly broken
by Russia. Here and now, we reaffirm our resolute
solidarity with and support for Ukraine. We once
again express our deepest sympathies for their loss and
suffering to all who have been affected by the collapse
of the dam at the Kakhovka hydroelectric power plant,
which has destroyed the efforts of Ukrainians working
strenuously for the future. We are profoundly concerned
about the reported shelling during the evacuation and
about Russia’s denial of access for United Nations
humanitarian aid to areas affected, as the United
Nations Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator in
Ukraine, Denise Brown, has confirmed.
In response to the crisis, Japan immediately decided
to provide $5 million in emergency humanitarian
assistance in such areas as food, water, sanitation
and health care through the World Food Programme,
UNICEF, the International Organization for Migration
and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees. We sincerely hope that our assistance,
together with that of others, will be delivered swiftly
and without hindrance to the people in need. In addition,
6/23

23/06/2023

Japan will provide approximately 160 water purifiers,
30 drain pumps, 4,000 plastic water containers and
20 large water tanks through the Japan International
Cooperation Agency, along with 530 generators and 30
construction machines, as well as awareness-raising
activities related to mine action for local people through
the United Nations Development Programme.
Russia’s aggression has had a negative impact on
people all over the world, and we are taking steps to
support partners worldwide as they respond to the
suffering that it has caused. We are also building on
the success of our efforts to ensure that Russia will no
longer be able to weaponize the availability of energy
and food supplies against us and everyone else. Our
support for Ukraine will not waver. We will not tire
in our commitment to doing everything we can to stop
or mitigate the impact of Russia’s illegal actions on
Ukraine and the rest of the world. In that regard, the
Black Sea Grain Initiative must continue without delay.
Japan values the serious engagement efforts of many
countries and their leaders, including those of Africa,
to realize peace in Ukraine. We would like to underline
that a comprehensive, just and lasting peace cannot
be realized without the complete and unconditional
withdrawal of Russia’s troops and military equipment.
That is the demand of the General Assembly and should
accordingly be included in any call for peace. Peace
must be based on the principles of the Charter, and
in that regard, an unjust peace that defies the Charter
would be a victory for the aggressor. Any attempt to
change the status quo of territory by force or coercion
must be rejected anywhere it occurs in the world. Other
Member States should also refrain from supporting the
aggression, directly or indirectly.
Belarus recently announced that it has started
taking delivery of Russian tactical nuclear weapons.
Japan condemns Russia’s threat to use nuclear weapons
as a serious and unacceptable menace to the peace and
security of the international community. The 77-year
record of the non-use of nuclear weapons must not be
broken. We urge Russia and Belarus to refrain from any
action that could increase tensions.
It is Russia that initiated the unprovoked aggression.
It must stop the aggression right here and now. Nothing
but ending the aggression can eliminate the root cause
of the immense suffering. There must be no impunity
for war crimes or other atrocities. Justice must be
23-18284

23/06/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

done, and those who are responsible for the undeniable
atrocities must be held accountable.
Mr. Kumanga (Mozambique): I thank UnderSecretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing
and acknowledge the presence of the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine at this meeting.
Since the start of this conflict, a year and a half
ago, the Security Council has held more than 100
formal and informal meetings on the subject, including
Arria Formula meetings, attesting to the gravity of
the situation we are facing. We must admit the reality
that despite repeated calls for a cessation of hostilities,
compromise, dialogue and a return to the negotiating
table, the conflict continues unabated. An alarming
downward spiral is taking hold of the confrontation,
manifest in the form of a dangerous arms race, millions
of refugees and internally displaced people and the
destruction of civilian infrastructure, which has created
a dire humanitarian situation. That is taking place
against a backdrop of increasing pessimism with regard
to the ability of our multilateral peace and security
architecture to cope with multiple security challenges,
and of questions about its legitimacy and whether it is
still fit for purpose. Despite several goodwill attempts
at negotiation, most notably the recent initiative by
some African Heads of State and Government, they
have been met with scepticism and quickly dismissed
as unsuitable non-starters. That is a testament to the
high level of mistrust between the contending parties
without whom attempts at peace are condemned to fail.
Cognizant of the unwillingness of the parties
concerned to seek a politically negotiated solution, it
is Mozambique’s firm conviction, born out of its own
journey towards peace and national reconciliation,
that all avenues to bring the conflict to an end must
genuinely be explored.
Needless to say, the price of war in humankind’s
history has been always more expensive than the price
of peace. For that purpose, it is fundamental to give
the force of reason a chance, rather than the reason
of force. In fact, the conflict has gone too far and has
brought us to this dangerous juncture. The potential of
miscalculated decisions by nations involved directly
and indirectly in the war moving forward may have
disastrous and unimaginable consequences for the
entire world.
No solutions, however, will bear fruits without
genuine political will from the main parties and their

S/PV.9357

supporters to engage in negotiations. Only their good
faith and genuine intent to save lives and, indeed, the
entire humankind can stop the war.
It is against that background that Mozambique
reiterates its call for the immediate cessation of
hostilities and a return to direct negotiations between
the parties as a matter of urgency and in full respect
for the Charter of the United Nations and the Council’s
decisions in relevant matters of peace and security.
Mr. Moretti (Brazil): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for the update on the impacts of
the conflict on the Ukrainian population. We deeply
regret the thousands of deaths officially recorded
by the Office of the High Representative for Human
Rights since February 2022 and deplore the continuing
destruction of Ukraine’s civilian infrastructure. Brazil
extends its solidarity to the families of the victims and
reaffirms its support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
We share the disappointment of others with the
absence of dialogue between the parties and the
insistence on the pursuit of a military solution. We are
concerned about the intensification of fighting along
the front lines and the placement of nuclear weapons
in a non-nuclear-weapon State. We reiterate our deep
concern about the risks to the integrity of the nuclear
facilities in Zaporizhzhya, especially after the rupture
of the Kakhovka dam. Avoiding damage to the nuclear
power plant is imperative. Brazil urges the parties to
collaborate to ensure the supply of water for cooling the
reactors and spent fuel.
We also echo the call by the Humanitarian
Coordinator in Ukraine, Ms. Denise Brown, for Russian
authorities to facilitate access to areas under their
control. The rupture of the Kakhovka dam endangered
thousands of people on both sides of the Dnipro River,
who depend on humanitarian assistance provided by
the United Nations.
In recent weeks, the voices of members of the
international community in favour of an immediate
cessation of hostilities have multiplied. Brazil followed
with great interest the visit of African leaders to Kyiv
and Moscow. We endorse the words of President
Macky Sall of Senegal: even in the midst of fighting,
it is necessary to keep open the channels of dialogue.
Otherwise, it will not be possible to escape the trap of
espousing a purely military logic.

23-182847/23

S/PV.9357

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Brazil supports the proposals of a de-escalation of
hostilities, an exchange of prisoners of war and peace
negotiations based on the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations that take into account the legitimate
security concerns of all parties. It is also essential to
bear in mind the adverse impacts the conflict has on
third countries due to the increased prices of food and
agricultural inputs.
As South African President Cyril Ramaphosa
pointed out a few days ago, the conflict is affecting
Africa negatively. The same applies to other regions,
including my own, Latin America and the Caribbean.
Due consideration must be given to calls for
normalization of the grain and fertilizer trade.
Sustainable peace cannot result from the imposition
of unilateral terms, under the coercion of arms, on
either side. We urge the parties to avoid entrenching
themselves in their positions. The policy of isolation
and the imposition of unilateral sanctions have already
demonstrated their limits. We encourage the parties to
explore alternative paths, starting with a cessation of
hostilities and the resumption of direct negotiations.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for
her briefing.
In the light of the current state of the Ukraine crisis,
China wishes to stress the following points.
First, every effort must be made to prevent the
situation from spiralling out of control. For some time
now, the fighting in Ukraine has continued to escalate,
with an ever-clearer trend of expansion and significantly
greater uncertainties. The destruction of the Kakhovka
dam once again reminds us that, if the fighting drags
on, there will be only more major risks and any horrible
scenario could materialize. We hope that both parties
to the conflict will stay calm and exercise restraint
and that the international community will refrain from
escalating the tensions, in particular strictly safeguard
the bottom line of nuclear safety and stay far away from
the red line of nuclear war. Everything must be done to
avoid a point of no return.
Secondly, every effort must be made to alleviate
the suffering of the people. China once again calls upon
the parties concerned to strictly abide by international
humanitarian law; strictly fulfil the obligations to
protect civilians; guarantee the safety of women,
children and other vulnerable groups; and respect the
8/23

23/06/2023

basic rights of prisoners of war. We encourage the
international community and humanitarian agencies
to step up their assistance to populations affected by
the crisis on the basis of adhering to the principles
governing humanitarian aid.
Thirdly, every effort must be made to manage the
spillover effects. China is seriously worried about the
impacts of the Ukraine crisis on the recovery of the
world economy and in particular the achievement by
developing countries of the Sustainable Development
Goals in the post-pandemic era. We call upon all parties
to join efforts to reduce the negative impact of the crisis
and keep global industrial and supply chains stable, and
we urge relevant countries to immediately lift the socalled unilateral sanctions and long-arm jurisdiction.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative should be implemented
in a balanced, comprehensive and effective manner,
and the memorandum of understanding signed between
the United Nations and Russia should be implemented
in earnest.
Fourthly, every effort must be made to promote
dialogue and negotiation. Recently, a peace delegation
consisting of the leaders of six African countries,
including South Africa, visited Ukraine and Russia,
which China welcomes. We hope that peace-loving
and justice-upholding countries in the world will send
rational messages in promotion of peace talks. However
significant the difficulties, the door to the political
settlement of the Ukraine crisis must not be closed,
efforts to stop the fighting and promote talks must not
relent, and the process of diplomatic negotiations must
not stall. It is important to work to encourage all parties
to enhance engagement, build consensus, form the
broadest common ground and gradually accumulate and
create conditions for the final settlement of the crisis.
In relation to the Ukraine issue, China has always
maintained that the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of all countries should be upheld. The purposes and
principles of the Unitec Nations Charter should be
observed, the legitimate security concerns of all parties
should be valued, and all efforts conducive to the
peaceful settlement of the crisis should be supported.
China will continue to work with the international
community and play an active and constructive role in
promoting the political settlement of the Ukraine issue.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I would like to start by thanking Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for her briefing and for all her efforts.
23-18284

23/06/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

A few weeks ago, the Secretary-General reminded
us that international humanitarian law makes all the
difference between life and death, between restraint
and anarchy. I regret that, since then, the truth of these
words has been sadly confirmed once again in Ukraine,
in the context of Russian military aggression. In recent
weeks, continuous Russian missile attacks have again
hit residential areas in several Ukrainian cities. I
repeat that civilian lives and infrastructure must be
protected. Switzerland condemns all indiscriminate
and disproportionate attacks. The perpetrators must be
brought to justice.
In addition to the protection afforded to civilian
property, structures and installations containing
dangerous forces benefit from special protection.
Switzerland is therefore deeply concerned about the
humanitarian, ecological and economic consequences of
the flooding caused by the destruction of the Kakhovka
dam. The lack of drinking water is compounded by a
host of other challenges, including the risk posed by
mines and explosive remnants of war displaced by
water, which complicate the delivery of humanitarian
aid and humanitarian mine clearance. We welcome the
ongoing efforts of humanitarian actors, including the
United Nations, the International Committee of the
Red Cross and local actors, to help all those affected.
We urge the Russian Government to act in accordance
with its obligations under international humanitarian
law and allow and facilitate safe, rapid and unhindered
humanitarian access to Ukrainian territories currently
under its control.
The destruction of the dam illustrates the risks
that continued Russian military aggression poses
to infrastructure, with disastrous consequences for
the civilian population. It also increases the risk
of further escalation, including a nuclear incident.
Switzerland welcomes the continued commitment
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
to protecting the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant
and other nuclear facilities in Ukraine. We reaffirm
our practical, financial and political support for the
IAEA’s work. We call on Russia and Ukraine to strictly
respect international humanitarian law protecting
civilian objects and structures and facilities containing
dangerous forces, and to commit to the five principles
established by the IAEA.
While our attention is focused on the immediate
challenges, we must nonetheless think of the future and
keep hope alive. Switzerland welcomes the solidarity

S/PV.9357

expressed at the Ukraine Recovery Conference in
London this week. With the cycle of conferences,
we are determined to offer better prospects to the
Ukrainian people. It is essential that reconstruction
takes place in a participatory and transparent manner,
as underlined by the Lugano principles. In parallel with
this show of support, Switzerland is closely monitoring
the various undertakings aimed at advancing peace
in Ukraine. For us, compliance with the principles of
the United Nations Charter is the basic requirement in
these considerations.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative has shown that
the involvement of third-party actors with all parties
can help mitigate the negative effects of war. We must
build on and develop this experience. We regret that
the trend is moving in the opposite direction and call
on the parties to redouble their efforts to find a lasting
solution. Switzerland is always ready to offer its good
offices if the parties so wish.
Respect for international law is the only way to
achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
Ukraine. I therefore reiterate today our appeal to Russia
to cease all hostilities and withdraw all its troops from
Ukrainian territory without delay.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for
her briefing.
It has been nearly 500 days since Russia’s illegal
and barbaric full-scale invasion of Ukraine. Let us
again take stock of its impacts.
Russia’s air strikes have reduced towns and cities
to rubble. More than 9,000 civilians have been killed,
including more than 500 children. Many thousands have
been injured. Millions have been displaced, unable to
return to their homes. Families have been torn apart,
with children taken from their parents and sent to farflung corners of Russia.
Wherever Putin’s Government has attempted to
take control of Ukraine, it has shown its true colours:
a pattern of torture, killings and brutal repression of
human rights and fundamental freedoms. Last week,
Russia rejected pleas from the United Nations to
assist those in desperate need in the aftermath of the
catastrophic destruction of the Kakhovka dam.
This is a war of choice for President Putin. He has
shown contempt and disregard for Russia’s obligations
under the United Nations Charter. He is indifferent to

23-182849/23

S/PV.9357

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

the cost to Ukrainians, to Russians and to the world.
He fires missiles at Kyiv even as world leaders visit
Moscow seeking to build peace. He supplies his armies
from United Nations-sanctioned States such as Iran
and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, further
undermining global security.
He continues to hold the world’s food to ransom by
holding up grain shipments under the Black Sea Grain
Initiative. The World Bank has estimated that Ukraine’s
reconstruction needs are over $400 billion. Russia’s
destruction adds more pressure to the global economy,
already suffering from conflict, climate change and the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
The world needs peace. But Ukraine will never
have peace while Russian forces remain on its territory.
We therefore call on Russia to withdraw its forces from
Ukraine and end this illegal war of aggression. At the
Ukraine Recovery Conference in London this week,
my Prime Minister paid tribute to Ukraine’s incredible
spirit — a spirit of strength and defiance, but also of
ingenuity and innovation.
We will stand with the people of Ukraine for as
long as it takes for them to win a just and sustained
peace that respects Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity in line with the United Nations Charter. And
we will also stand with them as they win the peace and
rebuild a country shattered by Russia’s aggression.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for
her briefing.
The bloody violence and human suffering remain
unsustainable in the intensifying fighting in Ukraine,
despite the peace initiative of African Heads of State,
the objective of which continues to be paving a path
towards de-escalation and dialogue between the
belligerent parties. The humanitarian situation has
worsened in recent weeks following the destruction of
the Kakhovka dam and the severe floods that ensued,
resulting in the evacuation of thousands of people and
extensive material damage.
According to the latest statistics of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees regarding
verified civilian victims, the number of deaths stands
at 9,093 and the wounded stands at 15,779. The civilian
population and infrastructure continue to be the targets
of direct shelling, and we repeat our appeal to the
warring parties to cease these blind and indiscriminate
10/23

23/06/2023

attacks and bombings. We also call on the parties to
facilitate the access of humanitarian workers to people
who need urgent help, especially in the areas affected
by the destruction of the Kakhovka dam.
The latest report of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and the World Food
Programme warns of the risk of deteriorating food
security between June and November. The outlook
is very bleak, with 22 countries at risk of housing 18
hotspots of famine. The rising food prices caused by
the conflict has contributed to weakening low- and
middle-income countries. The most affected are those
already facing security challenges or armed conflicts.
Statistics show that some international aid is indeed
already being diverted to Ukraine.
Allowing this war to continue is to ensure that
there will be more civilian casualties — more women
and children plunged into grief and more lives shattered
by war and exile. My country continues to express its
rejection of the war and calls on the parties to respect
international humanitarian law. The warring parties
must refrain from using weapons with indiscriminate
effects against civilians and from shelling critical
infrastructure. We also reiterate our appeal to the parties
to not use civilian infrastructure for military purposes.
We eagerly await peace initiatives and mediation offers
that can offer a path towards a diplomatic solution.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative leads us to believe that
diplomacy always prevails in the end.
We commend the work that United Nations agencies
continued to undertake on the ground to assist and
protect civilians, and we recognize the important role of
the International Committee of the Red Cross to assist
people suffering in Ukraine and beyond, particularly in
its actions with regard to prisoners of war.
Finally, my country once again calls on the parties
to prioritize dialogue with a view to resolving the
conflict. We remain convinced that there is no credible
alternative to dialogue and negotiation to ultimately
achieve a cessation of hostilities and restore peaceful
coexistence between the belligerent parties.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): I join the previous
speakers in thanking Under Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo for her informative briefing.
We thank her for reaffirming the Organization’s
commitment to support efforts aimed at finding a
lasting solution to the raging conflict in Ukraine and
providing the needed humanitarian support.
23-18284

23/06/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

From the beginning of the Russian Federation’s
aggression against Ukraine, the United Nations,
through its agencies and partners, have performed
the indispensable function of providing life-saving
humanitarian aid and assistance to the suffering people
of Ukraine, and we are very appreciative of their efforts.
Ghana continues to be deeply concerned about the
unfolding circumstances in several regions of Ukraine.
We regret that despite the many calls for the protection of
civilians from harm, they still remain targets of missile
and drone attacks. Civilians, on a daily basis, suffer the
consequences of a war they never asked for. From the
onset of the war in February 2022 to 4 June this year,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights has recorded no less than 24,000
civilian casualties, with close to 9,000 people killed and
some 15,000 more injured. Those numbers, along with
the widespread destruction of infrastructure across
Ukraine, point to the gravity and abject futility of the
war and reinforce the urgency of action needed to end it
now rather than later.
Over the past month, we also witnessed a complex
mix of challenges brought about by the destruction of
the Kakhovka hydroelectric dam. Our fears of negative
environmental and social impacts are being borne out
as communities reliant on the dam for their water supply
face challenges in accessing potable water. Reports
also indicate the heightened risk of water-borne and
hygiene-related diseases, as well as food security and
livelihood challenges.
It is a difficult task to chronicle the myriad suffering
brought about by the war. Even more distressing is the
growing intensity of hostilities as the parties remain
polarized on a political settlement. With regard to our
mandate of the maintenance of international peace and
security, we cannot be despondent; rather, with unity of
purpose, we must work together to restore the hope of
peace to the people of Ukraine.
During the Ukraine Recovery Conference, held
over the past two days in the United Kingdom, massive
expressions of support and pledges have been made
towards Ukraine’s recovery and reconstruction, which
now runs into billions of dollars. Such support, at a
time when the aggression is still ongoing, demonstrates
a persevering commitment by the international
community to a new dawn of peace and prosperity
in Ukraine.

S/PV.9357

We remain convinced that those shared aspirations
can be attained by bringing into play the full range
of tools for the pacific settlement of conflicts offered
under the Charter of the United Nations. It is for that
reason that we have consistently advocated for dialogue
and diplomacy as the best channels for reaching a
comprehensive, sustainable and durable peace between
the two countries.
We once more urge respect for the rules of
international law and the principles and core values of
the Charter of the United Nations. We further urge the
parties to commit to engaging in constructive dialogue
in good faith and with a view to narrowing down
their differences.
While reiterating calls for the cessation of
hostilities, we remind the parties of their obligations
under international humanitarian law to refrain from
causing deliberate harm to civilians and avoid the
deliberate destruction of civilian infrastructure.
With regard to nuclear safety and security,
the Director-General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency has warned that the situation at the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant is extremely fragile
and reiterated the call on the warring parties to adhere
to basic principles designed to prevent a nuclear
incident that would be catastrophic for Ukraine and
the world at large. We therefore align ourselves with
all demands to restore the integrity of the power plant
and appeal to the parties to ensure compliance with the
five basic principles for protecting the plant during the
military conflict, as outlined by the Director-General
in the Council in May (see S/PV.9334).
I also wish to express our indignation at reports
of ongoing gender abuse and conflict-related sexual
violence against women and girls. As we are well
aware, the conditions of women and girls in theatres
of conflict are traumatizing enough, and for them to
be subjected to such abuse is indeed tragic. All efforts
must be made to hold the perpetrators of such offensive
acts accountable for their actions. Moreover, it is
critical that sufficient resources be provided to help
victims overcome such ordeals.
As with all other conflict situations, we believe
that women’s conflict-resolution and peacebuilding
capabilities must be harnessed through their full and
meaningful participation in peace processes, as that has
been established to enhance the success and durability
of peace.

23-1828411/23

S/PV.9357

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Finally, we reiterate our call to the Russian
Federation to respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of its neighbour Ukraine through the immediate
and unconditional withdrawal of all its troops from the
internationally recognized borders of Ukraine.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I too thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo for her sobering briefing.
Malta strongly condemns Russia’s continued
escalation of the war and its blunt disregard for
international law, international humanitarian law and
human rights law. We deplore the continued killing of
civilians. The international law is clear. Civilians and
civilian infrastructure cannot and must not be targets.
As things stand, the number of Ukrainians in need of
emergency humanitarian aid and protection has now
reached 18 million.
That devastating situation has been further
exacerbated by the massive flooding caused by the
destruction of the Kakhovka dam on 6 June, which left
behind a still uncertain number of people killed and
injured. More than 700,000 people in Ukraine now face
significant shortages of drinking water. The attack has
also brought with it irreversible environmental damage,
since the Dnipro River has now been contaminated
with 150 tons of industrial lubricant. We are deeply
concerned about the fact that the Russian Federation
has so far declined the request of the United Nations
for access to the temporarily occupied areas in order to
provide humanitarian assistance to those who need it.
We once again urge Russia to comply with its obligations
under international law and to spare no effort to ensure
that humanitarian aid reaches those who are suffering
as a result of that destruction. Ensuring accountability
for the perpetrators responsible is essential.
Let us also remember that the dropping water levels
of the dam affect access to critical cooling water for
the reactors of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant.
The risks that the occupation of the nuclear power
plant currently poses to nuclear safety and security in
Ukraine are a direct consequence of Russia’s illegal,
unjustified and unprovoked war. Malta calls for the
return of full legitimate control over the facility to the
competent Ukrainian authorities, including the full
demilitarization and de-occupation of the plant as a
first and urgent priority. That remains a key prerequisite
for restoring nuclear safety and security as well as
upholding international law. We remain supportive of
the International Atomic Energy Agency’s continued
12/23

23/06/2023

efforts to find a permanent solution for the safety and
integrity of the Zaporizhzhya plant.
In addition to the ongoing International Criminal
Court and International Court of Justice processes,
in May Malta joined the Enlarged Partial Agreement
on the Register of Damage Caused by the Aggression
of the Russian Federation against Ukraine, set up by
the Council of Europe. The devastating impacts of
Russia’s war on children, women and men will be
felt for generations. Cases perpetrated by the Russian
Federation of indiscriminate killing of civilians, torture
and other forms of cruel, inhumane and degrading
treatment, as well as sexual and gender-based violence
and the abduction and forcible deportation of children,
have now been widely documented.
I would like to conclude by highlighting the
importance of the Black Sea Grain Initiative, which
extends beyond Ukraine and affects global food
security. It will be vital to ensure that the process is
further extended and secured beyond July among all
the parties to alleviate pressures on food security all
over the globe.
Malta strongly believes that there can be no peace
without justice. We urge Russia to immediately cease
all hostilities and to unconditionally and completely
withdraw all its forces and military equipment from
the entire territory of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders. That is the only step that can lead
towards a just and lasting peace.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs Rosemary DiCarlo for the
information she shared and for her briefing.
As Ecuador approaches the end of the first six
months as an elected member on the Security Council,
we regret that, despite the repeated calls made by my
delegation and a majority of other delegations for the
Russian Federation to comply with the Charter of the
United Nations, international law and the decision of
the International Court of Justice ordering it to suspend
its military operation against Ukraine, that operation is
still ongoing. Such an aggression against the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of a State has no place in
an international order based on rules and peaceful
coexistence among nations. Moreover, it undermines
the efforts we are pursuing for a more just and equitable
world. We regret that it continues in ignorance of the
decisive request by the vast majority of Member States
23-18284

23/06/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

to put an end to the military occupation, and in the
context of the persistent threat of a nuclear disaster in
Zaporizhzhya, whose facilities and territory must be
unconditionally returned to the Ukrainian people.
We stress the need to cease corrosive narratives
and actions that could lead to misinterpretations or
miscalculations. We condemn the fact that Russia has
started to deploy tactical nuclear weapons in Belarus.
We urge the Russian Federation to allow access for
humanitarian personnel and assistance, without
restrictions, and to refrain from hindering such efforts,
which are vital in this context. We stress the need for
parties to comply with international humanitarian law
and therefore urge Russia to stop its use of missiles
and drones, which have caused and continue to cause
extreme harm to the civilian population and critical
infrastructure. We see that this war continues to
exacerbate the humanitarian situation in Ukraine and
weaken the rest of the world, including in terms of food
security, against the backdrop of an insane increase in
global military spending. While I will address the issue
of the supply of arms more broadly at the Council’s
meeting on 29 June, I feel compelled to reiterate today
how serious it is to supply arms in violation of the
Council’s resolutions, and even more serious when it is
done to fuel a war effort.

S/PV.9357

just and lasting peace in Ukraine, we can and must urge
for the guns be silenced.
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault (France) (spoke in French):
I thank Under-Secretary General Rosemary DiCarlo for
her briefing.
The Russian invasion was supposed to last a matter
of a few days or weeks. But for 16 months Ukraine has
been resisting, defending its sovereignty and territorial
integrity and keeping Russia at bay on the ground.
But Russia refuses to admit it, and every day since
24 February 2022 it has chosen to prolong its war of
aggression, whose damaging consequences continue to
grow and spread, not only for the Ukrainian people but
for the rest of the world as well. Russia has maintained
its cynical strategy of destroying Ukrainian civilian
infrastructure, in flagrant violation of international
humanitarian law. The attacks on the capital of Ukraine
and other major cities have been relentless. Last
Friday, Russia did not hesitate to target Kyiv and the
surrounding region at the same time that a mission of
African leaders was there to promote a peace initiative.
Those strikes were carried out using Russian missiles
and Iranian Shahed drones, of which the latter had been
transferred in violation of resolution 2231 (2015).

I want to reiterate my country’s support for the
efforts of the United Nations in various areas since the
beginning of the invasion, including through the Black
Sea Grain Initiative and the efforts for the release of
prisoners, humanitarian action and nuclear security
work, to name but a few examples. The General
Assembly has played an exemplary role in upholding
the principles of the Charter. We therefore call on the
Council to equip the Secretary-General with better
tools to deepen the efforts aimed at achieving the
peaceful solution that is needed to turn this dark page
in humankind’s history.

A new threshold was crossed with the destruction
of the Kakhovka dam on the night of 5 and 6 June.
It is the most serious attack on Ukrainian civilian
infrastructure since the start of the conflict, as
Mr. Griffiths pointed out at our last meeting (see
S/PV.9340). France mobilized efforts from the start in
support of the displaced Ukrainians who were directly
affected by the destruction of the dam and welcomes the
rapid and substantial humanitarian response provided
by the United Nations. We call on Russia to respect its
obligations under international humanitarian law and
to allow humanitarian actors access to the territories
under its control.

Finally, in order to make progress on a solution
through dialogue, it is important to build on our areas
of convergence. At the Council’s meeting on 30 May
(see S/PV.9334), I pointed out that nuclear security was
a common component of the various peace proposals
and schemes, whether we are talking about President
Zelenskyy’s 10-point plan or China’s 12-point plan.
But that is not our only point of convergence. Within
the framework of the provisions of General Assembly
resolution ES/11-6, adopted on 23 February, on the
principles of the Charter underlying a comprehensive,

Russia continues to use aggressive nuclear rhetoric
that is irresponsible coming from a nuclear-weapon
State. A week ago the President of Russia announced
that he had made a first transfer of nuclear weapons
to Belarus, which aggravates an already unstable
situation. At the same time, Russia is continuing its
work of turning Belarus into a vassal State, yet another
blatant illustration of its imperialist intentions and its
efforts to bring a part of Europe under its thumb. As we
have repeatedly warned the Council in this Chamber,
one of the damaging effects of Russia’s aggression is

23-1828413/23

S/PV.9357

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

the worsening food insecurity it has produced in many
countries. Russia is running the risk that the first
anniversary of the Istanbul agreement, in July, will
also be the last, as Russia is threatening to withdraw
from the Black Sea Grain Initiative. Such blackmail
is unacceptable. Russia must also stop obstructing the
operations of the Joint Coordination Centre, whose
activity has been significantly reduced since May.
We must continue to support Ukraine in every
possible way so that it can conduct an effective
counter-offensive and exercise its right to self-defence
in accordance with Article 51 of the Charter of the
United Nations. That support is essential because it
is the key to just and lasting peace — in other words,
a peace rooted in the Charter of the United Nations
and in compliance with international law, and a peace
chosen by the Ukrainian people, not dictated by the
aggressor. That peace cannot be a ceasefire that would
freeze the front line and enshrine Russia’s annexation
of the territories it has occupied. On 23 February, 141
States expressed their support for that just and lasting
peace. The first step is respect for Ukraine’s territorial
integrity. It is in that spirit that France supports the
Ukrainian peace plan.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today’s meeting is taking place against a
remarkable backdrop. For nearly a month now, goaded
by its Western sponsors, to whom Ukraine has to account
for the effectiveness of its efforts in using the weapons
and ammunition they supply it with, the Ukrainian
Armed Forces have been conducting a suicidal counteroffensive on Russian positions. It has already cost them
tens of thousands of mobilized personnel and several
hundred armoured vehicles, while Ukrainian society
has dubbed it the “Zaporizhzhya meat-grinder”, by
analogy to the Bakhmut meat-grinder to which the
Kyiv regime sent Ukrainian soldiers to certain death
for several months merely to prove to Western arms
suppliers that Ukraine could defeat Russia. Of course,
they succeeded only in proving the opposite, something
that Zelenskyy and his clique are now trying to forget.
They have a rather more serious task now,
which is how to turn a total fiasco and a debacle
into a victory — the word in Ukrainian is peremoga.
Washington, London and Brussels have joined forces
with them to do that, although they have never given
any thought either to Ukraine itself or to its interests.
Given everything that has happened, it is now even
more obvious that they are interested in Ukraine only as
14/23

23/06/2023

a tool to weaken or at least restrain Russia. That is why
they will not allow the puppet regime in Kyiv to say a
word about peace — at least, not until every Ukrainian
is dead — just as they would not allow it in March of
last year, something that our President discussed in
detail at his meeting with African leaders. We will talk
more next Thursday about our former Western partners’
criminal policies in Ukraine, a subject that is definitely
worth a separate meeting.
Turning to the humanitarian situation in Ukraine,
we should point out the catastrophic consequences of
the destruction of the Kakhovka hydroelectric plant
dam, which will continue to be felt for a very long time
both in Ukraine and Russia. Ecosystems have been
unrecognizably altered, and that will have a direct
impact on the way of life of the people in the regions and
do irrevocable damage to the environment, including in
the Black Sea. It is clear that those in Kyiv who are
responsible for that terrorist attack, being fixated on
their famous counteroffensive, are in no way concerned
about the interests of their people or the future of
their country. In the time that has passed since this
tragedy occurred, ever more clear evidence has been
emerging that proves not just the Zelenskyy regime’s
responsibility for the crime but its Western sponsors’
as well. As we are all perfectly aware, the Ukrainian
Armed Forces can fire the HIMARS weapons systems
that were used to destroy the dam only once Washington
approves the target. All those facts and the evidence
are detailed in our letter, which has been circulated as
an official document of the Security Council and the
General Assembly.
In that context, we should not fail to note our
disappointment with the way our international
organization has acted, and continues to act. We
warned the Secretary-General about the Kyiv regime’s
plot regarding the Kakhovka dam as early as in our
letter dated 21 October last year. Nothing was done.
So where was the much-praised famous United Nations
prevention? Where were the essential preventive efforts
with Ukraine? Instead, United Nations officials are
complaining about a lack of humanitarian access to
Russian territories that suffered after the destruction
of the Kakhovka dam. I am obliged to clarify the issue
in that regard and to remind the Council of some points
that the United Nations has either clearly distorted or
failed to mention.
Since February 2022, Russia
advocated
the
continuation
of

has actively
international
23-18284

23/06/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

humanitarian assistance through the United Nations
and the International Committee of the Red Cross to
the civilian population in Donbas, who for several years
have been forced by the Kyiv regime to live under fire
and in totally isolated conditions. Moscow organized
regular cooperation with humanitarian workers and
invited colleagues from the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs. However, in practice the
lofty rhetoric of United Nations officials about their
desire to help the people in need has led to no concrete
efforts or results. The United Nations leadership is not
considering and never has considered any alternatives
for delivering aid to the Donetsk and Luhansk people’s
republics and the Zaporizhzhya and Kherson regions
other than from Kyiv and across the contact line. The
main reason for that rigid position is not humanitarian
but strictly political. The goal is not to help people who
are suffering, but to show that the Kyiv regime allegedly
retains control over those territories.
For its part, Russia has consistently drawn the
attention of United Nations representatives to the lack
of essential security conditions against a backdrop of
active combat, high risks of sabotage and provocations
and mine contamination, which for all practical
purposes makes cross-line access impossible. We have
repeatedly offered to consider options for delivering
aid from within Russia via established routes that have
already been used for supplying Donbas. The United
Nations turned down all our proposals, to the advantage
of Kyiv and its Western sponsors. Once again, we have
to point out these double standards and the blatant
politicization of humanitarian tasks. With expressions
of concern for the civilian population, a political agenda
is being obediently advanced without much remorse.
I should note that after Ukraine blew up the
Kakhovka dam, a large-scale humanitarian operation
was carried out in the Kherson oblast and the Russian
Ministry of Emergency Situations saved nearly 2,000
people, including hundreds of children. More than 6,000
people were evacuated from 36 flooded towns. The
effectiveness of our efforts was indirectly recognized
even in Ukraine, which attempted to use the footage of
our operations as its own.
While the Russian Federation is doing its utmost
to mitigate the suffering of the residents of the
affected areas and provide them with everything they
need, the Kyiv authorities have continued to shell
civilian facilities. On 10 June, Ukrainian forces hit an
evacuation point with British Storm Shadow missiles,

S/PV.9357

killing one woman. The United Nations has continued to
ignore such egregious crimes by the Kyiv regime while
attempting to sweep under the rug the destruction of
the Togliatti-Odesa ammonia pipeline, which is key to
ensuring the uninterrupted export of Russian fertilizer
to the global market that the Secretariat claims to care
about so much. At the same time, it continues to prop
up the Black Sea Grain Initiative, despite its clearly
commercial rather than humanitarian nature and
despite the fact that the Russian side of the agreement
was never implemented. And our exploded pipeline has
now eliminated any doubts about that.
Ms. DiCarlo is quick to make accusations about
the Russian Federation, but when it comes to the
crimes of Ukraine, the Secretariat displays astounding
ignorance. Let me remind the Council that the pipeline
was destroyed on Ukrainian territory. Or is she trying
yet again to blame us for blowing up our own pipeline?
We are ready to continue to help developing countries
in need with both grain and fertilizers, but we are not
going to pay for commercial supplies of grain from
Ukraine to rich Western States under the banner of
protecting the interests of those in need. Contrary to the
assertions of the Under-Secretary-General, the poorest
countries have received less than 3 per cent of all the
food shipments.
In the face of a failing counter-offensive, the Kyiv
regime is resorting to its favourite tactic of trying to
attract the attention of the Western community to highprofile crimes or stagings for which the blame is pinned
on the Russian Federation. That was the case with
Bucha in April 2022, and that is also one of the goals of
the destruction of the Kakhovka dam. That is why we
are extremely alarmed by the increasingly frequent and
paranoid statements of the leaders of the Kyiv regime
alleging that Russia has mined the Zaporizhzhya power
plant and is preparing to blow it up. Its absurdity would
have been clear to the mission of the International
Atomic Energy Agency led by Director-General Grossi,
who recently visited the plant, despite the obstacles
created by Ukraine. We would like to think that the
Western sponsors of the Kyiv regime will be able to
compel reason and prevent a disaster that could affect
a large part of Europe. As we have seen many times
before, Zelenskyy himself and his clique do not give a
damn either about Ukraine or Europe.
If Council members have been paying attention, one
of the Kyiv regime’s’s main complaints to its Western
sponsors since Ukraine’s so-called counteroffensive

23-1828415/23

S/PV.9357

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

began has been the lack of anti-aircraft and missile
systems. Curiously, those complaints have coincided
with an almost total halt to the reports of Russian
missiles and drone attacks allegedly hitting residential
buildings and facilities in Ukrainian cities. The most
recent such high-profile episode occurred in Odesa
on 14 June when a Ukrainian missile fell on the upper
floors of a residential building, causing damage and
casualties. Such reports have more or less disappeared
from the information space, despite the fact that attacks
on military infrastructure in Ukrainian cities are taking
place almost daily.
All of that confirms something that we have been
warning about for a long time and that Ukrainian
citizens know very well, which is that the most
significant, if not the only, danger to Ukrainian cities
is posed by the Ukrainian air defence systems deployed
there in violation of international humanitarian law.
When they are not there or are moved outside cities, the
only things that are blown up are ammunition storage
sites, military barracks and other military facilities,
as well as energy infrastructure facilities related to
supplying Western weapons to the front. Those strikes
will continue as part of one of the goals of the special
military operation, which is the demilitarization of
Ukraine. They have already left Ukraine almost without
weapons of its own, and the Kyiv regime is relying
almost exclusively on Western supplies. However, we
will talk about that in detail on Thursday.
Today a number of countries, and specifically
the United States, Albania and the United Kingdom,
alleged that the Russian Federation perpetrated another
provocation by conducting a missile strike on Kyiv
during the visit of the African delegation that had come
there to present a peace plan. The African leaders
denied the Kyiv regime’s claims of rocket attacks on
Kyiv during their visit. It was yet another scenario
staged by the regime. Allow me to quote a Ukrainian
news site.
“The delegation of South Africa, headed by
President Ramaphosa, denies a missile strike by the
Russian Federation.”
That was announced by the President’s spokesperson,
Vincent Magwenya. He said that he had been taking
a video from his hotel in Kyiv “when the so-called
explosion occurred”. Furthermore, he said,
“It’s very strange that we didn’t hear or see an
explosion. There’s obviously some deliberate
16/23

23/06/2023

misinformation being spread here... [While the
siren was sounding] people were simply going
about their day. As we expected, this mission
was not going to be easy, but some of the issues
were deeply disturbing while others were outright
amusing, like this so-called explosion.”
When asked to clarify whether he denied the explosion
in Kyiv, Magwenya answered,
“From my own experience and that of the people I
am travelling with, yes, I am disputing it. We were
all perplexed when we were taken back to the hotel
and passed streets where people were going about
their day as normal. It’s very strange and is, in a
way, deliberate misinformation.”
That is an example of how Ukrainian propaganda and
misinformation work and how Kyiv’s Western sponsors
are happy to spread it further.
Today we are seeing yet more attempts by the United
States and its allies to force the Secretariat to carry out a
so-called investigation into the alleged supply of Iranian
drones for use in Ukraine. We presented our opinions to
the press before today’s meeting. Briefly, both we and
the Iranians categorically deny those fabrications. The
Kyiv regime has not presented either us or the Iranians,
who agreed to bilateral consultations for that purpose,
with even a tiny bit of credible evidence. Attempts
to drag the so-called group of resolution 2231 (2015)
into this misadventure could run the risk of putting in
question the commitment of the Secretariat to Article
100 of the Charter. The group is not a sanctions
committee or a panel of experts. Its members were
not appointed by Member States as experts in specific
aspects of disarmament or other areas. We hope that the
Secretary-General is wise enough not to be misled by
our former Western partners.
Yesterday our country marked our Day of
Remembrance and Sorrow. On that day 82 years ago,
fascist Germany attacked the Soviet Union. Some
27 million residents of the Soviet Union perished in
the fight against their fascist aggressors. Today, as they
did then, German tanks are once again firing on our
soldiers in Ukraine, but with one difference, which
is that the Nazi regime that has taken hold in Kyiv is
backed not just by Germany but by the United States
and its NATO allies. What has not changed over the
years is their hatred of our country and the desire to
inflict a strategic blow on our country, loot our natural
resources and enslave our people. But those plans will
23-18284

23/06/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

never come to be, just as they did not come to be 82
years ago. Because just as they did then, the German
tanks and other Western equipment are burning on the
Ukrainian steppes alongside the unfulfilled hopes of
the newly sprung Nazis and their sponsors that they can
vanquish the Russian Federation. And just as they did
80 years ago, they will meet with bitter disappointment.
The President: I shall now make a statement
in my capacity as the representative of the United
Arab Emirates.
I would like to join others in thanking UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo for her informative
briefing, and I welcome Ukraine’s participation at
today’s meeting.
As Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo highlighted,
the recent trend of military escalation and the threat
of spillover is of huge concern. Both will serve only to
cause greater suffering to civilians and create knock-on
effects for regional and global stability. She also rightly
underlined the importance of political and diplomatic
efforts to set the conflict on the path to peace. We
urge all actors working towards that end to combine
their efforts and to heed her call for the full respect of
international humanitarian law throughout the duration
of the conflict.
To that end, I want to make two points today. First,
we must continue to take meaningful steps towards a
political resolution of this war. In her recent visit to
Kyiv, the Special Envoy of the United Arab Emirates
for Ukraine, Her Excellency Ms. Mariam Almheiri,
conveyed to President Zelenskyy our steadfast
commitment to a just and peaceful outcome in Ukraine
and our support to the country’s humanitarian needs. We
also welcome the efforts of the Africa Peace Initiative’s
presidential delegation, which recently visited both Kyiv
and Moscow and made a call for peace, demonstrating
global support for the stabilization of the world order.
While this conflict remains intractable, today we
must engage in the practical steps necessary to alleviate
human suffering and engage in trust-building exercises
between the two countries. The United Arab Emirates
is trying to do its part. We continue to support prisonerexchange initiatives. We strongly support the renewal
of the Black Sea Grain Initiative, which remains vital
for global food security, and we will support its full
operationalization with practical measures. Further, we
encourage the full implementation of the memorandum

S/PV.9357

of understanding on Russian fertilizer and food
products in the ongoing discussion.
Secondly, the humanitarian situation must remain
our clear focus today and in the coming days and the
weeks ahead. During her visit, Minister Almheiri had
a direct and clear-eyed view of the dire humanitarian
situation on the ground in Ukraine. She underlined
the unwavering humanitarian support of the United
Arab Emirates to all people affected by the conflict.
Accordingly, the United Arab Emirates is distributing
$100 million of aid for Ukraine. With 53 per cent of
energy facilities in the country affected by the fighting,
my country’s donation includes generators and lightemitting diode lights for civilians. We are also providing
supplies for newborns and babies, as well as a grant
of $4 million for programmes supporting the welfare
of orphaned children through the Olena Zelenska
Foundation. As the conflict prevents millions of
children and students from attending classes, the United
Arab Emirates will also donate 2,500 laptops to those
affected so that they can benefit from remote learning.
Children must remain the focus of our efforts, and
their rights should be upheld and protected at all costs.
The weight of war falls heaviest on children. We are
dismayed at reports of violations against the children
of Ukraine. All parties must meet their obligations for
the protection of children caught up in this war. Some
530 have so far already lost their lives and their futures.
We stress once again the importance of
humanitarian services reaching all those in need. The
safety of humanitarians responding to the Kakhovka
dam flooding must be ensured, all parties must comply
with their obligations under international law, and we
encourage all relevant actors to facilitate the life-saving
work of humanitarian actors.
We are also acutely aware of the dark potential of
a nuclear accident at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant. That has been addressed numerous times in this
Chamber, and the name Chornobyl has echoed with
good reason. We continue to monitor the situation
closely, and we welcome the continued efforts of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
including Director-General Grossi’s visit last week
and the work of the IAEA teams on ground, to avoid a
nuclear accident that would have devastating and longlasting consequences for decades to come.
The United Arab Emirates emphasizes the
importance of the continued non-use of nuclear

23-1828417/23

S/PV.9357

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

23/06/2023

weapons. The world has avoided their use for the past
77 years. That must be maintained. Nuclear rhetoric is
dangerous and destabilizing and undermines efforts to
forge peace. We must all see this as a collective red line.

Nations. It is appalling that Russia not only refused to
rescue the local population in the affected areas under
its temporary military control, but it also declined the
United Nations request for access to these areas.

Ultimately, de-escalation, diplomacy and dialogue
are the only way forward. None of us could have
imagined in March 2022, during the first United Arab
Emirates presidency of the Security Council, when the
conflict had just started, that we would continue to see
significant escalation almost a year later. We urge the
international community to redouble all efforts aimed
at ensuring that future generations are not scarred
by the failure to maintain peace and security on our
watch. In the meantime, the United Arab Emirates will
continue its humanitarian work and its support for all
mediation efforts. We stand ready to assist genuine
efforts to bring the war to a just, sustainable end, in
line with the United Nations Charter.

We commend the United Nations humanitarian
activities in the Ukraine-controlled part of the Kherson
region and support the United Nations efforts to obtain
necessary access to the areas temporarily occupied
by Russia. To this end, the Government of Ukraine
has promptly provided all security guarantees to the
United Nations for fulfilling humanitarian operations
in the entire affected area. We echo United Nations
Humanitarian Coordinator for Ukraine Denise Brown’s
call on the Russian authorities to act in accordance with
their obligations under international humanitarian law
and grant access to people in the occupied territory who
urgently need life-saving assistance. The situation there
remains critical, and the number of people reported
missing so far — 109 persons — may not fully reflect
the grim reality.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I recognize the
representative of Putin’s regime in the permanent seat
of the Soviet Union, whose statement today, as usual,
was as insincere, perverse and cynical as his war-party
leader’s goal was a year ago, when he said, according to
the Russian official tweet, that
“[t]he goal of Russia’s special military operation is
to stop any war that could take place on Ukrainian
territory or that could start from there.”
Two weeks ago, this criminal regime blew up the
dam of the Kakhovka hydroelectric power plant in an
attempt to prevent Ukraine’s possible counteroffensive
actions across the Dnipro River, which was yet another
blatant violation of the International Court of Justice
order of 16 March 2022. Since then, Ukraine has done
its utmost to mitigate the immediate consequences
of this act of terror and ecocide. Evacuating people,
providing them with humanitarian aid, ensuring
access to drinking water for the local population and
preventing infectious diseases have been among the
key priorities of my Government.
Systemic work, marked with the engagement of the
United Nations and other international actors, has been
organized on the right bank of the Dnipro River. At the
same time, the Russian occupiers have turned the left
bank into a “no-go zone”, closed even to the United
18/23

While Russia simply denies access in the occupied
areas, it also tries to undermine humanitarian operations
in Ukraine-controlled areas with unabated shelling.
For instance, on 20 June, a rescue team of the State
Emergency Service of Ukraine came under Russian
fire in Kherson. One rescuer was killed, and eight
others were wounded. The United Nations in Ukraine
characterized this incident as yet another example of
the human impact of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.
A comprehensive assessment of the implications
of this act of terror has yet to be made, although it is
clear that we are dealing with one of the biggest humanmade disasters in Europe in decades. In particular, oil
pollutants that weigh at least 150 tons are drifting along
the Dnipro River and may reach the Mediterranean.
The Kakhovka reservoir has been decimated, resulting
in approximately 95,000 tons of dead fish. Some 500
square kilometres of Ukrainian forests have been
flooded, and at least half of them will die. Some of the
20,000 wild animals that inhabited the flooded area
could hardly have survived.
It is a matter of alarm that, according to intelligence
information, Russia is considering the scenario of a
terrorist attack at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant leading to radiation leakage. The dam explosion
has made it clear that Russia is ready to apply a
scorched-earth tactic in response to the deteriorating
military situation on the ground in the captured lands
23-18284

23/06/2023

S/PV.9357

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

that they doubt they can hold. We therefore urge the
international community to take the threat of this act
of nuclear terror seriously and to step up pressure on
the Russian Federation to prevent these menacing
developments, including but not limited to introducing
strengthened restrictive measures against the Russian
nuclear industry and military-industrial complex. We
also expect an objective assessment by the DirectorGeneral of the International Atomic Energy Agency,
Mr. Rafael Grossi, regarding Russia’s criminal actions.
Only strong and adequate steps aimed at reducing
Moscow’s capabilities to inflict harm regionally and
globally will contribute to resolving the crisis created
by Russia. The military defeat of Russia in Ukraine and
ensuring accountability for the crime of aggression, war
crimes and crimes against humanity are the necessary
elements of this resolution.
Appeasement options, such as territorial
concessions to Russia and temporarily freezing the
conflict, will serve only as delayed-action mines, with
the detonator in the hands of the Kremlin. If such an
option is implemented, the resulting explosion, given
the damage to the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, will reverberate throughout the world.
Any terrorist act aims at intimidating and
generating fear. That is precisely how the Kremlin
regime attempts to achieve its aggressive goals. Russia
has heavily fortified the occupied Ukrainian territory,
but it does not believe in its fortification structures or
its own troops’ resilience.
That is why Russia blew up the dam and mined the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant to intimidate the
international community. That is why it fills its own
army with convicted criminals and deploys blocking
units behind the Russian positions, tasking them to
give soldiers in the first line of defence no escape from
combat. The killing of the Russian soldiers attempting
to retreat are evidenced by the testimonies of captured
Russians, as well as by video footage taken recently by
Ukrainian drones.
In some areas Ukrainian soldiers continue to move
forward, despite the heavily fortified occupied areas.
In some areas they defend their positions and resist
Russia’s intensified attacks. Ukraine will liberate all
its territories, and it will take as long as necessary,
because we value the lives of our soldiers and civilians
and do not apply the strategy of human-wave attacks
and total destruction of civilian infrastructure.

We appreciate the efforts of nations that express
their willingness to contribute to genuine peace,
which attest to the persistent validity and credibility
of the United Nations Charter. The General Assembly
outlined the modalities of such a peace in resolution
ES-11/6, entitled “Principles of the United Nations
Charter underlying a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in Ukraine”.
Thus far, Russia has not demonstrated any
willingness to give up its aggressive path, deliberately
insulting nations that come up with peaceful initiatives.
Russian cruise and ballistic missiles launched on Kyiv
during the visit of the delegation of African leaders
showed Russia’s real disdain for global efforts to restore
peace and to protect the world from aggression.
This attack was but one in an endless line of daily
air strikes with missiles, multiple launch rocket systems,
guided aerial bombs and Iran-made attack drones,
resulting in significant casualties and destruction. As
of today, the Russian Federation has launched more
than 1,000 Iranian unmanned aerial vehicle systems
over the territory of Ukraine.
In a statement delivered today at the media stakeout
right before this Security Council meeting, we said that
Russia’s and Iran’s actions violated resolution 2231
(2015) and that the Secretariat of the United Nations
must respond to growing calls from the international
community to investigate those violations.
Despite the war being at its height, we have already
started working on post-war recovery. The Ukraine
Recovery Conference, held this week in London, sent a
strong political message that Ukraine and its allies have
no doubt in the ultimate victory of my country — a
victory that will guarantee a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace for the benefit of all nations.
As my President
the Conference,

said

when

addressing

“although no one has the power to cleanse the depths
of human nature from the evil that sometimes rises
to the surface and destroys and kills ... we are able
to protect life and overcome the ruins after the
Russian aggression in such a way as to block the
path for evil — meaning for any new aggressions
... the world is watching to see if we will restore
normal life in such a way that our transformation
will land an ideological defeat on the aggressor.”

23-1828419/23

S/PV.9357

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

In his speech in Paris just yesterday, SecretaryGeneral Guterres said:
“[i]n 2023, more than 750 million people do not have
enough to eat. The coronavirus disease pandemic
[COVID-19] and the Russian invasion of Ukraine
have exacerbated the situation.”
In fact, Russia is worse than COVID-19. Putin’s
regime is cancer, and the world cannot be strong and
healthy while its cells continue to spread from Putin’s
bunker and form the new tumours around the world and,
indeed, in the Security Council, in this very Chamber. It
should be removed before it travels further in our blood
and kills us. The choice is ours. Let us choose life.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lithuania.
Mr. Paulauskas (Lithuania): I deliver this statement
on behalf of the Baltic States — Estonia, Latvia and my
own country, Lithuania.
I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her
briefing and the Emirati presidency for the opportunity
to address the Council.
Russia’s unprovoked, unjustified and illegal war of
aggression against Ukraine, aided by Belarus, is ongoing
for almost a year and a half now. Innocent people have
been killed, injured and displaced from their homes.
Families have been torn apart, and children have been
orphaned. The physical and emotional scars of the war
will be felt for generations to come.
Schools, hospitals and other public facilities
have been destroyed, leaving people without access
to essential services. According to the World Bank’s
assessment — carried out in collaboration with the
Ukrainian Government, the European Commission
and the United Nations — the reconstruction needs for
the damages caused by the Russian aggression against
Ukraine are estimated to be around $411 billion over
the next decade. This staggering amount highlights
the severity of the damages caused by the Russian
aggression and the need for significant investment to
rebuild the country. The calculations conducted so far,
however, do not incorporate the detrimental impact
of the Kakhovka dam’s destruction by Russia and its
humanitarian, economic and ecological consequences.
It is unacceptable that despite the repeated calls from
the United Nations to the Russian Federation to provide
safety guarantees for crossing the front line to the left
20/23

23/06/2023

bank of the Dnipro River and ensure humanitarian
access to all civilians impacted by the destruction of
the dam, such guarantees have not yet been provided.
It is imperative that Russia take immediate action, in
accordance with its obligations under international
humanitarian law to allow the United Nations to provide
the much-needed humanitarian aid to those affected by
this devastating act, including in Oleshky.
The Baltic State are among the top bilateral
aid donors to Ukraine, as a percentage of our gross
domestic products. Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania
already provided €1.5 million of immediate assistance
to Ukraine in order to alleviate the consequences of the
dam’s destruction, and that does not include private
initiatives. The costs of addressing the repercussions of
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine, a sovereign nation,
are consistently increasing, while only 26 per cent of
the total $3.9 billion required for the humanitarian
response in Ukraine has been funded. We urge the
international community to continue to provide the
necessary funding.
The work of the United Nations and its agencies to
ensure the close monitoring and proper documentation
of massive human rights abuses and violations of
international humanitarian law should also continue.
We hope for an objective and accurate assessment of
the situation in Ukraine resulting from Russia’s fullscale invasion in the forthcoming annual reports of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence
and children in armed conflict.
I would like to express Estonia, Latvia and
Lithuania’s appreciation for the active United Nations
engagement in alleviating the global consequences of
Russia’s aggression, including through the Black Sea
Grain Initiative. Russia continues to hinder the exports
of Ukrainian goods from Ukrainian ports, thereby
contributing to a significant increase in food prices in
global markets. Russia has also continued to manipulate
the facts and to repeatedly threaten to end the Black
Sea Grain Initiative if its demands are not met. In fact,
according to available statistics, including of Russian
origin, Russian exports of grain and fertilizers have been
consistently high in recent years, and its grain exports
have actually reached record levels. In 2022, due to
higher prices, Russia’s export revenues from fertilizers
increased by an impressive 70 per cent to 150 per cent,
depending on the source. According to the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the
export volume of Russian fertilizers in 2022 decreased
23-18284

23/06/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

by only 10 per cent. Russia must stop blackmailing
the global community and allow the Black Sea Grain
Initiative to operate at its maximum potential.
Finally, our countries continue to argue for full
accountability on the part of Russia’s political and
military leadership for the crime of aggression. The core
group on the creation of a special tribunal for Russia’s
crime of aggression against Ukraine will hold its fourth
meeting in Warsaw on 29 and 30 June, and we call on
all other States and international organizations to join
our collective efforts. We will continue to stand with
Ukraine and its people for as long as it takes Ukraine
to rightfully defend itself against Russia’s brutal war
of aggression. The only path to a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace in Ukraine is one that is based on
full respect for Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity within its internationally
recognized borders. The withdrawal of Russia’s troops
is a key precondition for that. We welcome all the
efforts of our global partners to reach peace in Ukraine
in line with Ukraine’s peace formula, the Charter of the
United Nations and international law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Sakowicz (Poland): Poland appreciates the
convening of today’s timely meeting and duly notes
the insightful remarks by Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo and other speakers.
For almost 500 very long days and nights, Russia
has been ruthlessly pursuing its brutal aggression
against Ukraine. During that whole time, it has also
cynically dismissed all the appeals to it — however
how loud and clear they have been or where they
originated — to stop the bloodshed and remove its
troops from Ukraine’s territory. For the past couple of
weeks, the international community has therefore been
closely following the efforts of the Ukrainian Armed
Forces, who are determined to liberate their country
from Russia’s illegal occupation. In that context, let me
draw the Council’s attention to three issues.
First, Russia needs to bear the full cost of the
destruction that its aggression has caused. With
Russia’s continued attacks on Ukraine’s critical and
civilian infrastructure, assessing the full scope of the
reconstruction process will be an especially crucial
challenge. After 16 months, it is obvious that what
Russia cannot take, it will try to destroy. Shattering
the livelihoods of thousands of innocent civilians

S/PV.9357

by blowing up the Kakhovka dam is just one of the
most recent examples of that cruel strategy. Poland
therefore reiterates its full support for the creation of
a comprehensive registry of all the damage inflicted
by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, followed by close
coordination and a transparent approach to the
reconstruction efforts. In that regard, we commend the
holding in London over the past two days of the Ukraine
Recovery Conference, with the aim of preparing a
political, legal and financial base that would enable the
provision to Ukraine of comprehensive assistance for
reconstruction. As such, it definitely fulfilled its goals.
Secondly, Ukraine has a perfect right to freely
choose its future alliances and partnerships. It needs to
be able to decide for itself the international partners it
wants to build its prosperity with — and that naturally
includes security cooperation. Kyiv is looking forward
to concrete prospects for ensuring its security after
Russia’s aggression is ended, and Poland fully
understands and supports that approach.
Last but not least, we must bear in mind that
although the process of the reconstruction of Ukraine
will be costly and lengthy, it is in the interests of the
whole world. According to some estimates, at least
600 million consumers worldwide depend directly on
Ukraine’s agricultural production. We firmly believe
that only a complete and unconditional withdrawal of
Russia’s forces from the internationally recognized
territory of Ukraine can provide a chance for a just and
stable peace, facilitating a long-term solution for global
economic recovery and an improvement in the world’s
food situation. Even if we manage to stop the bloodshed
today and reinstate the primacy of international law
and establish peace, the consequences of the war will
be felt for a very long time.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Czechia.
Mr. Kulhánek (Czechia): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of Slovakia and my
own country, Czechia.
We fully align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the European Union.
Let me thank you, Madam President, for convening
this meeting, and I of course also thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing, which
unfortunately only adds to the bleak picture of the
devastating consequences of Russia’s unprovoked and

23-1828421/23

S/PV.9357

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

unjustified military aggression against Ukraine. We
regret that the Security Council must once again devote
its attention to this issue simply because of Russia’s
utter disregard for the Charter of the United Nations
and its fundamental principles. Judging by its actions
in Ukraine, Russia has demonstrated time and again
that it has no interest in effective multilateralism, the
maintenance of international peace and security or the
development of friendly relations. The Russian armed
forces continue to deliberately target civilians and
civilian infrastructure, and we strongly condemn such
barbaric attacks. Let us therefore be under no illusions
about the true intentions of the Russian Government.
Its missile attack on Kyiv last week while African
leaders were in the city on a diplomatic mission speaks
for itself.
We ask ourselves how many lives must be lost
or ruined for this senseless war to stop. For Russia,
the death toll, which keeps rising from one Security
Council briefing to the next, is apparently just a
number on paper. Russia’s disregard for international
humanitarian law and human rights is also evident in
its ongoing repression of its own citizens. We were
horrified by the destruction of the Kakhovka dam and
by the very disturbing reports that Russian forces were
shelling Ukrainian rescue workers who were trying to
reach flooded areas in the Kherson region. We call on
Russia once again to stop its aggression against Ukraine
immediately and withdraw its troops from the territory
of Ukraine within its internationally recognized
borders, including Crimea and the regions where
Russia orchestrated its sham referendums. We will also
continue to support efforts to hold fully accountable
those who have committed the most serious crimes
under international law in Ukraine, including rape and
sexual violence against women and girls.
As our Foreign Ministers agreed at their most recent
bilateral meeting, we will maintain our comprehensive
support for Ukraine in its just struggle to preserve
its statehood. Czechia and Slovakia have stood by
Ukraine since the start of its defence against Russia’s
aggression, and we will remain steadfast in supporting
Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity until the nightmare ends. We hope that day
will come soon.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Skoog.
Mr. Skoog: I have the honour to speak on behalf of
the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
22/23

23/06/2023

candidate countries North Macedonia, Montenegro,
Albania, Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and the potential candidate Georgia,
as well as Andorra and San Marino, align themselves
with this statement.
I first want to thank Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo for her briefing and to take this opportunity
to commend the entire United Nations team on the
ground, led by Resident Coordinator Denise Brown, for
the invaluable assistance it is providing to the people
of Ukraine at this very difficult time. We know that
the United Nations system is fully mobilized through
humanitarian relief, support to refugees and internally
displaced persons, human rights monitoring, mine
action, nuclear safety, addressing the dire global
consequences of Russia’s aggression and much more. It
has our very strong support.
As Russia’s unprovoked and unjustified war of
aggression approaches the tragic 500-day mark, the
people of Ukraine and the international community
desire a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
Ukraine, in line with the Charter of the United Nations
and the resolutions of the General Assembly. Yet one
country, the aggressor, remains steadfast in pursuing
its brutal war on a neighbouring country and its people.
When African Heads of State visited Kyiv last week
calling for peace, Russia responded by bombing the
city, as it did when the Secretary-General visited last
year. The way to end Russia’s assault on Ukraine is
crystal clear. Russia must end its war and immediately,
completely and unconditionally withdraw all of its forces
and proxies from the entire territory of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders. I will emphasize
three brief points in my intervention — first, the tragic
human rights situation in the territories temporarily
occupied by Russia; secondly, the importance of
upholding international humanitarian law and thirdly,
the need for accountability.
The human rights situation in the occupied
territories is of grave concern. International monitoring
mechanisms, including the Human Rights Monitoring
Mission in Ukraine and the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine, have concluded
that Russian authorities have committed a wide
range of violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law in Ukraine. The
reported violations include indiscriminate attacks
on civilians and civilian infrastructure, a widespread
and systematic pattern of summary executions,
23-18284

23/06/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

torture and ill-treatment and unlawful confinement,
as well as inhumane detention conditions, rape and
other forms of sexual and gender-based violence and
forced transfer and deportation, including of children.
Many of those amount to war crimes. The most recent
report of the Commission of Inquiry (A/HRC/52/62)
also concludes that the attacks on Ukraine’s energyrelated infrastructure and the use of torture by Russian
authorities may amount to crimes against humanity.
We call on Russia to uphold international human
rights law. Its practice of forcibly issuing Russian
passports to Ukrainian citizens is in blatant violation
of international law and undermines Ukraine’s
sovereignty. The International Committee of the Red
Cross should be granted full and unconditional access
to all detained persons, and all Ukrainian citizens
illegally detained by Russia should be released. The
decision by the Russian Central Election Commission
to hold so-called elections in the territories of Ukraine
temporarily occupied by Russia’s military is yet another
violation of international law — and, by the way, of
General Assembly resolution ES-11/4, on Ukraine’s
territorial integrity, adopted in October 2022.
Secondly, we reiterate the importance of
upholding international humanitarian law. We are
appalled by reports that evacuation teams rescuing
civilians following the destruction of the Kakhovka
hydroelectric plant dam are being shelled. We urge
the Russian Federation to cease such attacks and allow
help to the affected civilian population, including
in areas under Russian military control. The EU
condemns in the strongest possible terms the attack at
the Kakhovka plant, which is a direct consequence of
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine. The downstream
flooding has not only put tens of thousands of civilian
lives in danger, but it is also affecting water and energy
supplies and causing an ecological and environmental
catastrophe. As the United Nations has repeatedly
requested, we urge Russia to enable safe, rapid and
unhindered humanitarian access to the populations
in need of assistance, in particular in the temporarily
occupied territories. Aid cannot be denied to those in
need. The impact of Russia’s aggression on children

S/PV.9357

is particularly horrific, and we look forward to the
imminent publication of the Secretary-General’s report
on children and armed conflict.
Thirdly, the EU is firmly committed to ensuring
full accountability for war crimes and the other most
serious crimes committed in connection with Russia’s
war of aggression. We emphasize the importance
of coordinated accountability initiatives to combat
impunity and ensure justice. We support the ongoing
work for the establishment of a tribunal for the
prosecution of the crime of aggression, which is of
concern to the international community as a whole. The
EU welcomes the establishment of the International
Centre for the Prosecution of the Crime of Aggression
against Ukraine at the European Union Agency for
Criminal Justice Cooperation in The Hague. We are also
fully supportive of the establishment of an international
mechanism to register the damage Russia has inflicted.
Following General Assembly resolution ES-11/5 of
November 2022, which acknowledged the need for a
register of damage, and the Reykjavík Summit of the
Council of Europe, the register has been established.
We underline our support for the investigations of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court.
The EU calls for a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace in line with the Charter and General Assembly
resolution ES-11/6, adopted in February, and with
respect for Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity within its internationally
recognized borders — a peace that will benefit all
nations, as the Ambassador of Ukraine just said. We
welcome international efforts to that effect and reaffirm
our support to President Zelenskyy’s peace formula.
The members of the Security Council must
distinguish between the victim and the aggressor in this
war of aggression. Under the United Nations Charter,
Ukraine has the right to self-defence against Russia’s
attacks in order to restore its territorial integrity. It also
has the right to request international support for such
efforts. The EU is committed to supporting Ukraine in
that regard for as long as it takes.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

23-1828423/23
