S/PV.8950

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8950th meeting

Wednesday, 19 January 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Huitfeldt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Norway)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Ms. Botchwey
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the Security Council
addressed to Permanent Representatives of Security Council members dated 7 May 2020
(S/2020/372), which was agreed in light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic, this official record of the Security Council will be supplemented by
a compilation of annexes (S/2022/39) containing the statements submitted by interested
non-members of the Council.

22-23363 (E)
*2223363*

S/PV.8950

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

their statements in five minutes or less. Note 507 also
encourages briefers to be succinct and focus on key
issues. In that spirit, briefers are further encouraged
to limit their initial remarks to seven to 10 minutes.
Everyone is also encouraged to wear a mask at all
times, including while delivering remarks.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question

I now give the floor to Mr. Wennesland.

The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Argentina, Bahrain, Chile, Cuba,
Egypt, Hungary, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Malaysia, Morocco,
Saudi Arabia, South Africa, the Syrian Arab Republic
and Turkey to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the Observer State
of Palestine to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Riad Al-Malki.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in the meeting: Mr. Tor
Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process; Ms. Nada Majdalani, Palestine Director
of EcoPeace Middle East; and Mr. Gidon Bromberg,
co-Founder and Israel Director of EcoPeace Middle East.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
to participate in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. Olof
Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations; His Excellency Mr. Maged
Abdelfattah Abdelaziz, Permanent Observer of the
League of Arab States to the United Nations; and
His Excellency Mr. Arrmanatha Christiawan Nasir,
Vice-Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Before we begin with our speakers list
today — recalling the Security Council’s latest
note by the President (S/2017/507) on its working
methods — I wish to encourage all speakers, both
members and non-members of the Council, to deliver
2/34

19/01/2022

Mr. Wennesland: In my recent briefings, I have
highlighted the ongoing deterioration of the economic,
security and political situation across the occupied
Palestinian territory. Regrettably, that trend continues,
and urgent steps are required to prevent the situation
from worsening.
The Palestinian Authority’s (PA) fiscal situation
continues to be dire, threatening its institutional
stability and its ability to provide services to its people.
Violence continues unabated across the occupied
Palestinian territory, including settler violence, leading
to numerous Palestinian and Israeli casualties and
increasing the risk of a broader escalation. Settlement
activity, demolitions and evictions also continue,
fuelling hopelessness and further diminishing prospects
for a negotiated solution.
We must be frank about what is needed to reverse
those trends and provide momentum towards a
reinvigorated peace process. Piecemeal approaches
and half measures will only ensure that the underlying
issues perpetuating the conflict continue to fester and
worsen over time. Unilateral steps and conflict drivers
must stop. Political and economic reforms must be
implemented to ensure the PA’s continued ability to
function effectively, while boosting donor confidence
and support.
Above all, efforts by the parties and the international
community to stabilize and improve conditions on the
ground should be linked to a political framework.
Without a realistic prospect of an end to the
occupation and the realization of a two-State solution
based on United Nations resolutions, international law
and previous agreements, it is only a matter of time
before we face an irreversible, dangerous collapse and
widespread instability.
Daily violence continued throughout the occupied
Palestinian territory during the reporting period.
In Gaza on 29 December, a Palestinian opened fire
towards the Gaza perimeter fence, injuring an Israeli
civilian. In retaliation, Israeli forces fired several tank
22-23363

19/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

shells at what they said were Hamas observation posts
in the northern Gaza Strip. Four Palestinian civilians
were reportedly injured, including a 16-year-old boy.
On 1 January, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF)
announced that two rockets fired from Gaza had
landed off the coast of central Israel. Israeli forces
subsequently carried out air strikes against what they
said were facilities belonging to militant groups in
Gaza. No injuries were reported.
In the occupied West Bank, six Palestinian men
were killed by Israeli security forces, and another
died in unclear circumstances in the context of
demonstrations, clashes, search and arrest operations,
attacks and alleged attacks against Israelis, as well
as in other incidents. Two hundred and forty-nine
Palestinians, including four women and 46 children,
were injured.
Settlers and other Israeli civilians perpetrated 28
attacks against Palestinians, resulting in six injured
and damage to property. Two Palestinians were killed
under unclear circumstances involving Israeli civilian
vehicles. In all, Palestinians perpetrated some 89 attacks
against Israeli settlers and other civilians, resulting in
15 Israeli civilians injured and damage to property in
clashes, shootings, stabbings and ramming attacks, as
well as incidents involving the throwing of stones and
Molotov cocktails and other incidents. Five members of
the Israeli security forces were also injured.
On 29 December, a Palestinian man who reportedly
attempted to carry out a ramming attack against Israeli
security forces near the Mevo Dotan settlement, in
the northern West Bank, was killed by Israeli security
forces.
On 22 December, a Palestinian man was killed by
Israeli security forces near the Al-Amari refugee camp
near Ramallah. According to Israeli security forces, the
man had opened fire from a vehicle at Israeli forces
conducting a search and arrest operation in the area.
On 31 December, a Palestinian man reportedly
attempted to carry out a stabbing attack against Israeli
soldiers and civilians near the village of Salfit. He was
shot by Israeli security forces and later succumbed to
his wounds.
On 6 January, a 21-year-old Palestinian man was
killed during armed exchanges with Israeli security
forces as the conducted a search and arrest operation in
the Balata refugee camp, near Nablus in Area A.

S/PV. 8950

On 5 January, a tow truck under supervision
by Israeli police hit and severely injured a 70-yearold Palestinian activist man in Un Al-Khail, south
of Hebron, during a police operation to confiscate
unregistered vehicles. The man subsequently died from
his injuries on 17 January. Police reported that a driver
was injured in the head by stones thrown at him and
required medical attention.
On 12 January, an 80-year-old Palestinian man died
in the context of an Israeli security forces operation
near Ramallah, in which the victim was reportedly
handcuffed, blindfolded and physically assaulted
by the security forces. According to the IDF, the
man was released alive. I note that Israeli authorities
have initiated an investigation and called for a swift,
thorough and transparent outcome.
On 17 January, Israeli security forces reported that
a Palestinian man attempted to stab an IDF soldier with
a knife near Hebron. Israeli security forces shot and
killed the alleged assailant. No injuries were reported
among the Israeli security forces. Another Palestinian
who had been driving the vehicle of the alleged assailant
later turned himself in to the Israeli security forces.
Settler-related violence remained a serious
concern throughout the reporting period. From 23 to
25 December 2021, 156 Palestinians were injured by
rubber bullets from Israeli forces and 15 from live
ammunition in confrontations that erupted in and
around Burqa, near Nablus, after settlers repeatedly
raided the village, vandalized property and clashed
with the local residents. That occurred as part of settler
protests against the killing of an Israeli settler in that
area on 16 December 2021 and demands to re-establish
the adjacent settlement of Homesh, which had been
officially evacuated in 2005.
On several occasions during reporting period,
Israeli security forces and Israeli settlers clashed in the
context of efforts by the security forces to dismantle
unauthorized structures set up by Israeli settlers in
Homesh and other outposts, which are also illegal
under Israeli law. All perpetrators of violence must be
held accountable and brought swiftly to justice.
Turning to settlement-related developments, on
5 January Israeli authorities postponed a planned
discussion on objections to two plans for some 3,500
housing units in the controversial E-1 Area on the West
Bank. A new date for the discussion has not been set.
The same day, Israeli authorities published tenders for

22-233633/34

S/PV.8950

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

some 300 settlement housing units in the Talpiot East
neighbourhood in occupied East Jerusalem.
On 10 January, the Israeli District Planning
Committee advanced a plan, pending revision, to build
some 800 housing units in place of an existing 182 units
in the East Jerusalem settlement of Gilo. On 17 January,
the Jerusalem District Planning Committee advanced a
plan for some 1,200 housing units next to Kibbutz Ramat
Rachel, in the southern Jerusalem area, a significant
number of which are intended for construction across
the Green Line in East Jerusalem. I reiterate that all
settlements are illegal under international law and
remain a substantial obstacle to peace. I call on the
Government of Israel to cease the advancement of all
settlement activities immediately.
Israeli authorities demolished, seized and forced
owners to demolish 54 Palestinian-owned structures
in Area C and 23 in occupied East Jerusalem, thereby
displacing 102 Palestinians, including 26 women and
47 children. The demolitions were carried out due to
the lack of Israeli-issued building permits, which are
nearly impossible for Palestinians to obtain.
On 19 January, Israeli forces evicted a Palestinian
family and demolished their home in the occupied East
Jerusalem neighbourhood of Sheikh Jarrah, which
displaced 12 Palestinians and reportedly resulted
in a number of arrests. According to the Jerusalem
Municipality, the structures were built illegally in
recent years and the land was cleared to build a special
needs school to serve Palestinian children from
East Jerusalem.
I remain concerned about the potential eviction of
a number of Palestinian families from homes in which
they have lived for decades in the Sheikh Jarrah and
Silwan neighbourhoods of East Jerusalem and the risk
that such actions pose for escalating violence. I call on
Israeli authorities to end the displacement and eviction
of Palestinians, in line with its obligations under
international law, and to approve additional plans that
would enable Palestinian communities to build legally
and address their development needs.
On 28 December 2021, Palestinian President
Mahmoud Abbas met with Israeli Defence Minister
Benjamin Gantz for the second time in four months.
Following the meeting, Israel announced several
measures, including updating the registration of
some 9,500 Palestinians on the West Bank in Gaza,
an advance of 100 million Israeli shekels against the
4/34

19/01/2022

clearance revenue that Israel collects on behalf of the
PA and additional entry permits for Palestinian officials
and businessmen. I welcome the ongoing high-level
engagement between Israel and Palestinian officials
and the recent steps that have been announced. I urge
both sides to continue to expand that engagement to end
past underlying political issues.
Following the designation by Israel of six
Palestinian non-governmental organizations as terrorist
organizations, the United Nations continues to engage
with all relevant parties to receive more information
about the allegations and their implications.
On 12 January, the Palestinian Central Elections
Commission concluded voter registration for a
second phase of local council elections, scheduled for
26 March. However, on 17 January, the Palestinian
Cabinet postponed local council elections in Gaza
over procedural disputes. On 14 January, the Envoys
of the Middle East Quartet met virtually to discuss the
most recent political developments and the situation on
the ground.
Turning to Gaza, during the month of January
Israeli authorities completed the issuance of permits
to approximately 10,000 Gazan merchants and
traders — some 12,000 total approved permits,
the highest number in years. I welcome the stated
willingness of the Government of Israel, in line with
the commitments made in November 2021 at the Ad
Hoc Liaison Committee meeting in Oslo, to increase
the movement of goods and people into and out of the
Gaza Strip and the steps taken in that regard. At the
same time, I reiterate that more such measures are
needed for durable economic benefits to materialize.
I urge both parties to engage with the United Nations
to find concrete ways to further enhance access and
trade, including facilitating the entry of dual-use
materials for key sectors of the economy under the
Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism.
On 27 December 2021, the State of Qatar announced
that it had signed an agreement with the PA and the
Gaza Electricity Distribution Corporation to advance
the construction of a natural gas pipeline from Israel to
Gaza. The pipeline aims to reduce costs and increase
efficiency and electricity generation at the Gaza power
plant. I urge all parties to facilitate the implementation
of that important project.
On 28 December 2021, the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
22-23363

19/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

East (UNRWA) announced the start of cash assistance
allocation of $8.2 million to families whose homes were
damaged during the May 2021 escalation. Thanks to
exceptional financial contributions, an advance on 2022
contributions, a Central Emergency Response Fund
loan and debt carried into 2022, UNRWA was able to
sustain critical education, health care and humanitarian
services for millions of Palestinian refugees in the
occupied Palestinian territories and throughout the
region. For 2022, UNRWA is again presenting a zerogrowth core programme budget, despite the increased
needs of Palestinian refugees. The Agency is confronted
with a serious financial existential threat that can affect
the rights and well-being of refugees and regional
stability. I therefore urge Member States to continue
and expand their contribution to UNRWA.
Turning briefly to the region, in the Golan, while
the ceasefire between Israel and Syria has generally
been maintained, violations of the 1974 Disengagement
of Forces Agreement by the parties continue to increase
tensions. It is important that the parties respect the
obligations under the terms of the Agreement and refrain
from taking unilateral steps in the occupied Golan that
further erode peace and stability in the region.
During a visit to Lebanon in December, the
Secretary-General expressed solidarity with the
Lebanese people in the context of the country’s difficult
socioeconomic situation. He reiterated the need for
political leaders to work together to urgently find a
solution to the crisis.
Parliamentary elections have been announced
for 15 May. The full reactivation of the Cabinet
will be important, including to reliably support
election preparations.
The situation in the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) area of operations remains
relatively stable, despite isolated incidents of aggressive
behaviour against peacekeepers. UNIFIL remains
engaged with the parties to contain incidents and defuse
tension along the Blue Line.
In closing, allow me to reiterate the urgent need
for a coordinated approach to addressing the political,
economic and institutional obstacles blocking the way
for a meaningful peace process. Alongside key reforms
and steps by all parties to defuse tensions, we must
focus on providing a political context that will ensure
that the positive engagement that we have witnessed in
recent months is not squandered.

S/PV. 8950

Partners, including those in the region, have a vital
role to play. Efforts must also be made to continue to
encourage all Palestinian political factions to move
towards political consensus and bring Gaza and the
occupied West Bank under one legitimate democratic
Palestinian Authority.
Gaza remains integral to a future Palestinian
State as a part of the two-State solution. Short-term
challenges and urgent crises must be addressed. Yet, at
the same time, we must ensure that the solution put in
place advances our ultimate goal: an end to occupation
and the achievement of a two-State solution on the basis
of United Nations resolutions, international law and
previous agreements.
The United Nations will continue to actively
engage, along with its counterparts in the Middle East
Quartet, regional and international partners and Israeli
and Palestinian leaders, to reach a just comprehensive
and lasting settlement of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
The President: I thank Mr. Wennesland for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Majdalani.
Ms. Majdalani: I am a mother of two. I relate
to the helpless feelings of Gazan parents seeing the
heartbreaking images of children being rescued during
this week’s flash floods in Gaza and of others taking
shelter under homes with roofs made of plastic sheets.
Children in Gaza my daughter’s age are growing
up in a reality that no child in the world should
experience: shortages of water, long dark, cold nights
without electricity or fuel, wars, and close to 15 years
of blockade that have resulted in medical and food
insecurity. Added to this now are the catastrophes of
climate change. Yes, we see it with our own eyes, today
in Gaza, affecting the lives of 2 million people.
We as humans, activists, professionals and decision
makers have a compelling obligation to prevent further
humanitarian and environmental crisis. Following the
United Nations Climate Conference in Glasgow, our
hope is that world leaders will walk us down a path that
comprises serious steps towards greater opportunities,
not just to build back better, but to build forward
towards the best possibilities.
I appear before the Security Council today as part
of an extraordinary and brave group of Palestinian,
Jordanian and Israeli environmentalists. Together with
my counterparts, Gidon Bromberg, Israeli Director,

22-233635/34

S/PV.8950

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and Yana Abu Taleb, Jordanian Director, we are leading
EcoPeace Middle East, an organization committed to
the principles of justice, peace, dignity, prosperity
for all and the well-being of our shared environment
and planet.
Our call for a Green Blue Deal for the Middle East
could turn the region from a source of disturbing news
into a recognized positive model for climate diplomacy
and cooperation. The Deal proposes creating regional
linkages and healthy interdependencies by the exchange
of renewable energy and water. It also promotes taking
proactive steps towards rehabilitating one of the most
recognized water bodies in the world, the Jordan River,
and the sustainable development around the entire
watershed by initiating green businesses and jobs. The
Deal addresses Palestinian water rights within a revised
framework that is different from the all-or-nothing
approach, with a view towards bringing water to every
Palestinian home at no cost to Israel’s water security.
Thanks to the Governments that support our work,
including Sweden, the United States of America,
Germany and others who sit in the Security Council, we
witness the importance and quick returns of our work
on the ground. Our educational programme is creating
a cohort of young leaders, skilled professionals and
creative individuals who understand their own national
realities and interests and are eager to cooperate with
their neighbours to find solutions.
During the past four years alone, we have
reached out to 40,000 students, young professionals
and teachers. Our virtual-reality platform, which we
created with the help of young Palestinian, Israeli
and Jordanian engineers, is recognized as a useful
educational tool by various prestigious institutions for
higher-education programmes on water diplomacy. Our
simulation game benefits decision makers, activists,
journalists and others for second-track discussions
on water and energy security. Our Impact Investment
programme is supporting several green businesses,
all led by local entrepreneurs, with elements of crossborder cooperation and knowledge transfer. We have
advocated and helped raise investments worth over
$500 million for Jordanian and Palestinian water and
sanitation infrastructure projects that address local and
cross-border environmental concerns.
The water crisis in Palestine is the result of
the political conflict, poor infrastructure, internal
management issues, and now climate change. If only I
6/34

19/01/2022

could entice members of the Council to visit Yatta, the
third largest community in the West Bank, where water
supply is as little as 30 litres per capita per day, which
is far below the minimum recommended by the World
Health Organization. Water insecurity is most severe
in Area C, where the military occupation still impedes
access to water and electricity. In Gaza, the situation is
even more dire, where 97 per cent of aquifer water for
domestic water supply is of a quality not suitable for
human consumption. During the long summer months,
Palestinian families need to strictly control how much
water they consume and purchase water from water
trucks at prices 10 to 20 times the cost of municipal
water, leaving the family with very little to live on in
terms of food and other basic needs.
The Oslo Accords from the mid-1990s still govern
the water-allocation status between Palestinians and
Israelis, where Israel takes the lion’s share of natural
water resources. The failure to make progress in the
peace process means that Palestinian water rights are
not yet met from shared aquifer sources and the Jordan
River. Water issues remain, together with refugees,
borders, illegal settlements and the status of Jerusalem,
which will have to be resolved as a single package.
Natural population growth and economic
development have only increased Palestinian water
needs, forcing the Palestinian Authority to purchase
large quantities of desalinated water from Israel, at an
average cost of 250 million shekels annually, putting
additional pressure on the fragile Palestinian economy.
Failure to act now will only deepen existing Palestinian
water and food insecurity, poverty and frustration. The
difficult realities on the ground in the occupied West
Bank and Gaza contribute directly and indirectly to
unrest, with security implications for all in our region.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has
indeed identified our region as a climate hotspot.
We have a strong interest in acting now and see an
opportunity to do so. We call on the Security Council to
consider our model of a Green Blue Deal for the Middle
East to be a practical and attainable path towards
achieving climate security and water diplomacy. We
believe that climate issues need to be an integral part of
the Middle East peace process, in order to advance the
two-State solution within the 1967 borders.
The President: I thank Ms. Majdalani for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Bromberg.
22-23363

19/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Bromberg: Today we have a window of
opportunity to advance new Israeli-Palestinian water
arrangements that can improve livelihoods, foster
confidence-building and advance peace. The looming
climate crisis demands that we do so urgently. Israel’s
leadership in the water sector, the dire impact of
climate change on Palestinian fresh water availability
and the new coalition Government in Israel all combine
to create a unique context in which decisions could
be taken towards conflict resolution, cooperation and
trust-building in the water and climate sector.
A long-standing impediment to progress in IsraeliPalestinian water issues is the zero-sum mindset that
sees one side’s gain as the other side’s loss. That is
why, at EcoPeace Middle East, we work on the ground
with schools, municipalities, young professionals and
decision-makers. We highlight to all that, from an
environmental perspective, we are fully dependent on
each another. Working together, therefore, is not doing
a favour to the other, but an issue of self-interest and
mutual gain.
Our Green Blue Deal report calls on our
Governments to act cooperatively on water issues under
a climate-crisis paradigm, rather than continuing to hold
water issues hostage to the politics of final status. By
advancing the Green Blue Deal, we can achieve water
security and climate resilience for Israelis, Palestinians
and all in our region.
The status quo threatens water security and public
health. Israel is well known for its leadership in the
water sector and its ability to do advanced climate
adaptation on water issues. Over 70 per cent of Israel’s
drinking water is now sourced from desalination
plants. In addition, Israel is a global leader in treating
and reusing wastewater for agriculture, creating water
security for its farmers.
But while Israel has achieved a high level of
water security, the conflict-related sanitation crisis in
the West Bank and Gaza threatens the gains that are
being made. In the West Bank, over 60 million cubic
metres of Palestinian-sourced raw and poorly treated
sewage are released annually into the environment,
contaminating scarce groundwater. Israeli and
Palestinian communities that live in close proximity
to the 12 cross-border streams suffer from sever
public health concerns. Similarly, the conflict-related
sanitation crisis in Gaza risks the health and welfare of
Palestinians and Israelis alike. The sewage from Gaza

S/PV. 8950

released into the Mediterranean leads to the intermittent
closure of Israel’s southernmost desalination plants,
directly impacting the Israeli water supply.
In order to protect its citizens, Israel unilaterally
builds sewage treatment plants on its side. However,
Israel deducts the cost of sewage treatment, including
the capital cost of construction, from Palestinian taxes.
In 2019, those deduction totalled over 110 million
shekels. The deductions weaken the Palestinian
Authority and create a disincentive to find sanitation
solutions on the Palestinian side. As indicated in a
2017 report by Israel’s State Comptroller’s Office, the
current water and sanitation arrangements fail both
sides to effectively protect shared natural waters. That
failure poses a threat to the gains made in Israel’s
water security.
The climate crisis further contributes to Palestinian
water insecurity. At EcoPeace, we are determined to help
our Governments and peoples understand that the climate
crisis must lead to increased cooperation — Israelis
and Palestinian experiencing first-hand the impact of
the climate crisis. Climate change is no longer seen in
our region as theoretical. It is recognized by all as an
immediate threat to water, health and national security
interests. As detailed by Ms. Majdalani before me,
the combination of conflict, inter management issues
and the climate crisis is significantly contributing to
Palestinian water insecurity, loss of livelihood and
animosity towards Israel.
The new coalition Government in Israel presents
new opportunities. In recent months, coalition
partners in Israel have reached out to the Palestinian
Authority, with a desire to increase cooperation in the
environment and water sectors. If implemented, such
cooperation will improve the reality on the ground and
build confidence essential to advancing peace efforts.
Led by the Ministry of Environmental Protection, Israel
has identified the climate crisis as an issue of national
priority. Israel has expressed a desire to work closely
with the Biden Administration and Secretary Kerry in
the global fight against climate change. Most recently,
President Herzog created a national climate forum,
and a working group on regional cooperation was
established, which I have the honour of co-chairing. The
link between the climate crisis and regional security is
also acknowledged by the Israeli security community.
Those are our recommendations to the Security
Council. Since Ms. Majdalani, Ms. Abu Taleb and

22-233637/34

S/PV.8950

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I briefed the Security Council three years ago (see
S/PV.8517), much has changed. We outlined then a
vision of how Governments could promote climate
resilience by harnessing the sea through increased
desalinated water, to be powered by harnessing the sun
through large-scale investment in solar energy. Within
less than a year since the release of our Green Blue Deal
report, much due to the opportunities and changing
circumstances described above, the Governments
of Israel and Jordan signed a declaration of intent to
establish a large-scale solar facility in Jordan that will
sell electricity to Israel in exchange for desalinated
water sales to Jordan. The deal represents a landmark
climate-resilience agreement for our region.
The same Green Blue Deal rationale can now
bring water security for Israelis and Palestinians, build
confidence and keep alive prospects for peace. We
ask the Security Council and relevant United Nations
agencies to embrace a climate-resilience perspective
and to prioritize Israeli-Palestinian climate security
by calling on the parties to advance new arrangements
for natural water allocation and pollution control. We
invite foreign ministers to follow the lead of the Foreign
Minister of Finland, His Excellency Mr. Pekka Haavisto,
to help create a coalition of the willing in order to
advance a Green Blue Deal of climate resilience in
the Middle East. We call on the East Mediterranean
Gas Forum to widen its mandate to include renewable
energy and climate concerns in order to be a primary
vehicle to advance climate security in our region.
Finally, we call on the Security Council to
recognize globally that climate change is a threat to
peace, within the meaning of Article 39 of the Charter
of the United Nations.
Let me also thank the EcoPeace staff in Amman,
Ramallah and Tel Aviv, our Board and the members
of EcoPeace’s International Advisory Committee. I
thank you, Madam President, for this opportunity
to present our civil society perspectives before the
Security Council.
The President: I thank Mr. Bromberg for
his briefing.
I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Al-Malki (Palestine): As we gather here
to discuss how to advance peace, Israel pursues its
8/34

19/01/2022

relentless way against the Palestinian people on
the ground.
Today, before dawn, Israeli forces surrounded
and raided the Salhiye family house in Sheikh
Jarrah, violently uprooting them — including their
children — from their home, throwing them out in
the freezing cold and arresting several members of
the family and supporters before demolishing their
homes, leaving behind despair and destruction. That
happened while United Nations representatives rushed
to the scene, where some were present just a few hours
before, and despite their repeated calls against such
crimes. The Salhiye family, forcibly displaced in 1948,
is displaced once again.
Israel’s denial of Palestinian rights and the
defiance of the international community has continued
for so long because it can rely on the fact there will
be criticism and condemnations, but there will not be
consequences. If the international community wants to
help us end this conflict, it must end Israeli impunity.
There is a bias when it comes to Israel, but not the
one that Israel claims exists. It is the bias shielding
it from any form of accountability; the bias that has
prevented the Security Council from ever acting under
Chapter VII; the bias that has allowed Israel, instead of
apologizing for its crimes and putting an end to them,
to accuse even its closest partners of anti-Semitism
for voting resolutions rooted in international law and
human rights; the bias that has allowed it to attack the
International Criminal Court, the International Court
of Justice, the Human Rights Council, the General
Assembly and the Security Council for performing
their mandates and to insult and harass world leaders,
Nobel Peace Prize Laureates, moral figures, celebrities
and citizens for their stance regarding the question of
Palestine; the bias that has allowed Israel to criminalize
civil society and humanitarians and still be called a
democracy; the bias that has allowed Israel to become a
Member of the United Nations while, 75 years later, we
have yet to become a <ember; the bias that recognizes a
very widely interpreted right to security of an occupying
Power, while the people under occupation are deprived
of the most basic forms of protection.
The year 2021 was one of the deadliest for
Palestinians in over a decade, including for Palestinian
children, notably in the besieged Gaza Strip. It was
one of the worst years in terms of home demolitions
22-23363

19/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8950

and of advancement of settlement units in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.

moment where all these years, efforts and resources can
bear fruit or be squandered.

This year has barely started and yet its events
offer a bleak picture of what awaits our people if
resolute action is not undertaken. The first days of
2022 witnessed the killing of more Palestinians, even
children and older persons, including Sheikh Suleiman
Al-Hazaleen, the 80-year-old icon of popular peaceful
resistance, as well as the announcement of plans for
new settlement units in occupied East Jerusalem and
continued dispossession and forced displacement of our
people. In these circumstances, inaction would at best
amount to complacency, at worst complicity.

Nothing good will come from waiting. Leaving the
parties alone means leaving the steering wheel in the
hands of extremist Israeli settlers, as they are the ones
controlling the agenda in Israel.

The Palestinian people are here to stay. Their
steadfastness has been tried and tested across
decades and is unwavering. We urge the international
community, however, to spare them more unnecessary
suffering, to prevent yet another Palestinian generation
from enduring this injustice and fate by providing them
with the international protection they are entitled to and
by helping us to end this colonial occupation now.
Why feel a sense of urgency regarding a centurylong conflict when there are so many other pressing
issues? Beyond the need to repair the historical injustice
endured by the Palestinian people and to end decades
of occupation and oppression, there is urgency because
this conflict has a solution that may still be available
today and that will no longer be viable tomorrow.
The two-State solution the international community
has legislated and defended for so long does not need
United Nations representatives by its bedside to share
comforting words. It needs them to save it. Absent
this sense of urgency, States Members should prepare
themselves to attend the funeral of this solution with
all the consequences of such a death for the lives of
millions of people, Palestinians and others.
The Palestinian people will survive, but the twoState solution may not. What happens then? Will the
international community accept this apartheid in the
twenty-first century, or will it convert to advocates of
the one-State solution of freedom and equal rights for
all between the river and the sea? These would be the
only options available then.
We recognize the efforts of the international
community in defence of the international consensus,
and we are grateful for the principled solidarity and
support long extended to our people. This is the decisive

While measures that may partially alleviate the
hardships faced by our people are needed, they cannot
serve as a substitute to addressing the root cause of
our suffering and the conflict, which is the Israeli
occupation. One cannot entrench the occupation and
pretend to shrink the conflict. One cannot reject the twoState solution and the one-State solution, unlawfully
annex our geography and besiege our demography,
attack our people and holy sites, including in the holy
city of Jerusalem, and demand for themselves alone
peace, prosperity and security.
Since when is the peoples’ right to self-determination
subject to the goodwill of the colonial Power? Did any
country represented at the United Nations accept such
logic? Can anyone seriously argue that we should wait
for Israel to be ready to end its occupation on its own,
to wake up one day wiser and decide to redeem itself,
to respect the rule of international law and to listen
to the advice of the world based on its meri?. Is there
anyone around this table who believes this is a rational
or winning strategy?
The fate of the Palestinian people cannot be left
hostage to Israeli domestic politics and expansionist
desires, and neither can the survival of the Israeli
coalition serve as an excuse to deny the rights of an
entire nation.
Israel displays the same arrogance displayed by
colonial Powers blinded by their colonial appetite
throughout history. Healing Israel from this disease is
not only a service to Palestine, to the rule of international
law and to our humanity, but also to Israel itself. Only
when the cost of occupation outweighs its benefits will
Israel ever consider ending it. The Israeli public will
then demand it.
The resolutions of the Security Council, including
resolution 2334 (2016), provide a clear path to a just
peace, the only path to peace. It is the responsibility
of the Council to pursue the implementation of its
own resolutions. It is important to enact the law and to
condemn those violating it, but it is as important to pursue
enforcement and ensure accountability. Israel wants

22-233639/34

S/PV.8950

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

United Nations resolutions to conform with the illegal
reality it has created on the ground, while the Council
should ensure that the reality on the ground conforms
to its resolutions. Israeli representatives proclaim their
outrage that the Security Council is getting involved in
the conflict, while the Council should be outraged by
Israel’s dismissive attitude and persistent violations. I
invite the members of the Council to visit Palestine, to
examine first-hand the situation on the ground and to
discuss and adopt the steps needed to ensure that what
was adopted here affects realities there.
Do those who claim that conditions are not
yet ripe for peace think that, without international
intervention, they will ever be? Thirty years ago, the
Madrid Conference was held not because the parties
themselves had decided to make peace, but because the
world left them with no other option. If Yitzhak Shamir
had been allowed to veto the peace negotiations, they
never would have been held. It is that kind of resolve
and sense of urgency that we need today, leading to the
convening of an international conference for peace that
would mobilize all the goodwill and means available
out there to salvage peace and achieve a just solution
in accordance with international law and United
Nations resolutions.
Many hoped that the end of the Trump
Administration and the Netanyahu Government would
be enough to pave the way for renewed momentum for
peace. But while the new United States Administration
has reversed several of the unlawful and ill-advised
policies of its predecessor — and we hope it will
fulfil its remaining commitments — it has yet to
ensure the current Israeli Government renounces
its colonial policies and abandons its rejection of the
two-State solution and peace negotiations. That is an
unacceptable stance that should neither be tolerated
nor excused and must be reversed. The United States
special relationship with Israel means it has a special
responsibility in that regard.
The Middle East Quartet also has an important role
to play, as the body mandated by the Security Council
for the very purpose of ending the occupation and
achieving peace. We cannot but echo the call made by
Russia to convene the Quartet at the ministerial level as
soon as possible to mobilize efforts to break out of the
current impasse.
In parallel, each State can help roll back the
occupation and advance peace by upholding its own
10/34

19/01/2022

obligations, in line with international law and the
relevant resolutions, including obligations of distinction
between Israel and the territories it has occupied since
1967, non-recognition and non-assistance to illegal
actions and policies and advancing accountability.
We are grateful to every citizen taking action, every
organization taking a principled stance and every State
making a contribution.
There are many important initiatives being taken to
advance justice and peace by actors in our region and
across the world. What we need is a common agenda
for peace that translates those positions and efforts
into collective measures to deter crimes and promote
compliance, thereby helping advance a just peace.
Commentators speak of the fatigue of the
international community with the Palestinian question.
While we understand how one can tire of a conflict
that has lasted so long, believe me that no one is more
tired than the children who have had to survive four
wars to reach the age of 15. No one is more tired than
the mother who fears seeing her son arrested or killed
each time he leaves the house, or than the hundreds of
Palestinian parents never mentioned in the Council who
are denied the simple right to a dignified burial for their
loved ones.
No one is more tired than the prisoners who can
resort only to life-threatening hunger strikes to protest
their arbitrary detention, or than the refugees who,
after finding shelter, have to face the settlers’ creeping
annexation reaching their doorstep — victims of a
system that privileges one kind of human being over
another. Their calls for justice must be heeded.
This is a time for action and a time for peace,
not apartheid.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Erdan (Israel): I am pleased to be speaking
here today and to have the opportunity, at the outset, to
congratulate the new members of the Security Council.
I expressed my hope a year ago that the discussions
on the Middle East in this forum would be more balanced
and finally focus on the true threats that plague the
region. Unfortunately, I have to convey that wish again
for the year 2022. Indeed, today there are serious actors
that threaten regional stability and security, none more
so than Iran, whose leaders continue to weave their web
of terror across the region.
22-23363

19/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I want to begin, in fact, by expressing my deepest
condolences to the Permanent Representative of the
United Arab Emirates following the abhorrent attack
by the Iranian-sponsored Houthi terrorist group, as
well as to the Permanent Representative of India for the
loss of life.
There is no doubt that the threat caused by the
Iranian regime demands the urgent attention of the
entire world, and especially that of the Security
Council. Yet despite such urgent and pressing issues,
we regrettably find ourselves once again hearing the
same false narratives attacking Israel. It is just the same
old falsehoods and the same old hypocrisy. If there is
one word that stands out above everything else at the
United Nations, it is hypocrisy.
From the Palestinian Foreign Minister, we heard all
of those regurgitated accusations and baseless claims.
But as he stands here and points the finger at Israel,
what the Minister conveniently ignores is that, in the
past month — just one month — more than 200 terror
attacks have been carried out by Palestinians against
Israeli citizens. There have been 143 rock-throwing
attacks in just one month. There have been 20 grenade
and Molotov cocktail attacks, as well as dozens more
stabbings, car rammings, shootings and other violent
physical attacks, risking and claiming Israeli lives, all
in just one month.
That ended a year which saw thousands of other
violent attacks against Israelis — attacks that are, at
best, only marginally mentioned in the Council. Those
attacks include rockets fired indiscriminately from
Gaza, shootings and stabbings of civilians in Jerusalem
and car rammings.
But there is another kind of terror attack, a kind
of Palestinian terror that endangers the daily lives of
innocent civilians throughout Judea and Samaria and
Jerusalem, that is neither mentioned in United Nations
reports nor presented here before the Council. Such
terror attacks with rocks — not little stones, but rocks
like this, which are thrown at Israelis in their cars and
on buses. Rocks are thrown at Israeli men and women,
at Israeli babies and children, every single day.
In 2021 alone, Israelis suffered 1,775 rock attacks
by Palestinian terrorists, but the world says nothing.
Would members of the Council consider it a terror attack
if a rock were thrown at their car while driving with
their children? That is exactly the kind of attack that
claimed the life of 4-year-old Adele Biton and others.

S/PV. 8950

What would the representatives here do? Would they,
at the very least, condemn those brutal terror attacks
carried out against Israeli civilians by Palestinians?
Look at this: rocks kill. A terrorist is not only
someone with a gun, not only someone with a bomb.
Rocks can and do kill. But do we hear condemnation
from the Palestinian Authority? Did the Palestinian
Authority condemn the murder of Eli Kay, an Israeli
tour guide who was shot in the back by a Palestinian
terrorist as he walked in Jerusalem a few weeks ago?
Did the Palestinian Authority condemn and decry the
murder of Yehuda Dimentman, who was ambushed in
his car and murdered last month? Do they condemn, or
do they condone? Where is the voice of the Palestinian
leadership against any violence? Israelis do not hear
it, the international community does not hear it, and
the Palestinian people certainly do not hear any
condemnation. Instead, they hear encouragement
and incitement.
When the Palestinians see the support and honour
that their leaders give to terrorists, they see clearly that
terror pays.
That hypocrisy, that moral bankruptcy is a poison
that is spread online, in the media, in the mosques and
even in the schools under the Palestinian Authority. Yet
despite all that, the Palestinian Minister for Foreign
Affairs, who has not once condemned acts of Palestinian
terror, has the audacity to accuse Israel of violence. He
blames Israelis when he knows very well that Israeli
violence against Palestinians is the exception to the
rule, not the norm. He knows very well that whenever
there are such incidents, Israel and its leadership find it
abhorrent. We probe, we investigate and we condemn.
But when Palestinians attack Israelis, the
Palestinian Authority celebrates, congratulates and
rewards. The Palestinian Authority continues to pay the
salaries of terrorists in a pay-to-slay policy that means
that the more Jewish blood you spill, the more money
you and your family get.
But the hypocrisy does not end there either. The
Security Council also continues to fail at clearly
condemning Palestinian terror. Israel, a country with a
robust legal system that has zero tolerance for violence
and terror regardless of the perpetrator’s identity,
is blamed, while the Palestinians’ acts of terror and
incitement are whitewashed. That lack of perspective
and proportion only serves to send one message to

22-2336311/34

S/PV.8950

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

19/01/2022

the Palestinians: that Jewish blood is cheap and terror
against Jews is acceptable.

problems and bring real cooperation — with the help of
the United States, by the way.

The Palestinians look for every chance to distort
reality in order to inflame the situation on the ground
while the international community embraces their
libel. What is happening right now in Sheikh Jarrah is
a perfect example. We are talking about a family that
stole public land for their own private use while those
lands had been earmarked for the building of a school
for children with special needs. That is a municipal
issue that has gone through all the respected channels
of the independent Israeli legal system, yet nevertheless
the Palestinians used this issue and the Pavlovian
anti-Israel response of the United Nations for their own
political gain.

Israel has proved time after time that it is
committed to regional cooperation and to improving
the lives of the Palestinians. One of the best ways to
do so is indeed through environmental protection
and the preservation of natural resources. In fact, as
Minister of Environmental Protection, I personally
promoted many attempted initiatives to address those
exact issues. Sadly, the Palestinian leadership had
different priorities.

I hope that the international community will
take the time to verify the facts before immediately
embracing the Palestinians’ falsehoods. It is not too
late for the Security Council to make a New Year’s
resolution. Let 2022 be the year in which it no longer
allows endless attacks on Israel from its platform. Let
2022 be the year in which it holds the Palestinians
accountable for their crimes. Let 2022 be the year in
which the United Nations, as an institution, ends the
hypocrisy against Israel.
When the world and the Security Council in
particular applies its moral compass correctly, then
we may well find the path to peace. But so long as it
allows itself to be led on by the lies of terrorists and
their supporters, we will all continue to wander in the
wilderness of an ongoing conflict.
The real obstacle to peace was and is the Palestinians’
inability to accept Israel’s existence in the region as the
Jewish State. We educate our children in coexistence
and tolerance while the Palestinians teach their children
hatred and violence, while they incite against Israel and
the Jewish people and while they promote boycotts and
attack Israel in international bodies.
On the ground, there are nonetheless positive steps
being taken to increase cooperation between Israelis and
Palestinians. The Council heard from EcoPeace about
the importance of environmental cooperation and how
we need to work together to promote climate resilience
and water security, and that is right. The past years have
shown what we can do in our region when there is a will
to succeed and build bridges. The water-for-energy deal
between Israel, Jordan and the United Arab Emirates
shows how collaboration can solve the planet’s greatest
12/34

A number of months ago, Israel’s current Minister
of Environmental Protection, Tamar Zandberg, met
with her Palestinian counterpart. That was the first
meeting of its kind since 2014, not because of Israel, of
course. Israel’s Minister Zandberg presented numerous
collaborative initiatives regarding the environment
and waste management, but Israel is still waiting for a
response from the Palestinians.
Harmony — that is what Israel wants. But hypocrisy
and terror — that is what Israel gets.
The Palestinians are not alone in the Middle East
when it comes to supporting terror and delegitimizing
Israel. At the beginning of my statement, I expressed my
condolences following the Houthis’ drone terror attack.
That was sponsored by Iran, as are most of the acts of
terror carried out in the region. What the Houthis have
in common with Hizbullah and Hamas is that they are
all terror proxies of the same malicious sponsor.
The whole region continues to live under the
shadow of the Iranian threat. As the talks in Vienna
reach a critical stage, the international community
faces a crossroads. If the Iranians are allowed to think
that the world does not seriously intend to stop them
as they race towards the bomb, then they will continue
to build a nuclear bomb. If Iran is allowed to think
that it can continue to build a corridor of terror from
Tehran to the Mediterranean, then that is what it will
do. If Iran is allowed to think that it can continue to
oppress its own people and leave them in poverty, and
even without water, while it spends every penny on its
missile programmes, then that is what it will do.
Those are not just Israel’s problems. Iran, the
biggest State sponsor of terror, strives to impose its
radical Shi’ite hegemony on the region and beyond.
That is not just a problem for Israel; that is a problem
22-23363

19/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

for the whole world, and that problem should be the
focus of the Council in 2022.
There are those who say that Iran has the opposite
of the Midas touch, that everything it touches turns
to terror and destruction rather than gold. Just look at
Syria, Lebanon, Gaza and Yemen. But unlike the Midas
touch, that is no myth.
Time is not on our side, but with goodwill and a
strong desire, that, too, can become a page in history,
and we can all go on to build a better future for the
peoples of the Middle East. That is the sincere New
Year’s wish of the State and the people of Israel.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway.
I thank Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland for
his briefing. I also want to thank Gidon Bromberg and
Nada Majdalani of EcoPeace Middle East for being
here today. Their climate and security work is a good
example of how important it is to support regional and
local peacebuilding and trust-building initiatives and
how addressing shared problems can be a possible entry
point for finding common ground.
Norway’s unwavering support for a negotiated twoState solution remains unchanged. At present, the goal
seems distant. Conflict and tensions are running high.
In 2022, we must steer the situation onto a better track.
First, the violence and acts of terrorism must be
stopped. All civilians must be protected in accordance
with international humanitarian law. Human rights
must be respected. Human rights defenders must be
protected. A vibrant civil society in Palestine is crucial.
Secondly, Israel must cease settlement building,
demolitions and evictions. The settlements on occupied
land are illegal under international law. They undermine
the prospects of a two-State solution, and they escalate
the conflict. Last night, another Palestinian family was
evicted from their home in East Jerusalem. This must
stop. Furthermore, the historic status quo at the holy
sites in Jerusalem must be respected.
Thirdly, a strong Palestinian Authority is needed. I
call on Israel to revise policies and actions that weaken
the Palestinian Authority and the economy. The donor
group that Norway chairs has outlined a programme
for continued Palestinian State-building. We must
implement it. I call on the Palestinian Authority to
strengthen its democratic legitimacy among its people.

S/PV. 8950

I call on the factions to revive efforts to achieve unity
in Palestine. We, the international community, must
provide support and do our part. We should cooperate
with any Palestinian Government that rejects the use of
violence and adheres to previous agreements made by
the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Fourthly, the situation for the people in Gaza
must be improved. I welcome Israel’s willingness to
adjust its policies, including increasing movement and
trade. I call for long-term solutions, a ceasefire and
calm. People on both sides will benefit. They want to
live in security. United Nations agencies, especially
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), are the
international community’s main instruments in Gaza.
We must ensure that UNRWA can continue to meet the
critical needs of Palestine refugees.
Fifthly, I welcome the normalization of relations
between Israel and several Arab States. It is essential
that the Palestinians also be involved and benefit from
the process. Meaningful progress in the negotiations
between the Israelis and the Palestinians would
reinforce the process of normalization and promote
stability in the region.
Sixthly, resuming negotiations is a matter of
urgency. The issue of borders and territory must be
resolved before it is too late. I urge the parties to explore
how they can resume talks, even if they are not ready to
start yet. Agreed immediate steps in the right direction
would help steer the situation onto a better track.
In conclusion, I would like to remind us all that
parameters for the two-State solution have been
established by the Security Council, most recently in
resolution 2334 (2016), and we continue to support
a return to negotiations based on the 1967 lines, the
relevant Security Council resolutions, international law
and internationally agreed parameters.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Regional Integration of the Republic of Ghana.
Ms. Botchwey (Ghana): I am pleased to participate
in this open debate on the situation in the Middle East
and commend Norway for its leadership on this crucial
matter. I also thank the briefers for their briefings
before the Security Council on the prevailing situation
in the Middle East.

22-2336313/34

S/PV.8950

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Finding a lasting solution to the situation in the
Middle East is a responsibility that we cannot shirk
or ignore. That is not a challenge that will disappear
one day without a collective commitment to dialogue
between the parties and the support of the international
community. We know that the consequences of inaction
would be even more dire down the road.
Despite the several important interventions by
the international community and the parties since the
holding of the 1991 Madrid Peace Conference, the
objective of a peaceful and comprehensive settlement
of the situation in the Middle East has continued to
elude us. The unending suffering of the Israeli and
Palestinian people and the prospect of a peaceful and
prosperous Middle East compel us to be steadfast in
pursuit of the decades-long objective.
The worsening security and humanitarian situation
in the region amid the crisis of the global coronavirus
disease pandemic is alarming and calls for the renewed
attention of the international community. The Council
must urgently address the question of how to revitalize
effective and coordinated peace talks, based on lessons
learned, building on past initiatives and exploring new
possibilities through which Israel and Palestine can
both realize their aspirations for normality, opportunity
for every Israeli and Palestinian and, indeed, statehood.
Ghana believes that a two-State solution with
Israel and Palestine living peacefully side by side on
the basis of pre-1967 borders remains the viable option
for restoring lasting peace and stability in the region.
Ghana therefore appreciated Norway’s facilitation of
the in-person ministerial meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of the International
Assistance to Palestinians in November 2021. We thank
the donor community and international development
partners for their commitment to supporting a
meaningful and comprehensive settlement. Ghana
commends the recent efforts of the Secretary-General
and the Envoys of the Middle East Quartet to address
critical concerns related to the fiscal conditions in
Palestine and the tense conditions in the West Bank,
Jerusalem and Gaza.
Advancing the peace process requires regional and
international actors to deploy the tools of diplomacy to
build and sustain momentum around the recent highlevel engagements. It also requires both sides to the
conflict to overcome past mistrust, work to rebuild
trust and goodwill and engage their public on a vision
14/34

19/01/2022

of peace that promises security and prosperity. None
of that will be easy. The cost of not doing it would
be harder.
Ghana condemns all acts of terrorism and violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law by
the parties. Those actions exacerbate the humanitarian
crisis. While reminding the parties of their obligations
under international law and several resolutions of
the Council, we urge them to refrain from unilateral
actions that obstruct and undermine efforts aimed at
achieving comprehensive and just peace to the decadesold conflict.
We thank Member States for their financial
contributions to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and
urge increased support to reverse the critical funding
deficit of the organization to enable it to continue
its vital mission of supporting those affected by the
conflict. We call on the Secretary-General to facilitate
a process that enables us to address the options for more
sustainable and predictable humanitarian funding for
the Middle East.
Without the genuine commitment of the parties
to the peace process, a peaceful resolution of the
conflict will continue to slip through our grasp. We
therefore urge the parties to resume direct negotiations
for comprehensive and lasting peace, in the spirit of
cooperation and in good faith.
Finally, I wish to express Ghana’s commitment to
supporting and facilitating the path to lasting peace in
the Middle East and underscore the need for cooperation
and unified action among all Member States and, in
particular, the Council.
The President: I now call on the Permanent
Representative of the United States and member of
President Biden’s Cabinet.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Before I deliver my remarks, I would like to
extend my condolences to the United Arab Emirates.
The United States condemns in unqualified terms
Monday’s terrorist attack in Abu Dhabi, which killed
three innocent citizens.
I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for his
briefing. I extend a special welcome to and thank our
briefers from EcoPeace Middle East. I also welcome
the Permanent Representative of Israel, Mr. Erdan, and
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the
22-23363

19/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Observer State of Palestine, Mr. Al-Malki, to today’s
meeting. I would also like to acknowledge the presence
of and welcome the Ghanaian Foreign Minister.
This year offers an opportunity to recommit to
reaching a political solution to the conflict. Let me
therefore start by reaffirming our strong support for a
two-State solution, one in which Jewish and democratic
Israel lives in peace alongside a sovereign, democratic
and viable Palestinian State. As I have noted before, I
look forward to the day when we do not find the need
to single out Israel for this type of unfair focus in the
Security Council.
All forms of hatred and violence stand in stark
opposition to the goal of a two-State solution. We
are particularly concerned about tensions in the West
Bank, Gaza and in and around Jerusalem, especially
violence perpetrated against civilians attempting
to go about their daily lives. To make progress, both
Israel and the Palestinian Authority must refrain from
unilateral steps that exacerbate tensions and undercut
efforts to advance a negotiated two-State solution. That
includes annexations of territory, settlement activity,
demolitions and evictions, similar to what we saw in
Sheikh Jarrah, incitement to violence and compensation
for individuals in prison for acts of terrorism.
I would like to reiterate a point I made to the
Council previously for our new members. It was clear
to me from my November trip to Israel and the West
Bank that Israelis and Palestinians are locked in a spiral
of mutual distrust that prevents the type of cooperation
that could bring about prosperity, freedom and security
for all. Israelis do not believe they have a partner for
peace, while Palestinians are trapped in despair, borne
out of the complete absence of a political horizon. That
gap in trust is the single-biggest obstacle to political
progress and peace. Most of the work of rebuilding that
trust needs to be done directly between the Israelis and
Palestinians themselves.
The recent meeting between Palestinian Authority
President Abbas and Israeli Defence Minister Gantz
yielded tangible steps, including Israel’s transfer of
$33 million in tax payments to the Palestinians, the
issuance of business permits and humanitarian status
approval. My hope is that we can keep building on that
progress and that we can all play a role in facilitating
further positive steps. For example, I would like to
applaud Jordan and Egypt for the constructive role
that they have played in preventing renewed violence,

S/PV. 8950

particularly the 26 December meeting they held in
Cairo with the Palestinian Authority.
We also appreciate Norway’s contribution as Chair
of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee. The Committee
serves as an important forum for the international
community to support economic development for
Palestinians. The Council, too, can facilitate forward
momentum, as can civil society organizations such as
the one we heard from today, EcoPeace Middle East. I
again thank our briefers for their presentations. Israeli
and Palestinian civil society members are instrumental
in building bridges among people in Israel, the West
Bank, Gaza and Jordan. Educational programmes and
round tables to discuss projects such as the Green Blue
Deal for the Middle East are important for addressing
shared issues that know no boundaries or borders, such
as climate change. We encourage broadening those
types of exchanges to also include the Abraham Accords
signatories. We need to underscore the importance
of dialogue and technical exchanges to address our
shared challenges.
Finally, on 27 January, the United States will join
people from nations around the world to commemorate
International Holocaust Remembrance Day. When
I was in Israel, I had the great honour of rekindling
the eternal flame in the Hall of Remembrance at Yad
Vashem. That solemn ceremony, next to the crypt that
held the ashes of Holocaust victims from across Europe,
served as a poignant reminder for me of our obligation to
never forget. Remembering and honouring the victims
of the Holocaust means more than reflection; it means
taking action. That is especially true as anti-Semitism
and Holocaust denial are on the rise. The harrowing
events in Colleyville, Texas, this past weekend brought
this home for us Americans. It reminds us that we all
must work together to stand against anti-Semitism
and extremism.
The United States will continue to champion justice
for the victims of anti-Semitism and for Holocaust
survivors and their descendants. We are committed to
building a world in which the lessons of the Holocaust
are taught universally, survivors live out their days in
dignity and comfort and all human lives are shown
decency and compassion. For the first time in many
years, all members of the Council have diplomatic
relations with the State of Israel. That is testament to
the important shifts under way in the Middle East and
indicative of Israel’s contribution on the world stage.
Let us avail ourselves of this opportunity to move

22-2336315/34

S/PV.8950

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

beyond our standard talking points and identify ways to
support the parties in pursuit of sustainable and lasting
peace for all of their people.
The President: I now call on the Assistant Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation for
Political Affairs of the United Arab Emirates.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I thank you, Madam President,
for presiding over today’s important debate, and I
welcome the distinguished Ministers present in the
Chamber today. I also thank the Special Coordinator
Tor Wennesland for his invaluable briefing, as well
as Ms. Nada Majdalani and Mr. Gidon Bromberg for
highlighting the importance of addressing the negative
impacts of climate change.
Today’s debate comes at an important and pressing
moment. Despite the positive developments towards
achieving stability and prosperity throughout the
region that have occurred in the Middle East recently,
treacherous attempts to spread chaos and terrorism are
still being made there. In particular, we refer to the
crimes committed by the Houthi militias, including the
attacks a few days ago against civilians and civilian
facilities in the United Arab Emirates.
My country strongly condemns this criminal
escalation, and we express our sincere condolences to
the families of the three victims and wish the injured
a speedy recovery. I also thank the more than 90
countries that have supported us in condemning these
terrorist acts.

19/01/2022

occupied Palestinian territory must stop, and Israel
must shoulder its responsibilities in that regard. We
refer in this context to the construction and expansion
of settlements, the confiscation and demolition of
Palestinian property, and the forced displacement
of residents, as we have seen today in Sheikh Jarrah
neighbourhood. We stress the need to maintain the
existing historical and legal status of Jerusalem.
Secondly, considering the fragility of the situation,
we stress the need to prevent or ease any escalation
that may occur. We also need to maintain the latest
ceasefire. In this regard, we value the ongoing efforts
of our brothers in the Arab Republic of Egypt and the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. We call for the need
to build confidence, break the current stalemate and
relaunch a credible peace process. We hope that the
recent high-level meeting between the two parties will
lead to new opportunities to engage in dialogue.
Thirdly, we emphasize the importance of providing
assistance to the Palestinian people, who continue
to suffer from difficult conditions, especially as
humanitarian needs have significantly grown since the
onset of the pandemic. For its part, my country recently
sent vaccines and medical aid to the Gaza Strip and
helped it to respond to the water crisis. We are also
supporting the construction of a new school to be run
by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East. In that regard, we
commend the efforts of the United Nations entities and
other donors.

In this context, my country reiterates its commitment
to supporting the brotherly Palestinian people and
their right to establish an independent and sovereign
Palestinian State along the 4 June 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital and in accordance with the
Madrid terms of reference, the Arab Peace Initiative
and all other agreed international terms of reference.

In conclusion, my country believes that striving to
achieve a just, lasting and comprehensive solution to the
Palestinian question will block attempts to exploit the
conflict, sow divisions or spread extremist ideologies
in the region. In order to achieve a stable future for the
Middle East, the Security Council must work to create
an environment conducive to peace and come up with
unified positions to address the region’s issues. In this
context, we stress the importance of compliance by all
parties with Council resolutions. It is also important
for the international community to work today toward
fundamentally resolving crises rather than simply
managing them. We are aware that doing so will not be
easy, but we will work diligently in cooperation with
the Member States to restore peace and stability in
the region.

To that end, I would like to focus today on the
following issues. First, all illegal practices in the

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Madam President, we welcome you as you

Notwithstanding the persistent challenges in the
region, we believe that opportunities still exist to
achieve peace in the Middle East. In our first open
debate on this agenda item since we joined the Council,
we would like to highlight the importance of seriously
striving to counter terrorism and end the region’s crises
and conflicts, which extend from Palestine and Yemen
through Iraq and Syria to Lebanon and Libya.

16/34

22-23363

19/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

preside over the Security Council today. We also wish
to note the participation in today’s meeting of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ghana, Ms. Shirley
Ayorkor Botchwey, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Palestine, Mr. Riad Al-Malki.
We thank Mr. Tor Wennesland for his comprehensive
briefing on the situation in the Middle East region in
the context of finding a settlement. We listened closely
to Mr. Gidon Bromberg and Ms. Nada Majdalani.
With regard to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict,
the degree of violence continues unabated and is
claiming casualties on both sides. The situation as
described today by the Special Coordinator is further
exacerbated by Israel’s unilateral, unlawful acts,
breaches of the status of the holy sites, expansion of
settlement activities, the confiscation of Palestinian
lands, expulsion of Palestinians, arbitrary arrests and
violence targeting civilians.
It is with concern that we have been learning about
sporadic outbreaks of violence in Jerusalem as a result
of which there have been casualties. Specifically, we
are very troubled by yesterday’s action by the Israeli
police in Sheikh Jarrar, as a result of which a Palestinian
family was evicted from its home.
We call upon the parties to exercise restraint and
to abandon and reject radical measures that create
irreversible facts on the ground. We call upon them to
rekindle a peaceful settlement process on a universally
recognized international legal basis. We attach great
significance to the comprehensive international
assistance being provided to those in need on the West
Bank of the Jordan River and in the Gaza Strip, as well as
to Palestinian refugees in neighbouring Arab countries.
We support the efforts of key international
organizations, among which we emphasize those
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). We
believe that the need to provide financial assistance
to UNWRA remains ongoing and important, so that
it may continue to deliver humanitarian assistance to
millions of Palestinian refugees in the Middle East
without hindrance. Russia will continue to make annual
voluntary contributions to UNRWA’s budget.
In this context, we welcome the results of the
Ministerial meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
in Oslo last November. We note Norway’s contribution
in organizing this event, which attests to the fact that

S/PV. 8950

the international community remains focused on a
Middle East settlement.
The focus of today’s debate under Norway’s
presidency of the Security Council is setting the stage
for the expeditious relaunch of the Palestinian-Israeli
peace process. We fully believe that a settlement
is possible only through the launch of direct talks
between the parties. At the same time, we believe
there is an urgent need to step up multilateral efforts
to create a propitious atmosphere for talks, first and
foremost, in the format of the Middle East Quartet
of international mediators. We intend to continue
to make assiduous efforts with our Quartet partners
aimed at boosting the effectiveness of this mediation
mechanism by determining and identifying possible
collective measures to implement what has been
endorsed in United Nations resolutions, namely, the
two-State solution. We reaffirm the importance of
convening a Quartet meeting at the Ministerial level
and of establishing full-fledged cooperation under this
mechanism with the Palestinians, Israelis and other
key regional stakeholders. I also wish to emphasize
that progress in the peace process is impossible
absent Palestinian reunification through the Palestine
Liberation Organization. We stand ready alongside
other interested parties, first and foremost, our Egyptian
friends to provide the necessary assistance to that end.
In conclusion, I wish to note that we have
growing concerns about plans that have been unveiled
vis-à-vis the expansion of Israel settlement activities
in the occupied Golan Heights. I refer not merely
to the ongoing cutting of red tape for Ramat Trump
settlement, which was announced in 2020, but also to
the creation of two new settlements, Asif and Matar,
with 12,000 housing units. The stated goal of the Israeli
leadership is to double the number of Israelis residing
in the Golan Heights, which flies in the face of the
1949 Geneva Conventions.
For our part, we emphasize Russia’s position,
which remains unchanged — we do not recognize
Israeli sovereignty over the Golan Heights, which are
an integral part of Syria.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I welcome you, Minister Huitfeldt, and thank you
for presiding over today’s meeting. I thank Special
Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing. I also
listened carefully to the briefings delivered by the two
representatives of EcoPeace Middle East.

22-2336317/34

S/PV.8950

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This year marks the seventy-fifth year that the
question of Palestine has been on the United Nations
agenda. We hope that the new year brings new hope
to the Palestinian people. The international community
should act with a stronger sense of urgency by taking
vigorous actions to promote an early, comprehensive,
just and lasting settlement of the Palestinian issue.
First, violence and hostilities must be stopped and
tensions eased. Last year saw continued unrest in the
occupied Palestinian territory, with 324 Palestinians
killed in hostilities and violence. There were also
civilian casualties on the Israeli side. Since the new
year, the situation on the ground has continued to be
tense and worrisome. We call on all parties concerned
to keep calm, exercise restraint, refrain from hostilities
and violence and consolidate the ceasefire in Gaza. As
the occupying Power, Israel must fulfil its obligations
under international law, guarantee the safety of
the people in the occupied territories, investigate
violence against Palestinian civilians and maintain
the historically established status quo of the holy sites
in Jerusalem. Meanwhile, Israel’s legitimate security
concerns must be respected.
Secondly, all Security Council resolutions must
be implemented and settlement activities must stop. In
2021, Jewish settlement in the West Bank continued
to expand, and the number of demolished Palestinian
homes was the highest since 2016. Settlement activities
in the occupied territories violate international law.
We urge Israel to stop demolishing Palestinian homes,
expelling Palestinians and expanding settlements and
to create conditions for the development of Palestinian
communities in the West Bank.
We are equally concerned about Israel’s
recent announcement that it will invest more than
$300 million in settlement construction in the Golan.
The international community recognizes Syria’s
sovereignty over the Golan. China urges Israel to stop
settlement activities that could cause tensions.
Thirdly, the economy and people’s livelihoods
should receive attention, and humanitarian assistance
should be scaled up. At present, Palestine is in a
deep economic and financial crisis, the humanitarian
situation is worrisome and the people are living under
difficult circumstances. The international community
should step up its support, strengthen the Palestinian
Authority and empower it to exercise its sovereign
18/34

19/01/2022

functions in the fields of security and financing and
provide basic public services.
China appreciates the efforts of Egypt, Qatar
and other countries of the region to rebuild Gaza and
calls on all parties to increase financial support to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. In that connection, we take
note of recent measures taken by Israel, such as handing
over tax collections to the Palestinian side, and we
hope that will help restore Palestinian-Israeli economic
coordination in support of civilians. China once again
calls on Israel to lift its blockade on the Gaza Strip.
Fourthly, all efforts should be mobilized to promote
peace and implement the two-State solution. History
and reality have repeatedly shown that the two-State
solution is the only viable way to resolve the Palestinian
issue. The international community should promote an
objective and fair approach, advocate tolerance and
mutual understanding and do more for the resumption
of dialogue on an equal footing between the two sides,
based on the two-State solution.
We hope that the two sides will take the recent
high-level contacts as an opportunity to gradually build
mutual trust and continue to build momentum. We
expect all parties in Palestine to strengthen solidarity,
achieve internal reconciliation through consultations
and dialogue and form a unified negotiating position.
We look forward to productive results from the
upcoming dialogue in Algeria.
We urge the United Nations, the League of Arab
States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and
countries with important influence to play a more
active role in the process and call for the holding of
an international peace conference under the auspices of
the United Nations and with the participation of all the
permanent members of the Council and all stakeholders
in the Middle East peace process so that we can pool
broader and more effective peace efforts.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that China
supports the establishment of a fully sovereign and
independent State of Palestine, based on the 1967
borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital, and
supports the peaceful coexistence of Palestine and
Israel and the common development of the Arab and
Jewish peoples. China will continue to work relentlessly
with the international community towards the early
settlement of the Palestinian issue.
22-23363

19/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to thank
you, Minister Huitfeldt, for being with us and presiding
over today’s debate. I also welcome all visiting
Ministers. I would like to thank Mr. Tor Wennesland for
his comprehensive and sobering briefing. I also thank
Mr. Bromberg and Ms. Majdalani for their valuable
insights on cooperation to deal with the challenges
posed by the region’s climate crisis.
The grim events of May reminded us all that the
Security Council can ill afford to be complacent on
the situation in the Middle East. Ireland reiterates that
a just, lasting and comprehensive settlement to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict remains both essential and
urgent. It is incumbent on the Council and the wider
international community to instil fresh momentum
for the resumption of direct negotiations between
the parties.
We have no illusions about the scale of the
challenge. However, that does not absolve the Council
of its responsibility to reinvigorate its efforts, not least
for the sake of young people and their future. More than
40 per cent of Israel’s population is under the age of
25, and more than 70 per cent of the population of the
occupied Palestinian territory is under the age of 30. We
have a collective duty to help ensure that those young
people are given the prospect of a renewed political
horizon that will allow them to live in peace and ensure
their role in preserving peace.
Ireland remains steadfast in our commitment to a
resolution of the conflict, ending the occupation and
achieving a two-State solution, in line with relevant
United Nations resolutions, international law and
bilateral agreements. That is the path to progress for all
the people of Israel and Palestine.
Ireland is gravely concerned about the recent high
levels of violence, including settler-related violence, as
well as a ratcheting-up of rhetoric. We condemn all acts
of violence and call for the de-escalation of tensions.
Ireland calls on Israel to ensure that its security
operations, including in Areas A and B of the West
Bank, are proportionate and take full account of the
obligation to protect civilians, particularly children.
Over the past few days, Israel carried out a
demolition in Sheikh Jarrah, in occupied East
Jerusalem, for the first time since 2017. That operation
culminated in the destruction this morning of two
family homes and their source of livelihood. This is
part of an ongoing pattern of demolitions, evictions and

S/PV. 8950

settlement expansion across the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, which continues apace. Those actions
have severe humanitarian consequences, and this
incident in particular threatens the fragile status quo in
East Jerusalem and risks increasing violence.
International humanitarian law, and in particular the
Fourth Geneva Convention, prohibits the unnecessary
destruction of private property. Demolitions contribute
to a coercive living environment for affected
Palestinian communities. Once again, we call on Israel,
as the occupying Power, to fulfil its obligations towards
this community and to cease its harmful practice of
evictions and demolitions of Palestinian property.
Ireland reiterates our long-standing position on the
illegality of Israeli settlements in the occupied West
Bank, including East Jerusalem. This week’s decision
regarding the construction of 1,465 units as part of the
Lower Aqueduct plan, as well as planned construction
in the sensitive parts of Area E-1, in Atarot and Givat
Hamatos, threaten the contiguity of a future Palestinian
State and must not proceed.
We reiterate our call for an end to the blockade of the
Gaza Strip, which continues to hamper reconstruction.
Ireland condemns the recent attacks on Israel from
the Gaza Strip, as well as the increased inflammatory
rhetoric. The long-suffering civilian population of Gaza
urgently needs a political horizon and an economic path
forward to a sustainable future.
Ireland welcomes the meeting between President
Abbas and Minister Gantz and looks forward to the
implementation of the outcomes of that cooperation
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority. We call
for progress on prisoner issues, the return of human
remains and further measures that will improve the
lives of Palestinians, which could assist in building
much-needed confidence for a political process. Ireland
looks forward to the second phase of local elections
to be held in March, which could help contribute to a
renewal of Palestinian institutions.
Ireland will continue to support the Palestinian
people, including through its support for Palestinian
institutions, civil society and United Nations agencies,
especially the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).
We reiterate our concern at the recent Israeli
decision to designate certain Palestinian civil society

22-2336319/34

S/PV.8950

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

organizations as terrorist entities. Ireland’s commitment
to civil society remains undimmed.
We call for continued support for UNRWA and the
resumption of the United States-Palestine economic
dialogue, as well as assistance from States in the
region for the Palestinian Authority. Support for both
the Palestinian Authority and UNRWA is critical for
regional stability.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I thank Mr. Wennesland
for the updates provided to the Security Council. We
would also like to thank EcoPeace Middle East for its
insightful work and ideas. The efforts of EcoPeace
Middle East remind us how Palestine´s prosperity and
Israel´s security are intertwined. Cooperation and
mutual respect cultivated from the bottom up are both
welcome and desired, as are new perspectives and
initiatives aimed at a just and lasting solution to the
conflict. The Abraham Accords are also such an effort
and through them old rivalries give way to dialogue
and diplomacy.
As we begin a new mandate as an elected member,
we are concerned to see how little progress has been
made in the Middle East peace process since the last
time we sat in the Council. New challenges keep
emerging, and existing crises continue unresolved,
taking a heavy toll on human life across the region.
We have witnessed already a dangerous escalation
in violence as the year began, with increasing tensions
in the Gaza Strip. The episode showed how the ceasefire
achieved in May 2021 remains fragile. We take this
opportunity to stress that there can be no justification
for any attacks against civilians. We urge both parties
to de-escalate, exercise maximum restraint and protect
civilian lives.
Despite the rise in violence, we were pleased to
see the recent direct talks held between Palestinian and
Israeli high-level authorities. Dialogue is essential for
addressing the urgent challenges that affect both sides.
It is also an important confidence-building measure to
rekindle the political process, and we hope that such
meetings can become more and more frequent.
As the Special Coordinator pointed out, the
economic and fiscal crisis in the Palestinian territories
worsens the prospects for political stability. We were
encouraged by the first round of local elections held
last December, and we expect the second round can be
held as planned next March. Transparent and inclusive
20/34

19/01/2022

elections are an essential step to strengthen the
legitimacy and credibility of Palestinian institutions
and should be supported.
The situation in Gaza remains worrisome. Poverty
and political instability constitute fertile ground for
extremist forces. Brazil supports the reconstruction
of Gaza and the provision of humanitarian aid on a
predictable, responsible and regular basis. We would also
like to acknowledge Norway´s efforts to improve Gaza´s
situation through cooperation, by hosting the meetings
of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination
of the International Assistance to Palestinians and the
Middle East Quartet last November.
As the only Latin American country that is a member
of the Advisory Commission of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA), Brazil is concerned about the lack
of resources to sustain essential services for 2 million
refugees across the region in the areas of education,
health-care services and other basic needs. We continue
to be fully committed to UNRWA´s valuable work.
In conclusion, let me reiterate Brazil’s longstanding commitment to the achievement of a just and
sustainable peace in the Middle East, with Israelis and
Palestinians living side by side in peace and security
in two democratic, prosperous and sovereign States,
within secure and internationally recognized borders.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland and
Mr. Bromberg and Mr. Majdalani for their briefings,
and I welcome Minister Malki and the delegation
of Israel.
At the Madrid Conference in 1991, the first steps
were taken to initiate a dialogue between Arab and
Israeli leaders. Over the past 30 years, we have seen
several phases of understanding, from the Oslo Accords
to the recent Abraham Accords, as well as regional
cooperative initiatives such as the water management
projects among Jordan, Israel and Palestine promoted
by EcoPeace.
Some recent instances of reconciliation are steps
in the right direction. In that regard, we applaud the
meeting held between Defence Minister Gantz and
President Abbas, and we commend the economic plan
for Gaza of Minister Lapid. We urge the parties to keep
the channels of communication open and to strengthen
civilian cooperation in the areas of security and taxes.
22-23363

19/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8950

While the easing of restrictions in Gaza is positive,
it is not sufficient. The blockade of the Gaza Strip
must be permanently lifted. We regret that the central
demand of the Palestinian people — their right to selfdetermination — remains pending.

with Israel. India’s developmental partnership with the
Palestinian Authority in its nation-building efforts and
our financial assistance to the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East is a reflection of that support.

Mexico reiterates its commitment to a two-State
solution formulated in a way that addresses Israel’s
legitimate security concerns and allows for the
creation of a Palestinian State, in accordance with
international law and United Nations resolutions,
within secure and internationally recognized borders,
while maintaining the special status of Jerusalem.

I would like to focus on two key issues today: the
urgent necessity for reversing the negative trends on the
ground and the need for a road map for the resumption
of direct political negotiations.

We note with concern the ongoing actions on the
ground that undermine the viability of the two-State
solution, such as the case of evictions in Sheikh Jarrah,
including the one that took place this morning. Mexico
condemns the expansion of Israeli settlements in the
occupied territories, as well as the consequences
of the appropriation, eviction and demolition of
Palestinian structures.
In all cases, we condemn the use of force. Attacks
by settlers on Palestinian civilians are as deplorable
as attacks from Gaza on Israeli civilians. We urge the
parties to exercise maximum restraint.
In conclusion, we welcome all efforts to promote
intra-Palestinian reconciliation, while welcoming the
talks held by the Special Coordinator of the Middle
East Peace Process with his European Union and
Russian counterparts. We hope that a meeting of the
Middle East Quartet will soon take place, as that would
be a positive step forward in a process that is not only
deadlocked but eroding day by day in the face of the
prevailing inaction.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I would like to thank
the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Process,
Mr. Tor Wennesland, for his briefing. I also thank the
other briefers, Mr. Gidon Bromberg and Ms. Nada
Majdalani from EcoPeace, for their comments.
I welcome to this meeting His Excellency the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the State of Palestine
and the Ambassador for Israel to the United Nations.
Allow me, at the outset, to reiterate India’s firm and
unwavering commitment to the peaceful resolution of
the Palestine issue. India supports a negotiated two-State
solution leading to the establishment of a sovereign,
independent and viable State of Palestine living within
secure and recognized borders, side by side and at peace

Resolution 2334 (2016) was adopted by the
Council to reaffirm the international community’s
firm commitment to preventing the erosion of the twoState solution. It calls upon parties to prevent all acts of
violence against civilians; stresses that all settlement
activities must cease; and underscores the need to exert
collective efforts to launch credible negotiations on all
final status issues.
We remain deeply concerned by recent developments
in the West Bank, Jerusalem and Gaza. Violent attacks
on civilians have increased in recent weeks. Acts of
destruction and provocation continue. New settlement
units have been announced. We call upon the parties
to immediately make concrete efforts to reverse those
actions. Such unilateral measures unduly alter the
status quo on the ground, undercut the viability of the
two-State solution and pose serious challenges to the
resumption of peace talks. They must be eschewed.
The international community must also send a
strong signal against any step that would prevent the
possibility of durable peace between Israel and Palestine
in the near future. It is extremely important to prevent
actions that undermine confidence-building measures.
The parties must focus on constructive measures.
In that regard, we are encouraged by the expansion
of direct contacts between the Israeli and Palestinian
leadership. The recent meeting between Palestinian
President Mahmoud Abbas and the Israeli Minister of
Defense, Benjamin Gantz, as well as the subsequent
Israeli announcement to continue the advancement
of socioeconomic measures in addition to those
determined in their previous meetings, such as the
advancing of the transfer of tax payments and status
approvals and so on, are welcome developments.
Such initiatives, which are in the interests of both
parties, help maintain stability and discourage the
possible recurrence of terror and violence. The full
and immediate implementation of those measures and

22-2336321/34

S/PV.8950

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

continued high-level interactions must be accompanied
by a clear road map for the early resumption of direct
negotiations on all final-status issues. We believe that
to be the best path towards achieving the goal of a twoState solution.
India has consistently called for direct peace
negotiations between Israel and Palestine, based on
the internationally agreed framework and taking into
account the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian
people for statehood and Israel’s legitimate security
concerns. The absence of such direct talks on key
political issues has asymmetrical costs for both Israelis
and Palestinians and does not augur well for long-term
peace in the region. We call upon the United Nations and
international community, in particular the Middle East
Quartet, to prioritize the revival of those negotiations.
As a friend of Israel and Palestine, India will
continue to support all efforts towards achieving
a comprehensive and lasting two-State solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and stands ready to
contribute constructively to such efforts.
Before I conclude, let me also express my strong
condemnation of the recent terror attack in Abu Dhabi
in which two Indians tragically lost their lives. Such an
attack on innocent civilians and civilian infrastructure
is completely unacceptable. It is a blatant violation of
international law and also goes against all civilized
norms. India stands in solidarity with the United Arab
Emirates and extends its full support for an unequivocal
condemnation of that terror attack by the Council. It is
important that the Council stand united in sending a
clear signal against such heinous acts of terror.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me thank Special
Coordinator Wennesland and the two briefers for their
valuable information.
The Security Council has shown many times that
it has the power to do great things when it galvanizes
the collective will of its membership. But there is one
issue that has proven itself to be hard to resolve, even
for such a powerful collective organ as the Security
Council: the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The Council has played a pivotal role in creating
the international framework to resolve the conflict,
but even after more than seven decades a solution does
not appear to be in sight. As we have heard, as things
stand now there is not even an active peace process or
negotiations initiative, while the situation on the ground
22/34

19/01/2022

remains volatile and risks producing new explosions of
violence as we have seen time and again.
This is our first time speaking on this issue in our
capacity as a member of the Council. We do not have
the formula for the Council to achieve a just and lasting
solution among the Israelis and the Palestinians. We do
not take the moral high ground to lecture the parties in
what is widely seen as a never-ending conflict. What
we can offer is our own lived experience, namely, the
way in which we have navigated our own path through
existential threats, wars we did not choose and other
serious challenges in order to come together and find
ways to invest in understanding and cooperating
with others, as we have done and do every day in
our neighbourhood.
We have no other interest except our sincere desire to
see the Israelis and Palestinians manage their differences
and coexist in peace and harmony. Albania cherishes
its historic friendship with the Jewish people — a
friendship that has stood the test of the darkest hour
of humankind. We stand firmly and unequivocally for
the security of the State of Israel. We understand the
security challenges that Israel faces on a daily basis.
It is not easy for a country to feel secure when another
country in the neighbourhood — a powerful country
with a dangerously aggressive policy — advocates
openly for the destruction of that country. It is hard to
feel at peace while living under the constant threat of
indiscriminate missile attacks, whether from the south
or north of the country.
Israel has the legitimate right to defend itself,
and we stand by it on this issue. That must be done
in accordance with the law and with respect for
human rights.
Let me add in that respect that we reiterate our full
solidarity and support for the United Arab Emirates
following the heinous attack by the Houthis on its soil.
But we also try to understand the daily lives of the
Palestinians in the West Bank — their desperation, the
lack of perspective and the dimming hope for a better
future. Hope dies last, as the saying goes, and when
there is no more hope, there is nothing left. That is to
say, the status quo is unsustainable.
We continue to believe that the only viable and
just solution is a negotiated two-State solution, with
Jerusalem as a shared capital, with two States living
22-23363

19/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

side by side, in security and in full respect of the rights
of the respective populations, Israelis and Palestinians.
Trust is the most important ingredient for
negotiations to resume and to succeed. That is why we
call on both parties to do everything they can to create
the necessary conditions and to refrain from any acts
that go against that spirit.
We are encouraged by the small but welcome
steps taken lately by the Israeli Government after the
recent meeting between President Abbas and Minister
Gantz, such as the increased number of employment
authorizations from both the West Bank and Gaza, the
transfer of tax payments and additional permits for
businesspeople to enter Israel. But much more needs
to be done, and more such steps and initiatives that
help improve the climate, build trust and enable people
to live in dignity, with enjoyment of their rights, are
needed. In that respect, we remain of the opinion that
the expansion of settlements is wrong, as it threatens
that two-State reality and goes against the prospect of a
peaceful resolution of the conflict.
We welcome the Abraham Accords. We want to
believe that as relations between Israel and the Arab
States improve considerably, that will also have an
impact on relations between Israelis and Palestinians.
We support the preservation of the status quo
regarding the Holy sites in Jerusalem. They are part
of the shared heritage of the three great monotheistic
religions that should be recognized and respected by all.
It is a symbolic case of the need for mutual recognition,
without which peaceful coexistence is unsustainable.
The concept of democracy would be mostly
theoretical without a free and developed civil society.
A strong and vibrant civil society is critical to empower
people and plays a vital role in strengthening mutual
understanding through people-to-people contacts and
to counter prejudice, hatred and hostility.
Our concerns regarding the designation of six
Palestinian non-governmental organizations are well
known. But we are also deeply concerned about the
shrinking space for civil society in the areas controlled
by the Palestinian Authority, especially Hamas.
In conclusion, let me say that the Council’s
inability to find a solution should not discourage it
from continuing to seek one. That means, as mentioned
earlier, focusing on the people and supporting their
aspirations here and now. That means doing all we

S/PV. 8950

can to support processes and initiatives that enable
people — everyone, Israelis and Palestinians both — to
live in security and dignity, in peace and prosperity,
with full and equal rights, in practice and not just
in principle.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I wish
to welcome your presence among us today, Madam
President. I wish also to thank the Special Coordinator. I
extend thanks also to Mr. Bromberg and Ms. Majdalani
for their statements.
It is incumbent on the Security Council to work
to safeguard the two-State solution, with Jerusalem as
the capital of both. That solution was defined by the
Council, and to date it is the only one that can meet
the legitimate aspirations of the Israeli and Palestinian
peoples, guarantee the security of all and foster a just
and lasting peace.
The parameters of that solution are known. They
must be implemented through negotiations between the
parties on all final-status issues. That is a prerequisite
for both Israelis and Palestinians to be in a position to
provide fair and lasting solutions to the challenges that
they face together.
France is deeply concerned about the ongoing
weakening of the two-State solution, particularly
as a consequence of ongoing settlement activities.
We emphatically condemn the new plans adopted on
17 January, in particular the so-called lower aqueduct
project, creating hundreds of new housing units east of
the Green Line, specifically in East Jerusalem, between
Givat HaMatos and Har Homa. That project imperils
the geographical contiguity of a future Palestinian
State and contributes to further cementing the ring of
settlements separating East Jerusalem from Bethlehem.
We therefore call on the Israeli authorities to
reconsider their decision and to definitively suspend
their plans related to the creation of a new settlement in
Atarot and those aimed at expanding Area E1.
We welcome the recent measures announced
following the meeting between Prime Minister
Gantz and President Abbas. They must, however, be
accompanied by a freeze on unilateral measures.
Together with its European partners, France
remains concerned by the record increase in settler
violence, demolitions and evictions, particularly in
East Jerusalem. We therefore condemn the recent
demolitions and evictions in Sheikh Jarrah. We call

22-2336323/34

S/PV.8950

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

on the Israeli authorities to cease demolitions in East
Jerusalem and in Area C.
France remains concerned by the persistent
tensions on the ground and the precarious nature of
the cessation of hostilities in Gaza. It is imperative that
the necessary assistance and medical equipment reach
Gaza, ensuring that they reach their recipients. In that
regard, France recalls its full support for the work of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East.
Israel must ensure the protection of all civilians,
including Palestinians, in accordance with international
law. It must ensure that investigations are carried out
and that perpetrators are held accountable.
France is also concerned about the shrinking space
in which civil society operates. The designation of six
Palestinian non-governmental organizations as terrorist
organizations are of great concern. In the absence of
evidence to substantiate allegations of misappropriation
of funds or their support for or participation in terrorist
activities, France will remain mobilized in support of
those organizations and will continue to support them.
Violations of human rights and freedoms in the
Palestinian territories are also of concern to us. We call
for the ongoing investigation into the death in custody
of Nizar Banat to be completed. We reiterate our call
on the Palestinian Authority to renew the democratic
legitimacy of its institutions, specifically through
the holding of general elections. Robust democratic
institutions based on respect for the rule of law are vital
to a viable Palestinian State.
In that context, France calls on the Council to work
to relaunch the political process, which has been stalled
since 2014. It is key to recreating a political horizon
that would make it possible to reverse current negative
trends and thereby pre-empt a fresh cycle of violence.
France will continue to work to that end, specifically
with Germany, Egypt and Jordan.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Before I start, I
should like to stress that, as my Foreign Secretary has
said, the United Kingdom condemns in the strongest
terms the terrorist attacks of 17 January claimed by the
Houthis against civilian sites in Abu Dhabi. We extend
our condolences to the families of the victims.
Turning to the topic of today’s discussion, my
thanks go to the Special Coordinator for his briefing.
I should like also to thank our two briefers from
24/34

19/01/2022

EcoPeace. They have demonstrated today how climate
and environmental impacts can be both a source
of insecurity and a driver for cooperation between
communities. The United Kingdom supports their call
for greater regional cooperation on joint environmental
threats. The solar/water agreement between Israel,
Jordan and the United Arab Emirates in November
illustrates the value of such efforts.
I want to pay tribute to Norway for its leadership on
economic coordination between the parties, including
chairing in November the first in-person meeting of the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the
International Assistance to Palestinians in two years.
Both parties committed there to enhancing dialogue
and expressed a willingness to reinvigorate the longstalled Joint Economic Committee. The United
Kingdom calls on both parties to advance those goals,
as we approach the upcoming meeting of the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee in March.
The United Kingdom welcomes continued
engagement between the Government of Israel and
the Palestinian Authority, including direct meetings
between Defence Minister Gantz and President Abbas
and discussions between the Ministries of Finance aimed
at improving the economic conditions in the occupied
Palestinian territories. Such direct engagement is vital,
given the scale of the current challenges. We urge Israel
and the Palestinian Authority to accelerate efforts to
improve the financial situation and the economic and
humanitarian conditions in the West Bank and Gaza. We
welcome the appointment of new Palestinian Ministers
of the Interior and the Awqaf and continue to urge the
Palestinian Authority to deliver reforms towards greater
accountability, transparency and efficacy.
On 17 January, British diplomats witnessed the
attempted eviction of the Salhiye family, who live and
run a business in Sheikh Jarrah. Earlier this morning,
authorities returned to demolish their home and
arrested members of the family. We once again urge the
Government of Israel to cease such policies. Evictions
are against international humanitarian law in all but the
most exceptional circumstances and cause unnecessary
suffering. In addition, on 17 January, as we have heard,
approval was given to the Lower Aqueduct settlement
plan, representing nearly 1,500 housing units, some of
which fall outside the Green Line, to be built between
Givat Hamatos and Har Homa. We urge the Government
of Israel to permanently end its settlement expansion
22-23363

19/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and settlement activity, which heightens tension and
threatens the viability of a future Palestinian State.
The United Kingdom also condemns the attempted
stabbing attack against an Israeli Defense Forces solider
in the West Bank on 17 January. That incident follows
several attacks on Israeli civilians and soldiers at the
end of last year. We call for the parties to work together
to condemn violence and minimize tension.
Stability in Gaza remains a focus for the United
Kingdom. We condemn the firing of missiles from
Gaza towards Israel at the start of January, and we urge
all sides to work to sustain the calm.
We urge both parties to avoid unilateral actions
harmful to peace, which risk undermining the
engagement between the Israeli Government and
the Palestinian leadership, which I referenced at the
beginning of my statement. We call on both parties
to work together to create the foundations for future
progress towards a two-State solution.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Special Coordinator
Tor Wennesland for his update. Kenya continues to
acknowledge his work. I also thank the briefers and take
note of the perspective that they have shared. I would
also like to recognize the presence of the delegations of
Israel and Palestine among us today.
With regard to the situation in the Middle East and
the question of Palestine, we see the central issue as
that of human agency. Indeed, Israelis and Palestinians
inhabit the same physical terrain. There are definitely
immediate challenges that will need to be addressed
with or without a political solution. That is part of
the peacebuilding process, but we should not lose
sight of human agency as a driver and sustainer of the
protracted conflict.
Human agency is exemplified, among other things,
by the lack of progress by the conflicting parties in
meeting the agreed commitments as outlined in the
relevant Security Council’s resolutions and under
international law. It also points to activities of extremist
entities, particularly terrorist attacks and acts conducive
to terrorism perpetrated by Hamas, Palestinian Islamic
Jihad and other affiliated groups against Israeli civilians
and civilian infrastructure, including the recent rockets
attacks from Gaza on 1 January, which acts Kenya
continues to condemn strongly.
Such human agency therefore necessitates the urgent
need for both sides to sit down, engage in dialogue

S/PV. 8950

and frame a negotiated peaceful settlement of the
protracted conflict. That should remain the Council’s
premise of engagement with the Israeli-Palestinian
situation. In that context, Kenya has repeatedly
affirmed that one of the critical implementation steps
for the actualization of the two-State solution based on
the 1967 lines is the constructive engagement with the
challenges on the ground that factor in both political
and economic performance.
We have regularly taken note of the progress made,
particularly when it comes to cooperation between
Israelis and Palestinians at all levels, including
the economy and security matters. In that regard,
we look forward to the operationalization of the
practical outcomes of the 28 December 2021 meeting
between Israeli Defence Minister Gantz and President
Abbas — the second such meeting to take place the
same year after a decade of no top-level meetings
between either party. It is indeed welcome to note
that, at the most recent meeting, the stated common
interests included strengthening security coordination,
preventing terrorism and violence and promoting
confidence-building measures in the economic and
civilian fields.
We believe that the cessation of Israeli settlement
activity in the occupied Palestinian territories, including
East Jerusalem, and demolitions, including those that
pose a risk to the territorial contiguity of a viable
Palestinian State, are also important peacebuilding and
confidence-building measures and are critical to easing
tensions and contributing to much-needed peace.
Kenya has welcomed, and will continue to welcome,
all constructive inter-ethnic and intercultural grassroots efforts that contribute to harmonious coexistence,
despite the current fragile situation on the ground.
On several occasions, we have called for the
reinforcement of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and
commended efforts by the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance
to Palestinians, chaired by Norway, in the areas
of institution-building and the development of the
Palestinian economy. When it comes to financing in
general, we believe that the important questions are:
Who receives the money, and what is being funded?
The answer to those questions, including how,
within the conflict situation, policymakers can engage
with the current and next generation of financers to

22-2336325/34

S/PV.8950

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

deliver on a more sustainable future for the conflictaffected communities, is worth pursuing. Kenya
welcomes the progress that has been made by the
Israeli Government in advancing financing with regard
to clearance revenues in the West Bank and the easing
of restrictions in Gaza, including the issuance of
permits to traders. We note that the progress is gradual
and much more needs to be done to ensure equitable
economic advancement and recovery in the aftermath
of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
In conclusion, let me reaffirm that the resumption
of a meaningful peace process will depend on human
agency, that is, how Israelis and Palestinians live,
work and cooperate on the path of peace and economic
sustainability in the interim.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by offering our condolences to the
Government of the United Arab Emirates for the
victims of the unacceptable missile attack against
civilian infrastructure in Abu Dhabi. My country
firmly condemns that attack.
We welcome Norway’s commitment to the
Middle East peace process. We also welcome Special
Coordinator Tor Wennesland to today’s meeting
and thank him for his very informative briefing. We
followed with interest the briefings by Nada Majdalani
and Gidon Bromberg on issues related to water sharing
and advocacy on climate security.
As we assess the situation in the Middle East in
the light of recent developments in the region, we note
that, despite several efforts made to promote peace and
stability in that region of the world, genuine prospects
for peace and development remain in jeopardy
because of ongoing violence and tensions. The IsraeliPalestinian conflict is part of that tragic situation.
The year 2021 was marked in particular by the 11day war between Israel and Hamas during the month
of May, which left many dead or injured. The year
2022 began with the violation of an already fragile
ceasefire — Israeli strikes on Gaza and rocket fire
on Israel. The humanitarian and economic situation
in the Palestinian territories remains disturbing. The
unprecedented financial crisis facing the Palestinian
Authority and the budget issues of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East increase the urgency of the situation faced
by the international community. We therefore call upon
all parties to show restraint and refrain from aggressive
26/34

19/01/2022

rhetoric and unilateral actions, such as the settlement
policy conducted by Israel and attacks on Israeli
civilians, which will lead only to a further escalation
of violence. Such acts are obstacles to the two-State
solution and stability in the region.
Gabon calls for the revival of Israeli-Palestinian
negotiations for genuine and lasting peace, based on the
application of the rules of international law. We support
the vision of a Palestinian State coexisting with the State
of Israel, within pre-1967 borders, in accordance with
the relevant United Nations resolutions. To revive such
prospects, my country calls on the Middle East Quartet
and all stakeholders in the region to intensify their
efforts to encourage Israeli and Palestinian leaders to
resume dialogue in good faith. The dialogue should be
inclusive and involve all segments of society, including
women. The creation of a Palestinian State is indeed a
key step in concluding the peace process. Such peace
will have an impact on the entire region.
The futures of Israel and Palestine are inextricably
linked. Therefore, only constant, earnest and direct
dialogue between the parties will enable a lasting
solution to be found to the conflict. That is why we
welcome the historic meeting in Israel on 28 December
2021 between the President of the Palestinian Authority,
Mahmoud Abbas, and the Israeli Minister of Defence,
Benjamin Gantz. We hope that the outcome of that
meeting will give new impetus to international efforts
for lasting peace in the region.
The President: I would like to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than four minutes to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Flashing lights on the microphone collars will prompt
speakers to bring their remarks to a close after
four minutes.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Trade of Hungary.
Mr. Szijjártó (Hungary): I thank you very much,
Madam President, for convening our meeting today
under such complicated circumstances to discuss this
very important matter.
There is absolutely no doubt that the security of
the Middle East has been one of the issues with the
strongest and most comprehensive impact on global
peace and security in past decades. We have all
witnessed many attempts by several actors to resolve
22-23363

19/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the crisis. However, most of those attempts have either
failed or had only limited impact.
The Abraham Accords, signed by Israel and
numerous Arab States, represent the most significant
result on the matter. Apart from normalizing bilateral
relations between the States involved, the Abraham
Accords may give new impetus to the Middle East
peace process, as well to the much-awaited agreement
between Israel and Palestine. Indeed, we hope that
negotiations will be successful in that regard.
We are pleased to see the deepening ties between
Arab countries and Israel, which we consider to be
a game-changer in regional dynamics. Increased
cooperation in important areas such as food security,
health care and water management has genuine
potential to increase long-term stability in the region.
We recognize the role of former United States President
Donald Trump in that regard. We strongly support the
comprehensive implementation of the Accords, the
accession of an ever-increasing number of States and the
signing of further agreements. We remain committed to
furthering this cause with all the means at our disposal,
including our leverage within the European Union
(EU).
I must state that we are often quite disappointed
about the way in which Israel is treated, even in some
of the committees and bodies of the United Nations. We
are committed to a fair and more balanced approach
concerning Israel. We reject all unilateral, unfounded
and biased decisions to condemn Israel. Furthermore,
we call upon the United Nations and its Member States
to end the anti-Israel discussion and avoid discussing
agenda items of that kind, as the purpose of such
discussion is not to find a solution to the current
situation but to blame only one side for the challenges
in the region.
We must speak honestly. Israel has been faced with
the tremendous threat of terrorism. We have to call the
terrorist organizations, persons and entities concerned
by name, as they pose a threat to Israel and its people.
We believe that Israel has the right to self-defence and
to protect its sovereignty and its citizens.
As a member State of the European Union, we
consider Israel to be an ally of key importance in
the region. That is why we often encourage closer
relations between the EU and Israel in Brussels. We
continue to call for the convening of the EU-Israel
Association Council.

S/PV. 8950

I would like to draw the Council’s attention to
an aspect that might explain why for us, Central
Europeans, the security situation in the Middle East
is so important. Past experiences in our region clearly
show that a deteriorating security situation and
instability in Middle East usually leads to waves of
illegal migration, which often target Europe. Migrants
reach Central Europe and cause major security-related
challenges on our continent.
Let me also mention that we follow with great concern
the rise of modern-day anti-Semitism in many parts of
the world. The Government of Hungary has announced
a zero-tolerance policy against anti-Semitism. We are
proud of the fact that the largest Jewish community in
Central Europe resides in Hungary. We are also proud
that the security of that community is guaranteed by
our Constitution and our authorities.
Lastly, I would like to mention that I am proud
to represent a country founded on a 1,000-year-long
Christian statehood. That is why Hungary feels and
assumes responsibility for the security of Christian
communities around the world. Unfortunately, we
are witnessing ever-increasing persecution against
Christians, who are becoming the most persecuted
religious group in the world. Unfortunately, many
Christian communities in the Middle East find
themselves in dire situations because of persecution.
I hope that the United Nations, the Secretariat and
fellow States Members of the United Nations will join
us in speaking up and standing up for the Christian
communities in this region in the future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by congratulating Norway for presiding
over the Security Council this month and to thank
you personally, Madam President, for presiding over
today’s meeting. I would also like to thank Mr. Tor
Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his invaluable briefing, and to thank
the other two briefers as well.
The Kingdom of Morocco, under His Majesty King
Mohammed VI, presides over the Al-Quds Committee
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and attaches
utmost importance to the Palestinian question and the
rights of the Palestinian people. Stability and security in
the Middle East stem from the just and comprehensive
peace that would result from resolving this question

22-2336327/34

S/PV.8950

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

based on international legitimacy and the two-State
solution agreed upon by the international community,
whose aim is to create a viable Palestinian State within
4 June 1967 borders, living side by side with Israel in
full security, tranquillity and peace. The Kingdom of
Morocco reiterates that negotiations between the two
Palestinian and Israeli sides remain the only way to
finding a final and lasting solution to this conflict.
In his recent address delivered on the International
Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian people, His
Majesty King Mohammed VI called for intensive and
active diplomatic efforts to encourage the parties to
return to the negotiation table in order to reach a solution
to the Palestinian question, specifically through the
two-State solution and providing a promising future for
generations of Palestinians and Israelis. I would like to
stress that the Kingdom of Morocco will continue to play
its valuable historical role in relation to the Palestinian
question, while leveraging its positive relations with
all parties and international stakeholders to create
conditions conducive to relaunching the negotiations,
which is the only way to establish security and stability
in the Middle East.
The Kingdom of Morocco calls for the need to
preserve Al-Quds Al-Sharif, in particular its unity
and sanctity as well as its legal, cultural, historical
and demographic status with its unique position as a
city of peace. As Chair of the Al-Quds Committee,
His Majesty King Mohammed VI will spare no effort
to preserve the distinctive character of this Holy City.
During the visit of Pope Francis to the Kingdom of
Morocco, on 30 March 2019, His Majesty the King and
His Holiness signed the Al-Quds Appeal, in which they
stressed the need to preserve the Holy City as common
heritage of humankind owing to its legal, historical and
demographic status and its openness to all followers of
the three monotheistic religions.
The Kingdom of Morocco has supported the
brotherly Palestinian people, including by several
initiatives, including the Bayt Mal Al-Quds Agency of
the Al-Quds Committee, which the Kingdom sponsors
for the benefit of the Palestinian people and in support
of Palestinian institutions and for which it provides
87 per cent of its funding under direct supervision of
His Majesty. Since its inception in 1998, the Agency
has worked to protect the Arab and Islamic rights in
the Holy City by supporting and funding several vital
social, cultural, educational, health and construction
projects and has had a direct and tangible impact on
28/34

19/01/2022

its residents. According to the Agency’s report, the
total cost of programmes and projects adopted in 2021
amounts $3.6 million, and, as I just mentioned, the
Kingdom of Morocco covers 87 per cent of the cost.
The Kingdom of Morocco condemns in the strongest
terms the evil terrorist attack by the Houthis against
Al-Mussafah and the Abu Dhabi airport, in the sisterly
United Arab Emirates, Following that vicious attack,
His Majesty King Mohammed VI called His Highness
Sheikh Mohammed Bin Zayed Al Nahyan, Crown Prince
of Abu Dhabi and Deputy Supreme Commander of the
Armed Forces in the United Arab Emirates, in which
he strongly condemned that disgraceful act against
innocent people and civilian facilities. His Majesty the
King reiterated the support of the Kingdom of Morocco
to all the steps taken by the United Arab Emirates to
defend its territories and to ensure the peaceful life of
its citizens against such attacks by Houthi militias and
their supporters.
The Kingdom of Morocco reiterates its position
of always fully supporting the sisterly United Arab
Emirates and providing it with all kinds of support
in defending its national security and protecting its
citizens. We call upon the international community,
especially the Security Council, to strongly condemn
such terrorist attacks, which threaten regional
and international peace and security, adopt strict
measures to put an end to these attacks and hold the
perpetrators accountable.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
The situation in the occupied Palestinian territory
continues to deteriorate, posing a threat to international
peace and security. During 2021, through the killing
of innocent people, including women and children, the
requisitioning of Palestinians’ property, the seizure and
demolition of their homes and their eviction by force,
the Israeli regime has continued its oppressive and
expansionist policies and unlawful criminal practices,
including grave and systematic violation of human
rights in the occupied Palestinian territory.
According to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, in 2021, 341 Palestinians were
killed, and 17,893 more were injured. The Israeli
security forces also systematically killed Palestinian
children: in 2021, 86 Palestinian children were killed in
22-23363

19/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the occupied Palestinian Territory, which is the highest
number since 2014.
One example of the Israeli regime’s brutalities
was its 11-day all-out war on Gaza in May 2021, when
Israeli forces killed 256 Palestinians, including 66
children and 40 women. These numbers include 13
members of an extended family, including children,
one as young as six months of age, who were killed and
buried in the rubble of their own home. These measures
constitute war crimes and crimes against humanity,
for which the perpetrators must be brought to justice.
Moreover, the seizure and demolition of Palestinian
homes increased in 2021 in comparison to 2019 and
2020: 894 structures were demolished in 2021, which
resulted in the displacement of 1,179 people.
By the same token, the Israeli regime continues its
destabilizing and malicious activities in the region by
consistently violating the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Syria and by openly threatening to use force
against other countries in the region. We condemn the
Israeli malevolent policies and destabilizing activities,
which are a clear threat to the peace and security of
the region.
We also condemn the convening of the recent
Israeli Cabinet meeting in the occupied Syrian Golan
and its statement on building new settlements there.
This unlawful action clearly constituted a flagrant
violation of international law and relevant United
Nations resolutions. It is therefore null and void and
without any legal effect on the status of the occupied
Syrian Golan, which remains an integral part of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria.
The inaction of the Security Council has
emboldened the Israeli regime to continue its crimes
against the oppressed people of Palestine. The Security
Council must obligate the Israeli regime to put an
immediate end to its systematic violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law in the
occupied Palestinian territory. The Council must also
compel Israeli to end its occupation of Palestinian and
other Arab territories.
In conclusion, the representative of the Israeli regime
has attempted once again today to misuse this forum
and make unfounded allegations against my country,
which are hereby totally rejected. These groundless
accusations are designed to distract attention away
from the atrocious, unrelenting brutalities committed
by the Israeli regime in the occupied Palestinian

S/PV. 8950

territory. It is indeed very ironic that a regime famous
for its atrocities and apartheid policies, war crimes,
crimes against humanity, attacks on or threats to use
force against its neighbours and more — a regime
with an atrocious record of developing, producing
and stockpiling different kinds of inhumane weapons,
including weapons of mass destructions — is now
labelling others as a threat to peace and security and
preaching others to observe international law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on Norway’s assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of January. I wish
you every success in steering the work of the Council.
I would also like to thank Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for
his briefing. I welcome His Excellency Mr. Riad
Al-Malki, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates
of Palestine.
December 2021 marked five years since the adoption
of resolution 2334 (2016), which reaffirmed all principles
contained in previous Council resolutions on the
Palestinian question. The resolution also reaffirmed the
illegality of Israeli settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem, and
the importance of distinguishing between territories
occupied in 1967 and those controlled now by Israel,
the occupying Power. Five years have passed since the
adoption of that resolution, and nearly 74 years since
the Nakba of 1948, and 55 years since the An-Naksa
of 1967. Nevertheless, the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory has continued to deteriorate in an
accelerated manner, in contravention of resolution 2334
(2016) and all previous Security Council resolutions on
the matter.
Israeli settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, are
expanding at an increasing pace. Palestinian homes and
structures, including those funded by donors in order
to alleviate the suffering of the Palestinian people,
are being demolished. There are attempts to forcibly
displace Palestinian families from their homes in the
Sheikh Jarrah and Silwan neighbourhoods in occupied
East Jerusalem. The occupied Palestinian territory has
witnessed more killings against the unarmed Palestinian
people, especially children, by Israeli occupation forces

22-2336329/34

S/PV.8950

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and settlers. Violations by settlers have increased in full
view of the occupation forces, without the provision of
any protection to the Palestinians.
In addition, Israel recently decided to designate
six Palestinian civil society organizations as terrorist
organizations, even though they cooperate with
international donors, notably the United Nations.
Furthermore, in May 2021, the occupied Palestinian
territory witnessed serious escalation, which claimed
the lives of 253 martyrs of unarmed civilians, including
nearly 66 children and 39 women.
In the light of all that, the Group of Arab
States calls upon the international community to
provide international protection to the Palestinian
people immediately.
We call for the occupying Power to end all illegal
measures and all human rights violations against the
Palestinian people, including attacking civilians,
building settlements, forcibly displacing Palestinians,
confiscating their land and demolishing their homes.
We also call on the international community to pressure
Israel to reverse its decision to designate Palestinian
civil society organizations as terrorist organizations.
We call on countries and donors to ignore that
designation and fabricated accusation and to continue
to support those organizations.
The Group of Arab States once again calls for
respecting the current historical and legal status in
East Jerusalem and the custodianship by the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan over the holy sites, including
Al-Haram Al-Sharif. The Arab Group values the
ongoing efforts of His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn
Al Hussein, Custodian of the Muslim and Christian
Holy Sites in Al-Quds Al-Sharif, to achieve peace
and maintain the existing historical and legal status
of the holy sites, especially the Holy Al-Aqsa Mosque/
Al-Haram Al-Sharif.
The Arab Group also values the ongoing efforts of
His Majesty King Mohammed VI of Morocco, Chairman
of the Al-Quds Committee of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation. We welcome the signing of the
Jerusalem Appeal by His Majesty and Pope Francis in
Rabat on 30 March 2019, calling for Jerusalem to be
the city of peace, fraternity, tolerance and coexistence
among the followers of all three Abrahamic religions.
The Arab Group commends Algeria’s support for
the Palestinian Authority in the amount of $100 million
30/34

19/01/2022

in order to help it overcome the financial crisis. We
commend President Abdelmadjid Tebboune, who
invited Palestinian factions to meet in Algiers in order
to achieve unity. We value all steps taken to that end.
The Arab Group also values efforts by Egypt, under
the leadership of His Excellency President Abdel Fattah
Al Sisi, to consolidate the ceasefire in cooperation with
all stakeholders. Egypt also announced the allocation
of $500 million to rebuild the Ghaza Strip through
projects carried out by Egyptian companies. Egypt also
examined ways to resume negotiations by hosting a sixparty meeting last month, with the participation of the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs and heads of intelligence
agencies from Jordan and Palestine.
There is no doubt that the continued occupation
will lead only to more escalation. The current
situation cannot continue, as it is not conducive to
the resumption of negotiations or to focusing instead
on confidence-building measures, without a political
process to end the occupation and achieve peace.
The Arab Group stresses the need to develop a
vision to ensure respect for international law, to stop
illegal unilateral measures and to resume negotiations
as soon as possible. The Arab Group therefore calls for
the holding of an international peace conference on the
basis of the agreed terms of reference, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the two-State solution in order to put an
end to the occupation and establish an independent
Palestinian State along 4 June 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. The Arab Group calls for the
activation of the Middle East Quartet at the ministerial
level and for the Security Council to achieve a just
solution to the Palestinian question on the basis of
Security Council resolutions.
At the same time, we must continue to support
the Palestinian people by supporting the Palestinian
Government and the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which
is still undergoing a severe financial crisis that is
preventing it from fulfilling its mandate in service of
Palestinian refugees.
While we strive to achieve regional stability and
security by resolving all crises in accordance with
international law and the Charter of the United Nations,
the sisterly United Arab Emirates and its capital have
been the target of a terrorist attack. The Arab Group
condemns, in the strongest terms, the targeting by
terrorist Houthi militias of civilians and civilian
22-23363

19/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

infrastructure in the United Arab Emirates. We stress
that the international community must be united in
confronting this terrorist act, which threatens peace
and security at the regional level.
In conclusion, the Arab Group stresses that a just
and comprehensive peace in the Middle East can be
achieved only by liberating the Arab territories that
were occupied in 1967 — in Palestine, the Syrian
Golan, the Shaba’a farmlands, the hills of Kfar Shuba
and the northern part of Al-Ghajar village and adjacent
areas — by putting an end to all unilateral actions,
including settlement activities, and by adhering to the
resolutions of international legitimacy, at the forefront
of which are United Nations resolutions and the
Charter, especially the right to self-determination and
respect for the sovereignty of States as well as regional
integration and non-interference in the internal affairs
of other States.
In the interest of time, Egypt will not deliver its
national statement.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer for the League of Arab States to
the United Nations.
Mr. Abdelaziz (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to begin my statement by congratulating Norway on
presiding over the Security Council for the month of
January and by personally welcoming you, Madam
President, along with the ministers present and the new
members of the Security Council. I would like to thank
Mr. Tor Wennesland for his exceptional briefing today
and for his tireless efforts as Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process.
The League of Arab States aligns itself with
the statement just delivered by the Permanent
Representative of the Arab Republic of Egypt on behalf
of the Group of Arab States in New York.

S/PV. 8950

for peace” instead of “land for peace” by gradually
strengthening relations with the Arab States while
simultaneously continuing to violate the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people, including continued
violation of the provisions of resolution 2334 (2016),
by increasing its settlement and colonial activities in
order to change the reality on the Palestinian ground
and by providing military protection to settlers and
joining in their monstrous attacks against unarmed
Palestinian people while confiscating their territories
and properties and forcefully displacing them in Sheikh
Jarrah, Silwan and other areas, in violation of all
international laws and norms.
The new Israeli Government is also illegally
designating civil society organizations that defend
the rights of the brave Palestinian people as terrorist
organizations, which is also a violation of all international
human rights norms. Without a doubt, the claim of
the new Israeli Government that it cannot change the
vicious settlement policy of the previous Government
and that it is unwilling to make any compromises in
peace negotiation processes cannot be justified by
the fragility of the Israeli Government’s coalition or
the fear that such compromises would threaten the
survival of the current Government. The international
community, in particular the Security Council, will not
be fooled by such claims. The Council strongly insists
on a genuine negotiation process between Israel and
Palestine, leading to the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State pursuant to the principle of the twoState solution, which has been internationally agreed.
That requires the Security Council to shoulder special
responsibilities in important main areas that need
effective international action, including the following.

We would also like to emphasize the strong
condemnation of the Arab League and its SecretaryGeneral of the terrorist attack by the Houthi militias
two days ago targeting vital facilities in the United
Arab Emirates and leading to civilian casualties.

First, the benefits of the Middle East Quartet
must be maximized by holding ministerial meetings
to prepare for direct negotiations between Israel and
Palestine, leading to an international conference for
peace, as requested by President Mahmoud Abbas to
the Secretary-General in his repeated statements before
the Council in 2018 and 2019 and before successive
sessions of the General Assembly.

Despite the adoption of terms of references in
Madrid, Oslo and Annapolis and of Security Council
resolutions pertaining to the principle of land for peace
as a main term of reference for the peace process, we
continue to see tireless efforts being made by the new
Israeli Government to change this principle into “peace

Secondly, unarmed Palestinians must be provided
maximum protection from the oppression of the
occupation authorities and armed settlers supported by
them, by holding Council meetings to consider the report
of the Secretary-General that was submitted to the tenth
emergency special session of the General Assembly in

22-2336331/34

S/PV.8950

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

August 2018 (see A/ES-10/794), which includes clear
protection options for the Palestinian people.
Thirdly, maximum support must be provided to
Palestinian refugees everywhere through the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, while guaranteeing the
access of Palestinian refugees to its services in all
host countries and working to fill its funding gaps and
increase voluntary contributions from donor countries
and organizations. In that regard, the League of
Arab States commends the work of the conscientious
Norwegian leadership of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians to that end.
Fourthly, a double standard must not be applied
and Israel must be held accountable for all violations
against the Palestinian people. As stressed by Minister
Al-Malki today, prejudice actions must be eliminated,
especially when addressing Israeli human rights
violations. If they are not deterred, they could bring
back scenes of apartheid and genocide, which we
have all denounced in Council and General Assembly
resolutions. We have all committed to applying the
principle of “never again” to such atrocities against any
people, in particular an occupied people.
Fifthly, the Security Council must ensure respect
for the historical and legal status of East Jerusalem and
support the Jordanian custodianship of the holy sites,
including the Al-Haram Al-Sharif.
Sixthly, Palestinians’ ability to achieve national
reconciliation must be promoted and national elections
must be held as soon as possible while all reconstruction
and economic development efforts must be supported.
As mentioned by Ambassador Greenfield of the United
States of America in that regard, all current Council
members have diplomatic relations with Israel and
they must use them to complete the formal visit of
the Council to the occupied Palestinian territories, for
which we have been calling for years, to no avail, in
order to bear witness to the suffering of the Palestinian
people under occupation and advance peace efforts.
The League of Arab States is fully prepared
to support any action by the Security Council, the
Secretary-General, the Middle East Quartet and other
peace-loving parties to resume direct negotiations
between Palestine and Israel with a view to establishing
an independent Palestinian State with East Jerusalem
as its capital along June 1967 borders.
32/34

19/01/2022

The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Skoog.
Mr. Skoog: I have the honour to deliver this
statement on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States. The candidate countries of North
Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania align themselves
with this statement.
The EU reaffirms its commitment to a just and
comprehensive resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, based on the two-State solution, with the State
of Israel and an independent, democratic, contiguous,
sovereign and viable State of Palestine, living side by
side in peace and security and mutual recognition,
and with Jerusalem serving as the future capital of
both States. The EU welcomes high-level contacts
between the parties, including in the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of the International
Assistance to Palestinians on 17 November. We call
for the immediate implementation of the commitments
made to improve Palestinian livelihoods and further
engagement between the parties to renew confidence
and to restore a political horizon and open the path
towards the relaunching of the peace process as soon
as possible.
The EU reiterates the imperative to consolidate the
ceasefire in Gaza and recalls its unequivocal position
that rocket fire, the launching of incendiary devices
and other attacks by Hamas and other terrorist groups
are unacceptable. The EU welcomes the easing of some
restrictions on Gaza, but as the measures taken so far
have shown to be insufficient to allow rapid stabilization
and recovery, it calls for further lifting of restrictions,
underlining the need for unimpeded humanitarian
access to Gaza. The EU calls on all parties to take
necessary steps to produce a fundamental change to
the political, security and economic situation in the
Gaza Strip, including the end of the closure and a full
opening of the crossing points, while addressing Israel’s
legitimate security concerns.
The EU urges both parties to demonstrate their
stated commitment to a two-State solution through
concrete actions and to avoid unilateral actions, which
threaten it.
The EU’s opposition to Israel’s settlement policy
and actions taken in this context, including in East
Jerusalem, and especially in sensitive areas, such as
Har Homa, Givat Hamatos and E1, is well known. We
reiterate that settlements are illegal under international
law and call to halt all settlement activities. Such
22-23363

19/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8950

actions as building the separation barrier beyond the
1967 line, demolitions and confiscation — including
of EU-funded projects — evictions, forced transfers,
including of Bedouins, illegal outposts, settler violence
and restrictions of movement and access severely
threaten the two-State solution and will only escalate an
already tense environment. The EU is concerned about
demolitions and evictions, including in East Jerusalem.
It will be important not to proceed with any planned
demolitions, evictions or settlement expansion.

Until a just, fair, agreed and realistic solution to the
refugee issue in accordance with international law is
found, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) remains
crucial for providing the necessary protection and
essential services for Palestine refugees and supporting
peace and stability in the region. The EU will continue
to support UNRWA in all its fields of operation,
including in East Jerusalem. We call upon all partners
to increase their contributions to UNRWA.

The EU condemns the recent increase in acts of
violence, including in East Jerusalem; firmly condemns
settler-related incidents; and calls for accountability.
We recall the special significance of the holy sites, and
call for upholding the status quo put in place in 1967
for the Temple Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif in line with
previous understandings and with respect for Jordan’s
special role. The EU will closely monitor developments
and their implications on the ground, and remains ready
to take further action to protect the viability of the twoState solution.

The conflict in Syria has endured for more than a
decade. We remain committed to the unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Syrian State and recall that
a sustainable solution to the conflict requires a genuine,
inclusive political transition in line with resolution 2254
(2015) and the 2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex), negotiated by the Syrian parties within the
United Nations-led Geneva process, with the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women.

We welcome the start of the cycle of local Palestinian
elections on 11 December as a step towards national
elections, and we reiterate our call on the Palestinian
Authority to organize the postponed elections without
further delay. Strong, inclusive, accountable and
functioning democratic Palestinian institutions based
on respect for the rule of law and human rights are vital
for the Palestinian people, for democratic legitimacy
and, ultimately, for the two-State solution.
We urge all Palestinian factions to engage in good
faith in the reconciliation process, adhere to previous
agreements, renounce violence and terrorism, recognize
Israel’s right to exist and commit to democratic
principles, including the rule of law. Palestinian civil
society must be allowed to carry out its important task
free from obstruction, harassment or intimidation by any
party. The EU expects a full independent investigation
into the death of Nizar Banat and that those responsible
will be held to account.
The EU calls for the fundamental right to freedom
of expression to be upheld, including in areas under the
control of the Palestinian Authority.
The European Union is proud of its continued
support to civil society, which contributes to peace
efforts and confidence-building between Israelis
and Palestinians.

We wholeheartedly support the efforts of United
Nations Special Envoy Geir Pedersen to advance all
aspects of resolution 2254 (2015), including with
respect to the issues of detainees and missing persons
at the hands of the regime and the establishment of a
safe and neutral environment in order for free and fair
elections to be held under United Nations supervision.
The EU calls on all participants, particularly the
Syrian regime, to engage in good faith in the political
process, including the Constitutional Committee.
We have responded positively to the Special Envoy’s
initiative for a step-for-step approach to help move the
political process forward.
By some estimates, up to 1,500 civilians have been
killed in Syria in 2021 alone as a direct result of the
conflict. Continued hostilities across Syria, provoked
by various actors, render ordinary life impossible
for the civilian population. The ceasefire agreed in
March 2020 in the north-west must be upheld without
reserve. The EU once again echoes the calls made
by the Security Council for the implementation of a
nationwide ceasefire. Civilians must be protected at
all times, and attacks on civilian objects, including
hospitals, must cease.
The Syrian regime must fully cooperate with the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
including in its investigations of the use of chemical
weapons in the conflict. The EU continues to call upon
the Syrian regime and its allies and upon all parties to

22-2336333/34

S/PV.8950

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the conflict to cease indiscriminate air strikes and the
shelling of civilians and humanitarian workers. The EU
strongly condemns the recent attacks near Idlib.
All parties responsible for breaches of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
some of which may constitute war crimes and crimes
against humanity, must be held accountable. The EU
reiterates our call to have the situation in Syria referred
to the International Criminal Court. Accountability
and justice for victims is essential for a stable, peaceful
Syria, based on a credible, inclusive and viable political
solution in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).
In the absence of international justice the
prosecution of war crimes under national jurisdiction,
where possible, which is now under way in several EU
member States, represents an important contribution
towards securing justice. The EU will continue to
support efforts to gather evidence with a view to
future legal action, including by the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011 and the work of the International Independent
Commission of Inquiry.
Turkey is a key partner of the EU and a critically
important actor in the Syrian crisis and the region.
Turkey’s security concerns in the north-east of Syria
should be addressed through political and diplomatic
means, and not by military action, in full respect of
international humanitarian law.
The underlying causes of the refugee and
displacement crisis must be addressed under resolution
2254 (2015). The EU continues to warn against any
further displacements in any part of Syria, as well as
against the potential exploitation of such displacements
for the purposes of social and demographic engineering.
Conditions for the safe, voluntary and dignified return
of refugees and displaced persons to their places of

34/34

19/01/2022

origin, in line with the parameters defined by the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and in accordance with international law, remain to be
met. The EU will be in a position to support returns
only once those conditions are satisfied.
Finally, humanitarian needs in Syria continue to
increase, from 11 million people in need of humanitarian
assistance in 2020 to 14 million people at present. The
EU and its member States are the largest donor and
have provided over €25 billion to meet the needs arising
from the crisis over the past decade. We will continue to
demonstrate solidarity with the Syrian people and call
on the other members of the international community
to increase their commitments.
All parties must allow rapid, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access, including across conflict lines, to
ensure that assistance reaches people in need by the most
direct routes. Cross-border assistance will continue to
be vital in the absence of adequate alternatives. The EU
counts on the renewal in July of resolution 2585 (2021).
Early recovery projects are also important for the
dignity of the Syrian people and for their future. The
EU will not fund early recovery efforts that could
support social and demographic engineering. The EU
will be ready to assist in the reconstruction of Syria
only when a comprehensive, genuine and inclusive
political transition in the framework of resolution 2254
(2015) and the Geneva process is firmly under way.
We call once again on all parties to the conflict
to advance a credible, sustainable and inclusive
political solution based on the full and comprehensive
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). It is the only
route to sustainable peace in Syria.
The President: There are still a number of speakers
remaining on my list for this meeting. With the
concurrence of the members of the Security Council, I
intend to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.25 p.m.

22-23363
