asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6955

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6955th meeting
Thursday, 25 April 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gasana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Rwanda)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Ms. King
Mr. Sharifov
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Briens
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Maes
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Shin Dong Ik
Mr. Pankin
Mr. M’Beou
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Letter dated 19 April 2013 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2013/239)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

13-31311 (E)

*1331311*

S/PV.6955

between Mogadishu, existing regional administrations
and fledgling ones — marks an important step in the
national reconciliation and federal State-building
process.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Letter dated 19 April 2013 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2013/239)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Ethiopia and Somalia to participate
in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, to participate
in this meeting.
On behalf of the Security Council, I welcome the
presence at this meeting of His Excellency Mr. Tedros
Adhanom Ghebreyesus, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/239, which contains a letter dated
19 April 2013 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council transmitting the
results of the Secretary-General’s technical assessment
mission to Somalia, pursuant to resolution 2093 (2013).
I now give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on recent developments in
Somalia and on the findings of the technical assessment
mission, as requested in resolution 2093 (2013).
I shall start with a brief political update. The Federal
Government of Somalia has continued implementing
its six-pillar policy for stabilization and peacebuilding
in the country. Notably, it has been reaching out
beyond Mogadishu in an effort to realize its vision for
a federal State of Somalia. The agreement between
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud and the Somaliland
administration to continue dialogue and increase
cooperation, signed earlier this month, is a welcome
step forward. Similarly, Prime Minister Shirdon’s
listening tour — aimed at building trust and consensus

2

However, the Government’s approach to building
new regional administrations is not accepted by all. An
interim draft charter to establish a so-called Jubaland
state in southern Somalia was ratified by representatives
from three regions on April 2 and is expected to result
in the election of a president for Jubaland state in
the coming days. While the draft charter envisages
Jubaland state as part of the federal system, the Federal
Government regards it as unconstitutional, and efforts
to find a compromise have reached an impasse. A
great deal more work is needed to tackle the inevitable
challenges that will arise in the development of a federal
system in Somalia.
There have been several alarming reminders
of the fragile security situation inside Somalia. On
17 March, Al-Shabaab retook the town of Hudur hours
after Ethiopian National Defence Forces withdrew.
Multiple suicide bombings carried out by Al-Shabaab
have claimed the lives of innocent Somali civilians
in Mogadishu. The most recent, on 14 April, involved
several coordinated attacks, including a double suicide
bombing at the regional court in the capital. More than
50 people were reportedly killed.
The courthouse attacks were more sophisticated
and coordinated than the previous attacks in Somalia,
indicating external support, but have so far failed to
undermine the optimism that permeates Mogadishu.
However, they underscore the need to rapidly strengthen
security in Somalia.
The African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
is reaching its operational limit in terms of holding and
expanding areas under its control. Innovative thinking
is required to address that challenge. Additional
resources, including enablers and force multipliers, as
well as the means to reconfigure the AMISOM forces,
are required if it is to maintain the impressive momentum
of the past year. The anticipated withdrawal of the
Ethiopian National Defence Forces will add further
strain. We remain concerned about the clear challenges
faced by AMISOM and the Somali national forces in
their current state. A better funded and coordinated
strategic approach that recognizes that well-trained and
equipped Somali forces are the ultimate exit strategy

13-31311

S/PV.6955

for international military operations in Somalia is
required by the international community.
The United Nations has continued dialogue with
the Federal Government, as well as the countries of the
region and partner organizations. This week, I spoke
with President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud. We discussed
the importance of developing mutually reinforcing
working relations with Somalia’s neighbours. Today,
the Secretary-General and I had constructive meetings
with Mr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, Foreign
Minister of Ethiopia, who is here with us today, where
we underscored the important role that Ethiopia is
playing in ensuring stability in Somalia. We urged close
coordination between the Ethiopians and AMISOM
regarding Ethiopia’s planned withdrawal of its forces
from Somalia. I have also been in contact with the
African Union and the European Union to ensure a
coherent approach to our support to Somalia.
The United Nations continues to work with the
Federal Government and local authorities in Somalia
to establish a new United Nations mission to support
peacebuilding and state-building, as requested in
resolution 2093 (2013). We are now very clear as to how
the United Nations should support the Government
through 2016. In his letter to the Council (see S/2013/239,
annex), the Secretary-General has outlined his vision
for a new United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNAMSOM) — the vehicle that is designed to deliver
that support.
For that and other reasons, the Mission’s core role
will be to act as an enabler, helping to create and to
galvanize the political and strategic environment in
which stabilization and peacebuilding can proceed,
including by leveraging other parts of the United Nations
system and international partners. Substantively,
the Mission will have four key areas of focus. It will
provide good offices, support reconciliation efforts and
assist with the mediation of the politically sensitive
challenges associated with the constitutional review
and the question of federalism.
It will help to build national capacities in the rule
of law and the security sector and in the protection and
promotion of human rights at all levels of society. It
will also seek to enhance the Government’s lead in
coordinating international assistance efforts through
the framework of the New Deal for Engagement in
Fragile States. Through joint task teams, the Mission
will also work with the country team and other partners

13-31311

on urgent issues, such as stabilization in the newly
recovered areas, maritime issues, economic triggers of
violence and capacity development.
The guiding principles outlined by the SecretaryGeneral will be critical to the success of UNAMSOM
and, indeed, of the United Nations system as a whole
in Somalia. Building Somali capacity and supporting
Somali leadership will be central to our efforts to
strengthen the peace process. In the longer run, we
hope that it will be Somali solutions that will bring
an end to conflict and determine the best models for
Somalia’s development. That is at the heart of the new
United Nations Mission’s approach.
The new mission will need to be agile, flexible and
mobile to respond and adapt to evolving priorities. The
limited space and resources and the challenging security
environment mean that the mission will have a limited
number of permanent residential staff. However, it will
need the resources to bring in specialized experts to
support emerging priorities. It will also need a concept
of support and a range of security options to enable
the United Nations to work side by side with Somalis,
including in Villa Somalia.
Such a model may be expensive given the security
environment of Somalia but, for the United Nations
to be relevant, it will require the strong support of the
Council, in particular, and of Member States, in general.
Collaboration and partnership will also be critical.
The Mission will rely on the United Nations country
team to bring programmatic support to the political and
strategic advice that it will provide, while ensuring that
the humanitarian space is protected. Joint leadership
and planning teams will guide the work associated with
the United Nations presence in Somalia. The Mission
will also have a core pillar of analysts and planners, who
will provide a multiplier effect, working to integrate the
Mission’s capacity and that of the country team and to
link those capacities with what AMISOM and other
partners would provide.
We look forward to strengthening our new strategic
partnerships with the African Union and AMISOM
through the new mission. We acknowledge that both
organizations play essential roles in supporting
Somalia’s peacebuilding in all its aspects. We are
committed to realizing the synergies between those
roles and the United Nations Mission. UNAMSOM
and AMISOM planners will meet as soon as the new
mission is up and running to work out the parameters of

3

S/PV.6955

our practical partnership on the ground. As in so many
areas, the United Nations partnership with the African
Union is vital to our ability to achieve our objectives.
We look forward to ongoing cooperation with the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, as well.
The United Nations will require a strong level
of commitment from the international community
if UNAMSOM is to succeed in the coordination role
envisaged by the Council in resolution 2093 (2013).
That means a clear commitment to working coherently
and patiently to allow the Federal Government to
develop its plans and build its capacities. The current
spectre of fragmented and duplicative efforts at
international assistance is inefficient and could be
counterproductive. It risks overwhelming the nascent
national capacity. The President of Somalia has told
us that. We are hopeful that the conference to be held
in London next month and other meetings scheduled
in Brussels and Tokyo later in the year will help us to
agree on a framework for future coordination.
The new mission represents a fresh start for the
United Nations in Somalia and a renewed commitment
by the Council to support Somali-owned peacebuilding.
Results will not be achieved overnight. If we are
genuinely committed to Somali leadership, we must
be prepared to let Somalis set the timelines, as well as
the priorities, and to keep our expectations realistic.
However, we firmly believe that the design of the new
mission is grounded in real needs and a well-thoughtout analysis of the objective reality in Somalia today,
as well as in the great goodwill that exists in the
international community. With the Council’s support,
we believe that we can help continue to move that
daunting agenda forward.
The President: I thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Somalia.
Mr. Duale (Somalia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this meeting on Somalia and, in
particular, on the assessment report on which we have
just been briefed (see S/2013/239, annex).
I thank the Council for inviting me to address it
today. I also thank the Under-Secretary-General for his
briefing. On behalf of my Government, I also thank the
assessment team that prepared the report. It is one of
the best reports I have ever seen. It is clear, it is factual,
and it prescribes the medicine Somalia needs right now
to get out of the predicament that it is in.

4

I also thank the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and the Governments of countries that have
saved us from Al-Shabaab, in particular our brothers
and sisters from Africa. AMISOM has done a good job,
and I believe it is now time to ensure that the Somali
National Security Forces are able in due course to take
over the responsibilities of clearing Al-Shabaab out of
all parts of Somalia, thereby providing stability and
security for the country.
I would also take this opportunity to express my
sincere appreciation for our brother, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Ethiopia, who is here with us. This
is the first time I have met him, and I am honoured to
do so.
I believe that Somalia has passed through many
stages. We are now at a time when we can see the light
at the end of the tunnel. We hope that the contents of
the report will be realized through the full support
of the Security Council, and the sooner, the better.
Furthermore, I believe that most of the findings and
recommendations on the many issues in the report
are consonant with what our President set forth in
his six-pillar policy as soon as he was elected. The
report therefore is very much in accord with what the
Government of Somalia believes in and wishes to see
realized as soon as possible.
I thank the Security Council and the members of the
Council who asked the Secretary-General to undertake
the assessment.
The President: I give the floor to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Federal Democratic Republic of
Ethiopia.
Mr. Ghebreyesus (Ethiopia): Mr. President,
let me start by thanking you for this opportunity to
address the Security Council. As the new Minister for
Foreign Affairs of my country, I am delighted — really
pleased — to make my maiden statement to the
Security Council under the presidency of Rwanda, a
country which not long ago came out of a horrendous
tragedy, quickly stood on its feet and got to where it is
now — a beacon of hope for our Africa. Let me also
express appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2013/239, annex).
I would also like to thank the Security Council for
having begun a process of very fruitful cooperation
with the African Union Peace and Security Council,
which we hope will continue to be strengthened; there

13-31311

S/PV.6955

is, undoubtedly, ample room for doing so. I also wish
to thank the Security Council for having adopted
resolution 2093 (2013), which, among other things,
requested the Secretary-General to urgently field a
technical assessment mission to Somalia with a view
to ensuring the effective implementation of the new
approach to United Nations support for Somalia set
forth in that resolution.
I also wish to thank the members of the technical
assessment mission for what is, in our judgment, a
very useful report. The report has addressed all the
relevant issues the mission was called upon to look at.
The mission’s assessment of the overall political and
security environment and of the humanitarian situation
in Somalia is both comprehensive and valid. The
report could not have put it better when, in describing
the political environment, it says that it is “extremely
complex, but there are also impressive capacities for
peace and dialogue” (S/2013/239, annex, para. 5).
We fully agree that the “strong political will of the
leadership of the Federal Government of Somalia
to rebuild their war-torn society bodes well for the
peacebuilding and State-building process” (ibid.). The
assessment also highlights a critical achievement that
had eluded Somalia for more than 20 years when it states
quite correctly that the “Government has considerable
legitimacy and inspires hope and optimism” (ibid.).
Indeed, the Government’s legitimacy can only be
enhanced when it is in a position to provide services to
society, thereby strengthening its credibility.
The report also underlines the challenges the
Federal Government of Somalia is facing, which consist
mostly of security issues. In that regard, the assessment
manages to reflect the situation on the ground as
objectively as possible, for example, when it says that
“Somalia is a country in which the international
community is seeking to make and build peace
in the context of ongoing war and active counterinsurgency operations” (ibid., para. 6).
The report also underlines — correctly, in our
view — that, although the “struggle against
Al-Shabaab has turned a corner… it is far from over”
(ibid.). We are also very convinced that the principles
underlined by the technical assessment mission
as a guide for its work — namely, Somali national
ownership, and collaboration and partnership with
various actors, particularly the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),

13-31311

inter alia — are indeed critical, and that is also what
common sense would counsel.
Obviously, in the light of the foregoing, and taking
into account both the opportunities, which are immense,
and the challenges, it appears that a more serious and
stronger effort must be made in order to ensure that the
momentum gained in Somalia is not only maintained,
but accelerated. That is particularly necessary in the
security area. It cannot be denied that the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) needs greater
support, particularly in terms of “additional enablers
and force multipliers” (ibid., para. 46). In fact, as
the technical assessment mission says in the report,
AMISOM, whose support is critical to ensuring the
security of the new assistance mission in Somalia, will
not, in many instances, be in a position to provide such
services within the existing troop ceiling.
The Secretary-General reminds the Council in his
report of his earlier recommendation with respect to the
option of deploying a United Nations or joint African
Union-United Nations peacekeeping operation. But
he has introduced a caveat by saying that the matter
should be taken up “as conventional combat operations
against Al-Shabaab end” (ibid.). We feel that more can
be done in that regard, and in our judgment, there is
no reason why the two proposed options should not be
examined immediately, with a view to speeding up the
implementation of one of them.
But even more critical is ensuring that everything
necessary is done to support the Somali National
Security Forces so that they can achieve the capacity
to play their proper role in maintaining peace and
security throughout the country. In our opinion, that
is doable if support is provided by Member States on
the basis of an integrated approach and not, as pointed
out by the technical assessment mission and reiterated
in the report of the Secretary-General, in a fragmented
manner.
In that regard, I wish to highlight paragraph 22 of
resolution 2093 (2013), on supporting the Government’s
efforts to manage and coordinate international
assistance, particularly in the security sector. It appears
to us that the way to proceed is to do whatever is
necessary to ensure that the Somali National Security
Forces are up and running, including in terms of
providing security for a new United Nations mission
and avoiding resort to the use of international private
security companies.

5

S/PV.6955

The proposal by the assessment mission in that
regard might need to be examined carefully. All this is
an argument for doing more to ensure that the Somali
National Security Forces are given all the necessary
support to handle security throughout the country. That
is also what we ourselves have been trying to contribute
in practice.
Let me before closing refer to one issue that is
related to the role of the Ethiopian National Defence
Forces and to what the technical assessment mission
has referred to as their announced withdrawal from
Hudur and their anticipated withdrawal from Baidoa.
There has been some misperception concerning this
matter which requires explanation. The question of lack
of consultation or absence of prior notification on the
part of Ethiopia is absolutely groundless. Those who
need to know were informed many months prior to the
withdrawal. There is no misunderstanding here. What
happened does not in any way signify any shirking of
responsibility on Ethiopia’s part, though the question
of burden-sharing is something that has always been a
source of concern for us.
But more important was whether Ethiopian forces
were deployed in a way that added value in terms
of addressing the major threat to the encouraging
momentum that has been created in Somalia. Our
conclusion was that they were not, but that is in no way
related to any diminished commitment on Ethiopia’s

6

part to continue being a factor for peace and stability
in Somalia. But again, as I said earlier, the question
of burden-sharing and the issue related to the effective
use of available forces is something to which we attach
great importance. These are issues that we would be
ready to discuss with stakeholders.
We feel that we have come a long way in Somalia.
Not keeping up the momentum is not an option. It is
our earnest hope that the new approach and the new
mission in Somalia will help to further strengthen the
foundation for sustainable peace in Somalia, which
no doubt will require, first of all, ensuring that the
security environment continues to improve. Both
IGAD and the African Union are ready to continue their
full cooperation with the Security Council to ensure
that that happens. It is our hope that there will be a
similar commitment on the part of both the Security
Council and the Secretariat to deepen cooperation
with the African Union. When everything is said and
done, what is critical in the end is that no support will
produce results unless it is based on the priorities set by
the Government and unless ownership by the Somali
Government is respected.
The President: There are no more speakers
inscribed on my list. I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.35 p.m.

13-31311
