United Nations

A/RES/55/108

General Assembly

Distr.: General
13 March 2001

Fifty-fifth session
Agenda item 114 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/55/602/Add.2 and Corr.1)]

55/108. The right to development
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, expressing in particular the
determination to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger
freedom and to employ international machinery for the promotion of the economic
and social advancement of all peoples,
Recalling that the Declaration on the Right to Development 1 confirmed that the
right to development is an inalienable human right and that equality of opportunity
for development is a prerogative both of nations and of individuals who make up
nations,
Noting that the World Conference on Human Rights, held at Vienna from 14 to
25 June 1993, reaffirmed the right to development as a universal and inalienable
right and an integral part of all fundamental human rights, 2
Recognizing that the Declaration on the Right to Development constitutes an
integral link between the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 3 and the Vienna
Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on Human
Rights on 25 June 1993 2 through its elaboration of a holistic vision integrating
economic, social and cultural rights with civil and political rights,
Expressing its concern that, more than fifty years after the adoption of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the unacceptable situation of absolute
poverty, hunger, disease, lack of adequate shelter, illiteracy and hopelessness
remains the lot of over one billion people,
Emphasizing that the promotion, protection and realization of the right to
development are an integral part of the promotion and protection of all human
rights,
Noting that the human person is the central subject of development and that
development policy should therefore make the human being the main participant in
and beneficiary of development,
1

Resolution 41/128, annex.
See A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
3
Resolution 217 A (III).
2

00 56587

A/RES/55/108

Stressing the importance of creating an economic, political, social, cultural and
legal environment that will enable people to achieve social development,
Affirming the need to apply a gender perspective in the implementation of the
right to development, inter alia, by ensuring that women play an active role in the
development process,
Emphasizing that the empowerment of women and their full participation on
the basis of equality in all spheres of society is fundamental for development,
Underlining the fact that the realization of the right to development requires
effective development policies at the national level, as well as equitable economic
relations and a favourable economic environment at the international level,
Welcoming in this regard the adoption by the General Assembly of the Agenda
for Development, 4 which declares that development is one of the main priorities of
the United Nations and which aims at invigorating a renewed and strengthened
partnership for development, based on the imperatives of mutual benefits and
genuine interdependence,
Noting with concern that the Declaration on the Right to Development is
insufficiently disseminated and should be taken into account, as appropriate, in
bilateral and multilateral cooperation programmes, national development strategies
and policies and activities of international organizations,
Recalling the need for coordination and cooperation throughout the United
Nations system for a more effective promotion and realization of the right to
development,
Underlining the important role of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights in the promotion and protection of the right to development, as
mandated in paragraph 4 (c) of General Assembly resolution 48/141 of 20 December
1993,
Recalling its resolution 54/175 of 17 December 1999,
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 2000/5 of 13 April
2000, 5
Welcoming the report of the Intergovernmental Group of Experts on the Right
to Development on its second session, 6 including the proposed strategy contained
therein, and welcoming in particular the recommendation that a follow-up
mechanism should be established to ensure promotion and implementation of the
Declaration on the Right to Development,
1.
Reaffirms the importance of the right to development for every human
person and all peoples in all countries, in particular the developing countries, as an
integral part of their fundamental human rights, as well as the potential contribution
that its realization could make to the full enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms;
2.
Recognizes that the passage of more than fifty years since the adoption of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights3 demands the strengthening of efforts to
4

Resolution 51/240, annex.
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2000, Supplement No. 3 and corrigendum
(E/2000/23 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
6
E/CN.4/1998/29.
5

2

A/RES/55/108

place all human rights and, in this context, the right to development in particular, at
the top of the global agenda;
3.

Reiterates that:

(a) The essence of the right to development is the principle that the human
person is the central subject of development and that the right to life includes within
it existence in human dignity with the minimum necessities of life;
(b) The existence of widespread absolute poverty inhibits the full and
effective enjoyment of human rights and renders democracy and popular
participation fragile;
(c) For peace and stability to endure, national action and international action
and cooperation are required to promote a better life for all in larger freedom, a
critical element of which is the eradication of poverty;
4.
Reaffirms that democracy, development and respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms, including the right to development, are interdependent and
mutually reinforcing, and in this context affirms that:
(a) The development experiences of countries reflect differences with regard
to both progress and setbacks, and that the development spectrum has a wide range,
not only between countries but also within countries;
(b) A number of developing countries have experienced rapid economic
growth in the recent past and have become dynamic partners in the international
economy;
(c) At the same time, the gap between developed and developing countries
remains unacceptably wide and developing countries continue to face difficulties in
participating in the globalization process, and many risk being marginalized and
effectively excluded from its benefits;
(d) Democracy, which is spreading everywhere, has raised development
expectations everywhere, that their non-fulfilment risks rekindling non-democratic
forces, and that structural reforms that do not take social realities into account could
destabilize democratization processes;
(e) Effective popular participation is an essential component of successful
and lasting development;
(f) Democracy, respect for all human rights and fundamental freedoms,
including the right to development, transparent and accountable governance and
administration in all sectors of society, and effective participation by civil society
are an essential part of the necessary foundations for the realization of social and
people-centred sustainable development;
(g) The participation of developing countries in the international economic
decision-making process needs to be broadened and strengthened;
5.
Urges all States to eliminate all obstacles to development at all levels by
pursuing the promotion and protection of economic, social, cultural, civil and
political rights, implementing comprehensive development programmes at the
national level, integrating those rights into development activities and promoting
effective international cooperation;

3

A/RES/55/108

6.
Reaffirms that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent
and interrelated and that the universality, objectivity, impartiality and non-selectivity
of the consideration of human rights issues must be ensured;
7.
Affirms that international cooperation is acknowledged more than ever as
a necessity deriving from recognized mutual interest and, therefore, that such
cooperation should be strengthened in order to support the efforts of developing
countries to solve their economic and social problems and to fulfil their obligations
to promote and protect all human rights;
8.
Welcomes the intention of the Secretary-General to give high priority to
the right to development, and urges all States to promote further the right to
development as a vital element in a balanced human rights programme;
9.
Also welcomes the high priority assigned by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to activities relating to the right to development,
and urges the Office of the High Commissioner to continue to implement
Commission on Human Rights resolution 1998/72 of 22 April 1998; 7
10. Further welcomes Economic and Social Council decision 1998/269 of
30 July 1998 authorizing the establishment by the Commission on Human Rights of
a follow-up mechanism, consisting of an open-ended working group on the right to
development and an independent expert with a mandate to submit to the working
group at each of its sessions a study on the current state of progress in the
implementation of the right to development, as provided for in Commission
resolution 1998/72;
11. Welcomes the holding at Geneva from 18 to 22 September 2000 of the
first session of the Open-ended Working Group on the Right to Development under
the chairmanship of Mr. M. S. Dembri (Algeria), and encourages the Working Group
to proceed with its second session, scheduled for January 2001;
12. Takes note of the coordination mechanisms and initiatives within the
United Nations system in which the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights participates to promote the implementation of the
right to development;
13. Also takes note of the second report of the independent expert on the
right to development, 8 which focuses on poverty eradication as a priority area
requiring attention in the realization of the right to development;
14. Further takes note of the Human Development Report 2000, of the
United Nations Development Programme, 9 and the World Development Report
2000/2001: Attacking Poverty, of the World Bank, 10 which cover issues relevant to
human rights and the right to development, and welcomes the participation in the
Working Group of representatives of international financial institutions, as well as
that of relevant United Nations specialized agencies, funds and programmes and
non-governmental organizations, in accordance with relevant resolutions of the
Economic and Social Council;

7
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1998, Supplement No. 3 (E/1998/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
8
See A/55/306.
9
United Nations publication, Sales No. E.00.III.B.8.
10
Published for the World Bank by Oxford University Press, New York, 2000.

4

A/RES/55/108

15. Invites the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
submit a report to the Commission on Human Rights each year for the duration of
the mechanism, to provide interim reports to the Working Group and to make those
reports available to the independent expert, with each report covering:
(a) The activities of her Office relating to the implementation of the right to
development, as contained in her mandate;
(b) The implementation of resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Commission with regard to the right to development;
(c) Inter-agency coordination within the United Nations system for the
implementation of relevant resolutions of the Commission in that regard;
16. Urges the United Nations system to continue to support the
implementation of the recent resolutions of the Commission on Human Rights
regarding the right to development;
17. Calls upon the Secretary-General to ensure that the Working Group and
the independent expert receive all necessary assistance, in particular the staff and
resources required to fulfil their mandates;
18. Calls upon the Working Group to take note of the deliberations on the
right to development during the fifty-fifth session of the General Assembly and the
fifty-sixth session of the Commission on Human Rights, and any other issue relevant
to the right to development;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
fifty-sixth session and to the Commission on Human Rights at its fifty-seventh
session a comprehensive report on the implementation of the various provisions of
the present resolution;
20. Decides to continue consideration of this question, as a matter of priority,
at its fifty-sixth session.
81st plenary meeting
4 December 2000

5
